THE SPANISH BAWD REPRESENTED IN CELESTINA OR The Tragic-(...) CALISTO and
(...) Wherein is contained, besides the pl(...) of the style, many
Philosophica(...) Instructions necessary f(...) Showing the deceits and
subtilties (...) servants, and Cunn(...)

LONDON Printed by I. B. And are to be sold by (...) ALLOT at the Sign of the
Bear (...) Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

TO MY WORTHY AND MVCH ESTEEMED FRIEND, Sir Thomas Richardson, Knight.
SIR, I now send you your long since promised Celestina, put into English
clothes; I shall entreat you to give her a friendly welcome, because she is a
stranger, and come purposely out of Spain into these parts, to see you, and
kiss your hands. I would not accompany her with my letters of recommendation,
whereby she might find the better reception. For, I must ingeniously confess,
that this your Celestina is not sine scelere; yet must I tell you withal, that
she cannot be harbored with you, sine vtilitate. Her life is foul, but her
Precepts fair; her example naught, but her Doctrine good; her Coat ragged,
but her mind enriched with many a golden Sentence: And therefore take her not
as she seems, but as she is; and the rather, because black sheep have as
good Carcasses as white. You shall find this book to be like a Court-Iack,
which though it be black, yet holds as good liquor as your fairest Flagon of
silver or like the Rod that Brutus offered to Apollo, which was rough and
knottie without, but within, all of furbusht gold. The bark is bad, but the
tree good.

Vouchsafe then (gentle Sir) to take a little of this coorse and sour bread;
it may be, your stomach being glutted with more delicate Cates, may take some
pleasure to restore your appetite with this homely, though not altogether
unsavory food. It is good plain houshold-bread, honest messeline; there is a
great deal of Rye in it, but the most part of it is pure Wheat.

Our Author is but short, yet pithy: not so full of words as sense; each other
line, being a Sentence; unlike to many of your other Writers, who either with
the luxury of their phrases, or superfluity of figures, or superabundancie of
ornaments, or other affected guildings of Rhetoric, like indiscreet Cooks,
make their meats either too sweet, or too tarte, too salt, or too full of
pepper; whence it happens, that like greedy Husbandmen, by enlarging their hand
in sowing, they make the harvest thin and barren. It is not as many of your
Pamphlets be, like a tree without sap; a bough without frut; a nut without a
kernel; flesh without bones; bones without marrow; prickles without a Rose;
wax without honey; straw without wheat; sulfure without Gold; or shells
without pearl. But you shall find Sentences worthy to be written, not in
fragile paper, but in Cedar, or lasting Cypress, not with the quill of a
Goose, but the feather of a Phoenix; not with ink, but Balsalmum; not with
letters of a black tincture, but with Characters of Gold and Azure; and
deserving to be read, not only of a lascivious Clodius, or effeminate
Sardanaplus, but of the grauest Cato, or seuerest Stoic.

All which, though I know to be true, yet doubt I not, but it will meet with
some detractors, who like dogs that bark by custom, will exclaim against
the whole work, because some part of it seems somewhat more obscene, then
may suit with a civil style: which as I not deny; so sithence it is written
reprehensiuely, and not instructiuely, I see no reason why they should more
abstain from reading a great deal of good, because they must pick it out of
that which is bad; then they should refuse Pearl, because it is fisht for in a
froathy sea; or contemn Gold, because it is drawn from a dirty mine; or hate
honey, because it is hiued in straw; or loath silk, because it is lapt in
soultage. Which kind of men I can liken to none better, then those of whom
Plutarke complainth, who are of so nice a delicacie, that they will not drink
a wholesome potion, unless it be given them in a Golden cup, nor wear a
winter garment unless it be wouen of Athenian wool.

The Lacedaemonians, who were as strict livers, and as great lovers of virtue,
as any Nation whatsoever; would make benefit even out of vices. But these
Critical companions, being of a depraved disposition, and apt in themselves to
be evil, I can compare to nothing better, then the Scarabee, who ouer-flying
the most fragrant flowers, chooses rather to settle in a Cow-shard, then to
light upon a Rose* or Noah's Crow, which flew forth of the Arc, and preying
upon carrion, returned no more. Howsoever therefore these rigid reprehenders
will not stick to say of Celestina, that she is like a Crow amongst so many
Swans; like a Grasshopper amongst so many Nightingales; or like a Paper-blurrer
amongst so many famous Writers; yet they that are learned in her language, have
esteemed it (in comparison of others) as Gold, amongst metalls; as the
Carbuncle amongst stones; as the Rose amongst flowers; as the Palm amongst
trees; as the Eagle amongst Birds; and as the Sun amongst inferior Lights; In
a word, as the choicest and chiefest. But as the light of that great Planet
does hurt sore eyes, and comfort those that are sound of sight: So the reading
of Celestina, to those that are profane, is as poison to their hearts; but to
the chaste, and honest mind, a preservative against such inconveniences as
occur in the world.

And for mine own part, I am of opinion, that Writers may as well be borne
withal, as Painters, who now and then paint those actions that are absurd. As
Timomachus painted Medea killing her children; Orestes, murdering his mother
Theo, and Parrhasius; Ulysses counterfaited madn^s, and Cherephanes, the
immodest imbracements of women with men. Which the Spectators beholding, do
not laudare rem, sed; artem not commend the matter which is expressed in the
imitation, but the Art and skill of the workman, which has so lively
represented what it proposed. In like sort, when we read the filthy actions
of whores, their wicked conditions, and beastly behavior, we are neither to
approve them as good, nor to embrace them as honest, but to commend the Authors
judgment in expressing his Argument so fit and pat to their dispositions.

Nor do I see any more reason, why a man should prove a Villain by reading of
other men's villainies, then a man should grow hard-fauored, by looking Thirsites
in the face, or a fool, for viewing Will Summers picture: But might rather
grow as the Lacedaemonians did by their slaves drunkenness, to a detestation
of so foul a sin. When therefore thou shall read of Celestina, as of a
notorious Bawd; of Sempronio and Parmeno, as of false servants; of Elicia and
Areusa, as of cunning queanes and professed whores; of Centurio, as of a
swaggring Ruffian, and common whoremaster; of Calisto and Melibea, as of
indiscreet and foolish Lovers. And so in the rest, learn thereby to
distinguish between good and bad, and praise the Author, though not the
practice; for these things are written more for reprehension, then imitation.
And the mind that comes so instructed, can never take harm; for it will take
the best, and leave the worst: But he that reads all things alike, and equally
entertaines them in his thought, that Reader shall easily show himself
obnoxious to many vices: And it shall happen unto him, as it did unto those who
imitated Plato's crookednes, or Demosthenes stammering. But when a Reader shall
light upon unworthy lines, I would have him cry out as a Philosopher advises
on the like occasion; Male hoc, and inconuenienter. But when he meets with
good; Recte hoc and decore. As the Be feeds upon flowers, and the Goat on the
tops of herbs; so would I have him that reads Celestina, graze like a horse on
that which is sweet and wholesome grass; and not like a hungry dog, which
snatches and bites at every thing that comes in his way. Socrates, when he saw
a dishonest woman, would either turn his head aside, or cover his eyes with
his cloak; taking whores to be like coals, which either black or burn.
Indeed, it was the wisest way for Socrates; for though he were a Philosopher,
yet withal he was a wanton: and therefore, for such as cannot look, but must
offend in viewing of the loose^ Lines, I would have them imitate the Lightning,
which vanishes, before it scarce appears; or your Abortiues, which die,
before they be borne. But for as those that are truly honest, and of that
perfect temper of goodness, that nothing can make them decline from the rule of
virtue, I would wish them to do with some pieces in this book (yet to read
all, and where they find anything unseemly) as the Priests of old were wont to
do, who in their sacrifices unto Juno, took forth the garbage of their beasts,
and threw it behind the Altar. If any phrase savor of immodesty, blame not me,
but Celestina. If any Sentence deserve commendation, praise not the Translator,
but the Author; for I am no more to be reprehended, or commended, then the
poor P^rrat, who accents but other folks words, and not his own.

If there be any, that is either a Parmeno, or a Sempronio, an Elicia, or an
Areusa, a Celestina, or a Centurio, I would have them to behold themselves in
this glass; not doubting, but that as Narcissus, viewing himself in that pure
clear Fountain, wherein he saw his own most beautiful Image, dyed overcome
with a (...), or self-love; so these men will either die, or their vices in
them, through an (...), or hate of themselves; at least make other men's
miserable ends, serve as so many sea-markes, that they may not run themselves
upon the like rocks in the sea of this life; wherein all they are miserably
drowned, who strike against them.

But to leave Celestina to a favorable censure, I must now come to entreat
some favor for my self, who am so far from pleading my excuse, that I must
wholly submit my self to your favorable interpretation; for I must ingeniously
confess, that I have in the undergoing of this translation, shown more
boldness then judgment. For though I do speak like Celestina, yet come I
short of her; for she is so concisely significant, and indeed so differing is
the Idiome of the Spainish from the English, that I may imitate it, but not
come near it. Yet have I made it as natural, as our language will give leave,
and have more beaten my brains about it in some places, then a man would beat
a Flint to get fire; and, with much ado, have forced those sparks, which
increasing to a greater flame, gave light to my dark understanding; wherein if
I have been wanting to give it it is true life, I wish, my industry herein may
awake some better wit, and judgment to perfect my imperfections, which as I
shall always be willing to acknowledge; so I desire to have them mended by
some better hand; nor am I any whit ashamed that any work of mineshould not be
absolutely perfect. For it is the Statute and Decree of Heaven, that every
composition here beneath, as well framed by the hand of Art, as fashioned by
the help of Nature, should sustain some imperfection: For Glass has it is
lead; G^^ it is dross; Corn it is chafe; Helene her mole; the Moon her spots,
and the Sun its shade. My expression is but like a picture drawn with a
coal, wanting those lively colors, which others more skillful might give it;
and might better it as much, if they would undergo the pains; as bad faces are
bettered by painting, and unsavory meats mended by their sauces. But I am too
saucie in my desire; howsoever, I will notwithstanding show my self a good
Christian; that though my works do not merit any reward, yet my faith and
assurance is such in you, that I make no question, but my works shall be well
accepted by you. In requital whereof, I will ever love you, and rest

Your friend and servant, DON DIEGO PVEDE-SER.

The Prologue.
IT is the saying of that great and wise Philosopher Heraclitus; That all
things are created in manner of a contention, or battle. His words are these,
Omnia secundum litem fiunt. A Sentence in my opinion, worthy perpetual
memory; and, for that most certain it is, that every word of a wise man, is
pregnant, and full; of this it may be said, that through too much fullness it
is ready to burst, shooting forth such spreading, and well-growne boughs and
leaves, that out of the smallest Sucker, or least Sprig thereof, fruit enough
may be gathered by men of discretion and judgment. But because my poor
understanding is not able to do anymore, then to nibble on the dry bark and
rugged rind of the wise sayings of those, who for the clearness and
excellency of their wits, deserved to be approved; with that little which I
shall pluck from thence, I will satisfy the intent and purpose of this short
Prologue. This Sentence did I find to be strengthened by that great Orator,
and Poet Lauriat Francisco Petrarca, who tells us, Sine lite atque offensione
nihil genuit natura parens: That Nature, who is the mother of all things,
engendered nothing without strife and contention. Furthermore saying, Sic est
enim, and sic propemodun vniuersa testantur; Rapido stellae obuiant firmamento;
Contraria inuicem Elementa confligunt; Terrae tremunt; Mariafluctuant; Aer
quati tur; Crepant flammae; Bellum immortale venti gerunt; Tempora temporibus
concertant; secum, singula; Nobiscum omnia. Which is as much to say; Indeed so
it is, and so all things almost in the world do witness as much. The Stars
encounter one another in the a hirling firmament of heaven; your contrary
Elements wage war each with other; the earth, that trembles and quakes, as if
it were at odds with it self; the Sea, that swells and rages, breaking it is
billows one against another; the Air, that darteth arrows of lightning, and
is moved this way and that way; the flames, they crack, and sparkle forth
their fury; the winds are at perpetual enmity with themselves; times with
times do contend; one thing against another, and all against us. We see, that
the Summer makes us complain of too much heat; and the Winter, of cold and
sharpness of weather. So that this, which seems unto us a temporal
revolution; this, by which we are bred up, and nourished, and live, if it once
begin to pass above it is proportion, and to grow to a greater highth then
usual, it is no better then open war. And how much it ought to be feared,
is manifested by those great earthquakes and whirlewinds, by those
ship-wrackes and fires, as well in the air, as the earth; by the sourse of
watercourse, and violence of inundations, by those courses, and recourses,
those rackings to and fro of the Clouds, of whose open motions, to know the
secret cause from whence they proceed, no less is the dissension of the
Philosophers in the schools, then of the waves of the Sea. Besides, among your
bruit beasts, there is not any one of them that wants his war; be they
Fishes, Birds, Beasts, or Serpents; whereof, every kind persecuteth, and
pursues one another: The Lion, he pursues the Wolf; the Wolf the Kidde; the
Dog the Hare. And if it might not be thought a Iable, or old wifes tale,
sitting by the fire side, I should more fully enlarge this Theme. The
Elephant, that is so powerful and strong a beast, is afraid, and flies from
the sight of a poor silly Mouse; and no sooner hears him coming, but he
quakes and trembles for fear. Amongst Serpents, Nature created the Basiliske,
so venomous and poysonfull, and gave him such a predominant power over all the
rest, that only with his hissing, he does affright them; with his coming, put
them to flight, and disperseth some one way, some another, and with his sight,
kills and murders them. The Viper, a crawling creature, and venomous Serpent,
at the time of ingendring, the Male puts his head into the mouth of the Female,
and she through the great delight, and sweetness of her pleasure, strains
him so hard, that she kills him. And conceiving her young, the eldest, or first
of her brood, breaks the bars of his mothers belly, eats out his way through
her bowels, at which place all the rest issue forth; whereof she dies; he
doing this, as a revenger of his fathers death. What greater conflict, what
greater contention or war can there be, then to conceive that in her body,
which shall eat out her Intralls? Again, no less natural dissension can we
suppose to be amongst fishes; for most certain it is, that the Sea does
contain as many several sorts of fishes, as the earth and air do nourish
bords and beasts; and much more. Aristotle and Pliny do recount wonders of a
little fish called Aecheneis; how apt his nature is, and how prone his
property for di^ers kinds of contentions, especially this one; that if he
cling to a shiper Carrack, he will detain and stop her in her course, though
she have the wind in the poope of her, and cut the Seas with never so stiff a
gale. Whereof Lucan makes mention, saying,

Non puppim retinens, Lucan. lib. 6. iuxta finem.
Euro tendente rudentes,
In medijs Aecheneis aquis.
Nor Aecheneis, whose strength, though Eurus rise,
Can stay the course of ships.
O natural contention! worthy of admiration, that a little fish should be able
to do more then a great ship, with all the force and strength of the winds.
Moreover, if we will discourse of birds, and of their frequent enmities, we may
truly affirm, that all things are created in a kind of contention. Your greater
live of rapine, as Eagles and Hawks; and your crauen Kites press upon our
Pullen, insulting over them even in our own houses, and offering to take them
even from under the Hens wings. Of a bird called Roque, which is bred in the
East Indian Sea, it is said to be of an incredible greatness, that the like
has never bin heard of; and that with her beak, she will hoyse up into the
air, not only one man, or ten, but a whole ship laden with men and
merchandise; and how that these miserable passengers, hanging thus in suspense
in the air, till her wings wax weary, she lets them fall, and so they receive
their deaths. But what shall we say of men, to whom all the foresaid creatures
are subject? Who can express their wars, their iars, their enmities, their
enuies, their heats, their broils, their brawles, and their discontentments?
That change and alteration of fashions in their apparel? That pulling down
and building up of houses? and many other sundry effects and varieties; all of
them proceeding from the feeble and weak condition of man's variable nature?
And because it is an old and ancient complaint, and used heretofore time out of
mind; I will not much marvel, if this present work shall prove an instrument
of war to its Readers, putting strifes and differences amongst them, every one
giving his verdict and opinion thereupon, according to the humor of his own
will. Some perhaps may say that it is too long; some too short; others to be
sweet and pleasant; and other some to be dark and obscure: So that to cut it
out to the measure of so many, and such different dispositions, is only
appropriate to God; Especially, since that it, together with all other things,
whatsoever are in this world, march under the standard of this noble Sentence;
For even the very life of men, if we consider them from their first and tendeer
age, till they grow gray headed, is nothing else but a battle. Children with
their sports, boys with their books, young men with their pleasures, old men
with a thousand sorts of infirmities, skirmish and war continually: and these
Papers, with all ages. The first blots and tears them; the second knows not
well how to read them; the third (which is the cheerful liuelihood of youth,
and set all upon iollity) does utterly dislike of them. Some gnaw only the
bones, but do not pick out the marrow, saying there is no goodness in it;
that it is a History, huddled, I know not how, together, a kind of hodgepode,
or gallimaufrey; not profiting themselves out of the particularities,
accounting it a fable, or old wifes tale, fitting for nothing, save only for to
pass away the time upon the way. Others call out the witty conceits, and
common proverbs, highly commending them, but slighting and neglecting that
which makes more to the purpose, and their profit. But they for whose true
pleasure it is wholly framed, reject the story it self, as a vain and idle
subject, and gather out the pith and marrow of the matter for their own good
and benefit, and laugh at those things that savor only of wit, and pleasant
conceit, storing up in their memory, the sentences and sayings of
Philosophers, that they may transpose them into such fit places, as may make,
upon occasion, for their own use and purpose. So that when ten men shall meet
together to hear this Comedy, in whom perhaps shall happen this difference of
dispositions, as it usually falls out; who will deny, but that there is a
contention in that thing which is so diversely understood? the Printers, they
likewise have bestowed their puncture, putting Titles, and adding Arguments to
the beginning of every Act; delivering in brief, what is more largely
contained therein; a thing very excusable, in former times being much used, and
in great request with your ancient Writers; others have contended about the
name, saying, that it ought not to be called a Comedy, because it ends in
sorrow and mourning, but rather termed a Tragedy. The Author himself would
have it take it is denomination from it is beginning, which treates of pleasure,
and therefore called it a Comedy. So that I seeing these differences, between
their extremes have parted this quarrel, by dividing it in the midst, and call
it a Tragick-Comedy. So that observing these contentions, these disagreements,
these dissonant and various judgments, I had an eye, to mark whither the
mayor part inclined, and found that they were all desirous, that I should
enlarge my self in the pursuit of the delight of these Lovers; whereunto, I
have been earnestly importuned; in so much, that I have consented (though
against my will) to put now the second time my Pen to this so strange a
task, and so far estranged from my faculty, stealing some hours from my
principal studies, together with others allotted to my recreation, though I
know, I shall not want new Detractors for my new Edition.

The ACTORS in this Tragick-Comedy.
Calisto, A young inamoured Gentleman. Melibea, Daughter to Pleberio. Pleberio,
Father to Melibea. Alisa, Mother to Melibea. Celestina, An old Bawd^ Servants
to Calisto. Parmeno, Sempronio, Tristan, Sofia,
Crito, A Whoremaster. Lucrecia, Maid to Pleberio. Whores. Elicia, Areusa.
Centutio, A Pandar, or Ruffian.
Errata.
Folly 5. Line 36. not, Read now. ibid. l. 45. been, r. bent. 24. l. 35.
never, r. new. 29. l. 18. part, r. port. 37. l. 16 Master, r. Mother. 38. l.
28. Parmeno, r. Sempronio. 45. l. 35. werticke, r. wretch. ibid. l. 40. man, r.
woman. So. l. 28. my, r. thy. 97. l. 12. hatefully, r. hateful. 110. l. 47.
wate, r. are. 126. l. 30 preferred, r. prefer. 132. l. 35. out, r. on. 133.
l. 4. on, r. out. 147 l. 2. poor. r. power. 169. (...) l. 20. not. r. now.
176. l. 1. thou should commend me, read, thou should not commend me.

A COMEDY, OR TRAGIC COMEDY OF CALISTO and MELIBEA.
THE ARGUMENT.
GALISTO, who was of Lineage Noble, of Wit Singular, of Disposition Gentle, of
Behavior Sweet, with many graceful qualities richly endowed, and of a
competent estate; fell in love with Melibea, of years young, of blood Noble,
of estate Great, and only daughter and heir to her father Pleberio, and to her
mother Alisa; of both exceedingly beloved. Whose chaste purpose conquered by
the hot pursuit of amorous Calisto, Celestine interposing her self in the
business, a wicked and crafty woman, and together with her two deluded
servants of subdued Calisto, and by her wrought to be disloiall, their
fidelity being taken wtth the hook of covetousness and pleasure; Those
Lovers came, and those that served them, to a wretched and unfortunate end. For
entrance whereunto, adverse fortune afforded a fit and opportune place, where,
to the presence of Calisto, the desired Melibea presented her self.

ACTVS. I.
THE ARGUMENT
CAlisto entering into a garden after his usual (...), met there with Melibea,
with whose love being caught, he began to court (...) by whom being sharply
checked and dismissed, he gets him home, being much troubled and grieved: be
consults his servant Sempronio, who after much intercourse of (...) till
Sempronio and Celestina (...). Parmeno was known by Celestina, who tells him
of the good against (...) which she had of his mother, and many matters that
had past between them; inducing him in the end to love and concord with
Sempronio.

INTERLOCVTORS. Calisto, Melibea, Parmeno, Sempronio, Celestina, Elicia, Crito.
CAlisto. In this, Melibea, I see heavens greatness, and goodness.


Melib. In what, Calisto?


Calisto. Greatness, in giving such power to nature, as to endow thee with so
perfect a beauty; goodness, in affoording me so great a favor as thy fair
presence, and a place so convenient to vnsheathe my secret grief; A grace
undoubtedly so incomparable, and by many degrees fargreater than any service I
have performed can merit ^omaboue. What inhabitant here below ever saw a more
glorious creature then I behold? Certainly, if sublunary bodies can give a
celestial reflection or resemblance, I contemplate and find it in thy divine
beauty: had it perpetuity, what happiness beyond it? Yet wretch that I am, I
must live like another Tantalus; see what I may not enjoy, not touch; and my
comfort must be the thinking of thy disdainnesse, thy pleasing coyness, and
the torment which thy absence will inflict upon me.


Melib. Hold thou this, Calisto, so great a reward?


Calist. So great, that if you should give me the greatest good upon earth, I
should not hold it so great a happiness.


Melib. I shall give thee a reward answerable to thy deserts, if thou persevere
and go on in this manner.


Call. O fortunate ears! which are (though unworthily) admitted to hear so
gracious a word, such great and comfortable tidings.


Melib^a. But unfortunate, by that time thou have heard thy doom. For thy
payment shall be as foul, as thy presumption was foolish, and thy
entertainment ^ small, at thy intrusion was great. How durst such a one as thou
hazard thy self on the virtue of such a one as I? Go wretch, be gone out of
my sight, for my patience cannot endure, that so much as a thought should enter
into any man's heart, to communicate his mind unto me in illicite love.


Calisto. I go; but as one, who am the only unhappy mark, again whom
adverse fortune the extremity of her hate. (...) I say, Where is this accursed
(...)


(...)

Calisto. Is'te'en so? Now the devil take thee; misfortune wait on thy heels
to thy destruction; mischief light upon thee; let some perpetual intolerable
torment sey^e upon thee in so high a degree, that it may be beyond all
comparison, till it bring thee (which shortly I hope to see) to a most
painful, miserable and disastrous death. Go, thou unlucky rogue, go I say,
and open the chamber door, and make ready my bed.


Sempronio. Presently Sir, the bed is ready for you.


Calisto. Shut the windows, and leave darkness to accompany him, whose sad
thoughts deserve no light. Oh death! how welcome art thou, to those who
out-liue their happiness? how welcome, would thou but come when thou art
called? O that Hypocrates and Galen, those learned Physicians were now living,
and both here, and felt my pain! O heaven, if ye have any pity in you,
inspire that Pleberian heart therewith, lest that my soul, helpless of hope,
should fall into the like misfortune with Pyrramus and Thisbe.


Sempr. What a thing is this? What Is the matter with you?


Calisto. Away, get thee gone, do not speak to me unless thou will, that
these my hands, before thy time be come, cut off thy days by speedy death.


Sempronio. Since you will lament all alone, and have none to share with you in
your sorrows, I will be gone, Sir.


Calisto. Now the devil go with thee.


Sempr. With me Sir? there is no reason that he should go with me, who stays
with you. O unfortunate, O sudden and unexpected ill; what contrarious
accident, what squint-eyed ^^ame is it that has robbed this Gentleman of his
wonted mirth? and not of that alone, but of it (which is worse) his wits. Shall
I leave him all alone? or shall I go in to him? If I leave him alone, he will
kill himself. If I go in, he will kill me. Let him bide alone, and bite upon
the bit, come what will, come I care not. Better it is that he dye, whose life
is hateful unto him, then that I dye, when life is pleasing unto me, and say
that I should not desire to live, save only to see my Elicia, that alone is
motive enough to make me look to my self, and guard my person from dangers:
but admit he should kill himself without any other witness, then must I be
bound to give account of his life. Well, I will in for that, but put case when
I come in, he will take neither comfort nor counsel: mary his case is
desperate, for it is a shrewd sign of death, not to be willing to be cured.
Well, I will let him alone a while, and give his humor leave to work out it
self; I will forbear, till his angry fit be ouer-past, and that his hat be
come again to his color. For I have heard say, that it is dangerous to lance
or crush an Impostume before it be ri^e, for then it will (...) the more: Let
him alone a while, let us suffer him to weep who suffers to sorrow, for tears
and sighs do ease the heart that is surcharded with grief; but then again,
if he see me in sight, I shall see him more incensed against me: For there
the sun scorcheth most, where he reflecteth most: the sight which has no
object set before it, waxes weary-and dull, and having its object, is as
quick. And therefore I think it my best play, to play least in sight, and to
stay a little longer; but if in the mean while he should kill himself, then
farewell he. Perhaps I may get more by it then every man is aware of, and cast
my skin, changing rags for robes, and penury for plenty: But it is an old
saying, He that looks after dead-mens shoes, may chance to go barefoote:
Perhaps also the devil has deceived me. And so his death may be my death, and
then all the fat is in the fire: The rope will go after the Bucket: and one
loss follow another; on the otherside, your wise men say, That it is a great
ease to a grieved soul, or one that is afflicted, to have a companion, to whom
he may communicate his sorrow. Besides, it is generally received, that the
wound which bleedes inward, is ever the more dangerous. Why then in these two
extremes hang I in suspense what I were best to do? Sure, the safest is to
enter: and better it is that I should endure his anger, then for fear of his
displeasure to forbear to comfort him. For, if it be possible to cure without
Art, and without things ready at hand, far easier is it to cure by Art, and
wanting nothing that is necessary.


Calisto. Sempronio?

Sempr. Sir.

Calisto. Reach me that Lute.

Sempr. Sir, here it is.

Calisto. Tell me what grief so great can be,
As to equal my misery.

Sempr. This Lute, Sir, is out of tune.

Calisto. How shall he tune it, who himself is out of tune? Or how can thou
hear harmony from him, who is at such discord with himself? Or how can he do
any thing well, whose will is not obedient to reason? Who harbors in his breast
needles, peace, war, truce, love, hate, injuries and suspicions; And all
these at once, and from one, and the same cause. Do thou therefore take this
Lute unto thee, and sing me the most doleful ditty thou can devise.


Sempronio. Nero, from Tarpey, does behold.
How Rome does burn all on a flame;
He hears the cries of young and old,
Yet is not grieved at the same.

Calisto. My fire is far greater, and less her pity whom now I speak of.


Sempr. I was not deceived when I said, my Master had lost his wits.


Calisto. What Is that ( Sempronio) thou muttrest to thy self?

Sempr. Nothing Sir, not I.

Calisto. Tell me what thou said* Be not afraid.

Sempr. Marry I said, How can that fire be greater which but tormenteth one
living man, then that which burnt such a City as that was, and such a
multitude of men?


Calisto. How? I shall tell thee. Greater is that flame which lasts
sourescore years, then that which endures but one day. And greater that fire,
which burns one soul, then that which burns an hundred thousand bodies:
See what difference there is betwixt apparencies, and existencies; betwixt
painted shadows, and lively substances, betwixt that which is counterset, and
that which is real. So great a difference is there betwixt that fire which
thou speak of, and that which burns me.


Sempr. I see, I did not mistake my byas; which, for ought I perceive, runs
worse and worse. Is it not enough to show thy self a fool, but thou must also
speak profanely?


Calisto. Did not I will tell thee, when thou speak, that thou should
speak aloud? Tell me what is that thou mumblest to thy self.


Sempr. Only I doubted of what religion your Lovers are.

Calisto. I am a Melibean, I adore Melibea, I believe in Melibea, and I love
Melibea.


Sempr. My Master is all Melibea: who now but Melibea? whose heart not able to
contain her, like a boiling vessel, venting it is heat, goes bubbling her
name in his mouth. Well, I have now as much as I desire: I know on which foot
you halt, I shall not heal you.


Calisto. Thou speak of matters beyond the Moon. It is impossible.

Sempr. O Sir* exceeding easy; for the first recovery of sickness, is the
discovery of the disease.


Calisto. What counsel can order that, which in it self has neither counsel
nor order?


Sempr. Ha, ha, ha, Calisto's fire; these, his intolerable pains: As if love
had been his bow, shot all his arrows only against him. Oh Cupid, how high
and unsearchable are thy mysteries? What reward have thou ordained for love,
since that so necessary a tribulation attends on lovers? Thou have set his
bounds, as marks for men to wonder at: Lovers ever deeming, that they only are
cast behind; and that others fill out-(...) them: That all men break through,
but themselves like your ^^ght (...) bulls, which being set loose in the place,
and ga^^ed with (...), take over the (...) as soon as they feel themselves
(...).


^

^

^

^

^

^

^

Sempr. It is misery enough to have a man's will captiuated, and chained to one
place only.


Calisto. Thou wot'st not what constancy is.


Sempr. Perseverance in ill is not constancy, but obstinacy, or pertinacy, so
they call it in my country; how-euer it please you Philosophers of Cupid to
phra^e it.


Calisto. It is a foul fault for a man to belie that which he teaches to
others: for thou thy self take pleasure in praising thy Elicia.


Sempr. Do you that good which I say, but not that ill which I do.


Calisto. Wy do thou reprove me?


Sempr. Because thou do subject the dignity and worthiness of a man, to the
imperfection and weakness of a frail woman.


Calisto. A woman? O thou blockhead, she is a Goddess.


Sempr. Are you in earnest, or do you but jest?


Calisto. Jest? I verily believe she is a Goddess.


Sempr. As Goddesses were of old, that is, to fall below mortality, and then
you would hope to have a share in her deity.


Calisto. A (...) on thee for a fool, thou make me laugh, which I thought
not to do to day.


Sempr. What, would you weep all the days of your life?


Calisto. Yes.


Sempr. And why?


Calisto. Because I love her, before whom I find my self so unworthy, that I
have no hope to obtain her.


Sempr. O Coward, baser then the son of a whore: why, Alexander the Great did
not only think himself worthy the dominion of one only, but of many worlds.


Calisto. I did not well hear what thou said, say it again: repeat it
again before thou proceed any further.


Sempr. I said Sir, Should you, whose heart, is greater then Alexanders,
despair of obtaining a woman? wherefore many, having been seated in highest
estate, have balsely prostituted themselves to the embracements of Muletteeres,
and Stablegroomes, suffering them to breathe in their faces, with their
unsavory breaths, and to imbosome them between their brest^* And othersome not
ashamed to have companied with bruite-beasts. Have you not heard of Pasiphae,
who played the wanton with a Bull? and of Minerua, how she dailled with a dog?


Calisto. Tusa, I believe it not, they are but fables.


Sempr. And that of your Grandmother and her Ape, that is a fable too: Witness
your Grandfathers knife, that killed the villain that did cuckold him.


Calisto. A pox of this cocks-combe, what gi^^ he gives!


Sempr. Have I ^ettled you (Sir?) (...) your histories, study your
philosophers, examine your (...); and you shall find how full their books are
of their (...) and of the ruins and destructions whereinto they have run,
who held them in that high esteem as you do. Consult with (...) and you shall
see how vilely he reckons of them. (...) unto (...), and you shall find that
all of them to this agree: but whatsoever I have, or shall hereafter speak in
them; mistake me not, I pray you, but consider them as words, commonly and
generally spoken: For many of them have been, and are holy, virtuous and
noble, whose glorious and resplendent crowns blot out this general reproach.
But touching the other, who can recount unto you their falsehoods, their
tricks, their tradings, their truckings, their exchanging commodities, their
lightness, their tears, their mutabilities, and their boldness and
impudencies: For whatsoever they conceit, they dare to execute without any
deliberation, or aduisement in the world; their dissemblings, their
talketiuenesse, their deceits, their forgetfulness, their unkindness, their
ingratitude, their inconstancy, their sicklenesse, their saying and
gaine-saying, and all in a breath; their windings and turnings, their
presumption, their vainglory, their baseness, their foolishness, their
disdainfulnesse, their coyness, their pride, their haughtiness, their base
submissions, their prattlings, their gluttony, their luxury, their
slut^ishnesse, their timorousness, their witeneries, their cheatings, their
gibings, their slandrings and their bawdry. Now consider with your self, what
idle gyddy-headed brains are under those large and fine cob-web veiles; what
wicked thoughts under those gay gorgets; what pride and arrogance under those
their long, rich and stately robes; what mad toys under their painted Temples.


Calisto. Tell me, I pray, this Alexander, this Seneca, this Aristotle, this
Virgil, these whom thou tell me of; did not they subject themselue unto
them? Am I greater then these?


Sempr. I would you should follow those that did subdue them; not those that
were subdued by them. Fly from their deceits. Know you (Sir) what they do?
They do things that are too hard for any man to understand: they observe no
mean; they have no reason; not do they take any heed in what they do. They
are the first themselves that cause ^ man to love: and themselves are the first
that begin to loath. They will privately pleasure him, whom afterward they
will openly wrong, and draw him secretly in at their windows, whom in the
streets they will publicly rail at. They will give you roste-meate, and
beat you with the spit. They will inuit you unto them, and presently send you
packing with a flea in your ear; Call you, and yet exclude you; seal you her
love, and yet proclaim hate; quickly be won, and quickly be lost; soon
pleased, and as soon displeased; and (which is the true humor of a woman)
whatsoever her will divines, that must be affected. Her apprehensions admit no
delays; and be they impossible to be attained to, yet not effecting them,
she streightway censures it want of wit or affection, if not both. O what a
plague? what a hell? nay, what a loathsome thing is it for a man to have to do
with them any longer, then in that short prick of time that he holds them in
his arms, when they are prepared for pleasure!


Calisto. Thou see the more thou tell me, and the more inconveniences thou
set before me, the more I love her. I know not how, nor what it is, but
sure I am, that so it is.


Sempr. This is no fit counsel I see for young men, who know not how to submit
themselves to reason, nor to be governed by discretion; it is a miserable
thing, to think that he should be a Master, who was never any scholar.


Calisto. And you Sir, that are so wise, who I pray taught you all this?


Sempr. Who? why, they themselves, who no sooner discover their shame, but they
lose it. For all this, and much more then I have told you, they themselves will
manifest unto men. Balance thy self then aright in the true scale of thine
honor, give thy reputation it is due proportion, it is just measure, and think
your self to be more worthy then in your own esteem you repute your self.
For (believe me) worse is that extreme, whereby a man suffers himself to fall
from his own worth, then that which makes a man ouer-valew himself, and seat
himself in higher place then beseem him.


Calisto. Now, what of all this? what am I the better for it?


Semp. What? why this: First of all, you are a man; then, of an excellent and
singular wit; To this, indewed with those better sort of blessings, wherewith
Nature has endowed you, to wit, wisdom, favor, feature, largeness of
limbs, force, agility, and abilities of body. And to these, fortune has in so
good a measure shared what is hers with thee, that these thy inward graces, are
by thy outward the more beautified. For, without these outward goods, whereof
fortune is chief Mistress, no man in this life comes to be happy. Lastly, the
stars were so propitious at thy birth, and thy self borne under so good a
Planet, that thou are beloved of all.


Calisto. But not of Melibea. And in all that, wherein thou do so glorify my
gifts, I tell she ( Sempronio) compared with Melibea's, they are but as
stars to the Sun; or dross compared to gold. Do but consider the
nobleness of her blod, the ancientnesse of her house, the greatestate she is
borne unto, the excellency of her wit, the splendor of her virtues, her
stately, yet comely carriage, her ineffable gracefulness in all that she
does; and lastly, her divine beauty; whereof (I pray thee) give me leave to
discourse a little, for the refreshing of my soul. And that which I shall tell
she, shall be only of what I have discovered, and lies open to the eye: For,
if I could discourse of that which is concealed, this contestation would be
needless, neither should we argue thereupon so earnestly as now we do.


Sempr. What lies and fooleries will my captiued Master now tell me?


Calisto. What Is that?


Sempr. I said, I would have you tell me: for I shall take great pleasure in
hearing it, so fortune befriend you Sir, as this speech of yours shall be
pleasing unto me.


Calisto. What say thou?


Sempr. That fortune would so befriend me, as I shall take pleasure to hear
you.


Calisto. Since then, that it is so pleasing unto thee, I will figure forth
unto thee every part in her, even in the fullest manner that I can devise.


Sempr. Here Is a deal of do indeed: This is that I looked for, though more
then I desired, it will be a tedious piece of business, but I must give him
the hearing.


Calisto. I will begin first with her hairs; Have thou seen those skaynes
of fine twisted gold which are spun in Arabia? Her hairs are more fine, and
shine no less then they; the length of them is to the lowest pitch of her
heel, besides, they are daintily combed, and dressed, and knit up in knots
with curious fine ribbaning, as she her self pleases to adorn and set them
forth, being of power themselves, without any other help, to transform men
into stones.


Sempr. Into Asses rather.


Calisto. What say thou?


Sempr. I say that these could not be Asses hayres.


Calisto. See what a beastly and base comparison this fool makes!


Sempr. It is well Sir that you are so wise.


Calisto. Her eyes are quick, clear and full; the hayres to those lids rather
long then short; Her eyebrows thinnish, not thick of hair, and so prettily
arched, that by their bent, they are much the more beautiful; Her nose of such
a middling size, as may not be mended; Her mouth little; Her teeth small and
white; her lips red and plumpe; The form of her face rather long then round;
Her breasts placed in a fitting height; but their rising roundnesse, and the
pretty pleasing fashion of her little tender nipples, who is able to figure
forth unto thee? So distracted is the eye of man when he does behold them; Her
skin as smooth, soft, and sleeke as Satin, and her whole body so white, that
the snow seems darkness unto it; Her color so mingled, and of so singular a
temper, as if she had chosen it her self.


Sempr. This fool is fallen into his thirteenes. O how he ouerreaches!


Calisto. Her hands little, and in a measurable manner, and fit proportion
accompanied with her sweet flesh; Her fingers long; Her nails large and well
colored; seeming Rubies, intermixed with pearls. The proportion of those other
parts which I could not eye, undoubtedly (judging things unseen, by the seen)
must of force be incomparably far better then that, which Paris gave his
judgment of in the difference between the three Goddesses.


Sempr. Have you done, Sir?


Calisto. As briefly as I could.


Sempr. Suppose all this you say were true, yet in that you are a man, I still
say, you are more worthy then she.


Calisto. In what?


Sempr. In that she is imperfect: Out of which defect, she lusts and longs
after your self, or some one less worthy. Did you never read that of the
Philosopher, where he tells you, That as the matter desires the form, so woman
desires man?


Calisto. O wretch that I am, when shall I see this between me and Melibea?


Sempr. It is possible that you may: and as possible that you may one day hate
her as much as now you love her, when you shall come to the full enjoying of
her, and to looking on her with other eyes, free from that error which now
blinds your judgment.


Calisto. With what eyes?


Sempr. With clear eyes.


Calisto. And with what I pray do I see now?


Sempr. With false eyes; Like some kind of spectacles, which make little
things seem great; and great little. Do not you despair; my self will take
this business in hand, not doubting but to accomplish your desire.


Calisto. Jove grant thou may: howsoever, I am proud to hear thee, though
hopeless of ever obtaining it.


Sempr. Nay, I will assure it you.


Calisto. Heaven be thy good speed; my cloth of gold doublet, which I wore
yesterday, it is thine, Sempronio. Take it to thee.


Sempr. I thank you for this, and for many more which you shall give me. My
jesting has turned to my good. I hitherto have the better of it. And if my
Master clap such spurs to my sides, and give me such good encouragements, I
doubt not, but I shall bring her to his bed. This which my Master has given
me, is a good wheel to bring the business about: for without reward, it is
impossible to go well through with any thing.


Calisto. See, you be not negligent now.


Sempr. Nay, be not you negligent; For it is impossible, that a careless
Master should make a diligent servant.


Calisto. But tell me, How do thou think to purchase her pity?


Sempr. I shall tell you. It is now a good while ago, since at the lower end
of this (...) I fell acquainted with an old (...) woman, called (...), a which,
(...) as the (...), and (...) in all the rogueries and (...) that the world can
a^foo^; One who in my conscience has marred and made up again a (...)
thousand maiden-heads in this City: Such a power, and such authority she
has, what by her persuasions, and other her cunning devices, that none can
escape her: she will move hard rocks, if she list, and at her pleasure provoke
them to Luxury.


Calisto. O that I might but speak with her!


Sempr. I will bring her hither unto you; and therefore prepare your self for
it, and when she comes, in any case use her kindly, be francke and liberal
with her; and whilst I go my ways, do you study and devise with your self,
to express your pains, as well as I know she is able to give you remedy.


Calisto. O but thou staiest too long.


Sempr. I am gone, Sir.


Calisto. A good luck with thee. You happy powers that predominate humane
actions, assist and be propitious to my desires, second my intentions, prosper
Sempronio's proceedings and his succes^e, in bringing me such an Aduocatrix as
shall, according to his promise, not only negotiate, but absolutely compass
and bring to a wished period, the preconceiued hopes of an incomparable
pleasure.


Celestina. Elicia, what will you give me for my good news?


Sempr. Sempronio is come.


Elicia. O hush; peace, peace.


Celest. Why? What Is the matter?


Elicia. Peace, I say, for here is Crito.


Celest. Put him in the little chamber where the besomes be. Quickly, quickly,
I say, and tell him a cousin of yours, and a friend of mine is come to see you.


Elicia. Crito, come hither, come hither, quickly; O my cousin is come, my
cousin is beneath; What shall I do? Come quickly, I am undone else.


Crite. With all my heart: Do not vex your self.


Semp. O my dear mother, what a longing have I had to come unto you! I thank
my fate, that has given me leave to see you.


Celest. My son, my king, thou have ravished me with thy presence, I am so
ouer-joyed, that I cannot speak to thee; Turn thee about unto me, and
embrace me once more in thine a^^. (...) so long away together, and (...)
here?


Elicia. Who, mother?


Celest. (...), daughter?


Elicia. (...) O, how my heart rises How (...) And what of him?


Celest. ^


Elicia. (...)


Sempr. Hy, hy, hy! Why, now now my (...) what is it (...)


Elicia. Wh^^! Three days? Three whole days away? And in all that time not so
much as once come and see me? Not once (...) upon me? Fortune never look on
thee; never comfort thee, (...) thee: Woe to that woman, wretched as ^he is, who
in (...) her hope, and the end of all her happiness.


Sempr. No more (dear Love.) Think thou (sweet heart) that distance of place
can divorce my inward and imbowelle (...) Or dead but the least spark or that
true (...)? Where-e're I go, thou go (...) Th^n have not felt more affliction
(...), then I have suffered and endured for thee. (...) Me thinks I here some
bodies seete move above: Who is it?


Elicia. Who is it? One of my sweet hearts.


Sempr. Nay, like though, I easily believe it.


Elicia. Nay, it is true: Go up and see else.


Sempr. I go.


Celest. Come hither (my son) come along with me, let this fool alone, for
she is idle-headed, and almost out of her little wits; such thought has she
taken for thy abs^nce. Regard not what she says, for she will tell you a
thousand film-flam tales; Come, come with me, and let us talk. Let us not
spend the time thus in idlements.


Sempr. But I pray, who is that above?


Celest. Would you know who?


Sempr. I would.


Celest. A Wench recommended unto me by a Friar.


Sempr. What Friar?


Celest. O, by no means.


Sempr. Now, as you love me, good mother, tell me what Friar is it?


Celest. Lord, how earnest you be? you would dye now, if you should not know
him; Well, to save your longing, it is that fat Friars Wench: I need say no
more.


Sempr. A^ac^e (...) wench) what a heavy load is she to bear?


Celest. You see, we women must bear all, and it were greater^ we (...) you
have seen but few murders committe^ upon a women in (...)


(...). (...) No but many great swellings, besides (...) what not?


(...). (...) upon you how you talk; you do but (...)


(...). (...) me see her.


Elicia. (...) and see her, but see you come at (...)


Sempr. Be patient, my dear, thou that are the only Idol of my (...); ^s
this the gall that w^ings you? This your grief? Nay, If this make you so
anger, I will neither see her, not any other woman in the world. I will only
speak a word or two with my mother, and so b^d you adie^.


Elicia. Go, go, be gone, ungrateful, unthankful as thou art, and (...)
away three years more if thou will, ere ever thou see me.


Sempr. Mother, you may rely upon what I have told you, and assure your self,
that of all the women in the world, I would (...) or ^^^^emble with you: Put on
your Mantle then, and (...) and by the way, I will tell you all. For if I
should stay here citating upon the business, and protract the time in
delivering my mind, it would turn much to both our hurts, and hinder thy
profit (...)


(...). (...), fare well; make fast the door; (...)


Sempr. So law. Now (mother) laying all other things apart, (...), be attentius
to that which I shall tell you; let not your (...) go a wool gathering; nor
scatter your thoughts, nor (...) them into many parts: for he that is every
where, is no where: and cannot, (unless it be by chance) certainly determine
anything. I will that you know that of me, which as yet you never (...).
Besides, I could never since the time that I first entered (...) with thee, and
had plighted my faith unto thee, desire (...), therein thou might not share
with me.


Celest. And Jove (my good son) share his good blessings with thee, which
(^^so it p^ease him) he shall not do without cause; because thou take pity
of this poor wicked old woman: say on therefore, make no longer delay; for that
friendship, which betwixt thee and me has taken such deep rooting, needs
no Preambles, no cirum^^urions, no preparations or insinuation to win
affection: Be brief therefore and come to the point; for it is idle to utter
that in many words, that may be understood in a few.


Semp. It is true: And there fore thus, Calisto is hot in love with Melibea, he
stands in need of thine and my help. And because he needs our joint
furtherance, let us join together to make some purchase of him. For to know a
man's time, to make use of opportunity, and to take occasion by the foretop, and
to work upon a man whilst his humor serves him, why it is the only round, by
which many have climbed up to prosperity.


Celest. Well have thou said: I perceive thy drift. The winking or beckning on
the eye is enough for me, for as old as I am, I (...) see day (...) this thy
news, as Surgeons of broken-(...) And (...) Delayed hope afflict^^ the heart,
And the farther he is off from obtaining, the fayrer will be promise to have it
effected. Understand you me.


Sempr. Hush. No more. We are now at the gate, and walls (they say) have ears.


Celest. Knock.

Sempr. Tha, tha, tha.

Calisto. Parmeno!

Parme. Sir.

Calisto. What a pocks, art thou deaf? Can thou not hear?


Parmo. What would you, Sir?

Calisto. Some body knocks at the gate. Run.


Parme. Who Is there?

Sempr. Open the door for this matronly Dame and me.


Parme. Sir, wot you who they are that knock so loud? It is Sempronio, and an
old bawd he has brought along with him. O how she is bedawb'd with painting!


Calisto. Peace, peace, you Villain; she is my Aunt. Run, run (you rascal)
and open the door. Well, it is an old saying, and I perceive, as true, The
fish leaps out of the pan, and falls into the fire. And a man thinking to
shun one danger, runs into another, worse then the former. For I thinking
to keep close this matter from Parmeno, (on whose neck, either out of love,
faithfulness, or fear, Reason has laid her reins) I have fallen into the
displeasure of this woman, who has no less power over my life, then Jove
himself.


Par. Sir why do you vex your self? why grieve you? Do you think, that in
the ears of this woman, the name, by which I now call her does any way sound
reproachfully? Believe it not. Assure your self, she glories as much in this
name, as often as she hears it, as you do, when you hear some voice, Calisto
to be a gallant Gentleman. Besides, by this is she commonly called, and by this
Title is she of all men generally known. If she pass along the streets
among a hundred women, and some one perhaps blurts out, See, where is the old
Bawd; without any impatiency, or any the least distemper, she presently turns
her self about, nods the head, and answers them with a smiling countenance,
and cheerful look. At your solemn banquets, your great feasts, your
weddings, your gossippings, your merry meetings, your funerals, and all other
assemblies whatsoever, where there is any resort of people, thither does she
repair, and there they make pastime with her. And if she pass by where there
be any dogs, they straightway b^ke out this name; If she come amongst birds,
they have no other note but this; If she sight upon a flock of sheep, their
bleatings proclaim no less; If she meet with beasts, they bellow forth the
same: The frogs that lie in ditches, croake no other tune; Come she amongst
your Smithes, your Carpenters, your Armourers, your Ferriers, your Brasiers,
your Ioyners: why, their hammers beat all upon this word. In a word, all sorts
of tools and instruments return no other Echo in the air; your Shoomakers
sing this song; your Combe-makers join with them, your Gardeners, your
Plough-men, your Reapers, you Vine-keepers pass away the pain fullness of
their labors, in making her the subject of their discourse; your
Table-players, and all other Gamesters never lose, but they peale forth her
praises: To be short, be she wheresoever she be, all things whatsoever are in
this world, repeat no other name but this: O what a deuourer of roasted eggs
was her husband? What would you more? Not one stone that strikes against
another, but presently noyseth out, Old whore.


Calisto. How can thou tell? do thou know her?

Parm. I shall tell you Sir, how I know her: It is a great while ago, since my
mother dwelt in her Parish, who being entreated by this Celestina, gave me unto
her to wait upon her, though now she know me not, grown out perhaps of her
remembrance; as well by reason of the short time I abode with her, as also
through the alteration which age has wrought upon me.


Calisto. What service did thou do her?

Parme. I went into the market place, and fetched her vitailes; I waited on her
in the streets, and supplied her wants in other the like services, as far as
my poor sufficiency, and slender strength was able to perform. So that though
I continued but a little while with her, yet I remember every thing as fresh,
as if it were but yesterday, in so much that old age has not been able to
wear it out. This good honest whore, this grave matrone, forsooth, had at the
very end of the City, there where your Tanners dwell, close by the waterside,
a lone house, somewhat far from neighbors, half of it fallen down, ill
contrived, and worse furnished. Now, for to get her living, ye must
understand, she had six several Trades: she was a Laundresse, a
Persumeresse, a Former of faces, a Mender of cracked maiden-heads, a B^^d, and
had some smatch of a Witch; Her first Trade was a cloak to all the test; under
color whereof, being withal a piece of a Sempstresse, many young wenches that
were of your ordinary sorts of servants, came to her house to work: some on
smockes, some on gorgets and many other things: but not one of them that came
thither, but brought with her either bacon, wheat, flower, or a Iar of wine,
or some other the like provision, which they could conveniently steal from
their Mistresses, and some other thefts of greater quality, making her house
(for she was the receiver, and kept all things close) the Rendeuous of all
their Roguery: she was a great friend to your Students, Noble men's Ca^erers,
and Pages: To these she sold that innocent blood of these poor miserable
souls, who did easily adventure their virginities, drawn on by fair
promises, and the restitution and reparation which she would make them of their
lost maiden-heads. Nay, she proceeded so far, that by cunning means, she had
access and communication with your very Vestalls, and never left them, till
she had brought her purpose to pass. And what time do you think she chose
when she would deal with any of these? At the time of their chiefest
ceremonies; as when they kept their most mysterious celebration of the feasts
of their Vesta, nay, and that most strictly solemnized day of Bona Dea, where
it is death to admit men: even then by unheard of disguises, she had her plots
and proiects effectually working upon them, to the utter abolition of their
vows and virginity. Now, what think you, were the trades and merchandise
wherein she dealt? She professed her self a kind of Phisician, and fained
that she had good skill in curing of little children: She would go and fetch
flax from one house, and put it forth to spinning to another, that she might
thereby have pretense for the freer access unto all: One would cry, Here
mother: and another, There mother: Look, says the third, where the old woman
comes: Yonder comes that Bel-dame so well known to all. Yet notwithstanding
all these her cares, troubles, and trottings to and fro, being never out of
action, she would never miss any great meeting, any religious processions, any
Nuptials, Loue-ties, Balls, maskes or games whatsoever; They were the only
markets, where she made all her bargains. And at home in her own house she
made perfumes, false and counterfeit Storax, Benjamin, Gum, Anime, Amber,
Ciuit, Powders, Musk and Mosqueta: She had a chamber full of Limbecks, little
vialls, pots, some of earth, some of glass, some brass, and some tin,
formed in a thousand fashions. She made sublimated Mercury, boiled confections
for to clarify the skin, waters to make the face glister, paintings, some
white, some vermillion, lip-salues, scarlet-dy'd clothes, fitted purposely for
women to rub their faces therewith, ointments for to make the face smooth,
lustrifications, clarifications, pargetings, fardings, waters for the
morphewes, and a thousand other slibber slabbers: Some made of the lees of
wine, some of daffadills, some of the barks and rindes of trees, some of
Scar-wolfe, otherwise called Cittibush, or Trifolium, some of Taragon, some of
Centory, some of sour grapes, some of Must, or new wine taken from the press,
first distilled, and afterward sweetened with sugar. She had a trick to
supple and refine the skin with the juice of Lemmons, with Turpentine, with the
marrow of Dear, and of Heron-shawes, and a thousand the like confections: she
distilled sweet-waters, of Roses, of Flowers, of Oranges, of Iesmine, of
three-leafed Grass, of Woodbine, of Gilly-flowers, incorporated with Musk and
Ciuit, and sprinkled with wine: she made likewise Lees, for to make the (...)
turn yellow, or of the color of Gold; and this she comp^^d of the sprigs of
the Vine, of Holme, of Rye, of Horehound intermixed with Saltpeter, with Alum,
Mill-foyle, which some call Y^^^ow, or Nose-bleed, together with diverse other
things. The oils, the butters, and the greases which she used, it is loathsome
to tell you, and would turn your stomach: as of Kine, Bears, Horses,
Ca^^e^s, Snakes, Conyes, Wha^es, Herons, Bittours, Bucks, Cats of the
mountains, Badgers, Squirrells, Hedge-hogges and others. For her preparatiues
for bathings, it is a wonderful thing to acquaint you with all the herbs and
roots which were ready gathered and hung up a-high in the roof of her house:
as Ca^romill, Rose-mary, Marth-mallowes, Maiden-haire, Blue-bottle, Flowers of
Elder, and of Mustard, Spike and white Laurel, buds of Roses, Rosecakes,
Gramenilla, Wild-Sauory, Green figs, Picodorae, and Folia-tinct. The oils
which she extracted for the face, it is incredible to recount, of Storax and of
Iesmine, of Le^mons, of Apple-kernels, of Violets, of Ben^uy, of Fistick-nuts,
of Pineapple kernels, of Grape-stores, of Iujuba, of Axenuz or M^lanthien, of
Lupines, of Pease, of Carilla, and Paxarera; and a small quantity of Balsamum
she had in a little vial, wherewith she cured that scotch given her overthwart
her nose. For the mending of lost maiden-heads, some she help with little
bladders, and other some she stitch't up with the needle: she had in a little
Cabbinet, or painted workeboxe, certain fine small needles, such as your
Glouers sow withal, and threads of the slenderest and smallest silk, rubbed
over with wax: she had also roots hanging there of Folia-Plasme,
Fuste-sanguinio, Squill or Sea-Onion, and ground Thistle. With these she did
work wonders; and when the French Ambassador came thither, she made sale of
one of her wenches, three several times for a virgin.


Calisto. So she might a hundred as well.

Parme. Believe me (Sir) it is true as I tell you. Besides, out of charity
forsooth, she relieved many Orphans, and many straggling wenches, which
recommended themselves unto her. In another partition, she had her knacks for
to help those that were loue-sicke, and to make them to be beloved again, and
obtain their desires. And for this purpose, she had the bones that are bred
in a Stagges heart, the tongue of a Viper, the heads of Quails the brains of
an Ass, the kalls of young Coltes, when they are new foaled, the bearing cloth
of a newborn babe, Barbary beans, a Sey-Compasse, A Horne-fish, the halter
of a man that has been hanged, Iuse berries, the prickles of a Hedge-hogge,
the foot of a Badger, Fearne-seed, the stone of an Eagles nest, and a thousand
other things. Many both men and women came unto her: of some she would demand a
piece of that bread where they had bit it: of others, some part of their
apparel: of some, she would crave to have of their hair: others, she would
draw characters in the palms of their hands with Saffrom; with othersome she
would do the same with a kind of color, which you call Vermilion: to others
she would give hearts made of wax, and stuck full of broken needles; and many
other the like things, made in clay, and some in lead, very fearful, and
ghastly to behold: she would draw circles, portraite forth figures, and
mumble many strange words to her self, having her eyes still fixed on the
ground. But who is able to deliver unto you those things that she has done?
And all these were mere mockeries and lies.


Calisto. Parmeno, hold thy hand; thou have said enough; what remains, leave
it till some fitter opportunity. I am sufficiently instructed by thee, and I
thank thee for it; Let us now delay them no longer, for necessity cuts off
slackenesse. Know thou, that she comes hither requested, and we make her stay
longer then stands with good manners. Come, let us go, lest she be offended,
and take it ill. I fear, and fear makes me more and more think upon her,
quickens my memory, and awakens in me a more provident carfulness how I
communicate my self unto her. Well, let us go, and arm our selves as well as
we can against all inconveniences. But I pray thee Parmeno, let me entreat
thee, that the envy thou bear unto Sempronio, who is to serve and pleasure
me in this business, be not an impediment to that remedy, whereon no less then
the safety of my life relyeth. And if I had a doublet for him, thou shall not
want a Mandillion. Neither think thou, but that I esteem as much of thy
counsel and advice, as of his labor and pains; and as brute beasts (we see)
do labor more bodily then men, for which they are well respected of us, and
carefully looked unto; but yet for all this, we hold them not in the nature of
friends, nor affect them with the like love: the like difference do I make
between thee and Sempronio. And laying aside all power and dominion in my
self, under the priuie-Seale of my secret love, sign my self unto thee for
such a friend.


Parme. Sir, it grieves me not a little, that you should seem doubtful of my
fidelity, and faithful service, which these your fair promises and
demonstrations of your good affection, cannot but call into question and
jealousy. When (Sir) did you ever see my envy prove hurtful unto you? Or
when for any interest of mine own, or dislike, did I ever show myself cross,
to cross your good, or to hinder what might make for your profit?


Calisto. Take it not offensiuely, not mis-conster my meaning* for assure thy
self, thy good behavior toward me, and thy fair carriage, and gentle
disposition, makes thee more gracious in mine eyes, then any, nay, then all the
rest of my servants. But because in a case so difficult and hard as this, not
only all my good, but even my life and wholly depends; it is needful that I
should in all that I am ab^e, provide for my self; and therefore seek to arm
my self in this sort as thou see, against all such casualties, as may
endanger my desire; howsoever, persuade thy self, that thy good qualities, as
far excel every natural good, as every natural good excels the
artificial, from whom it has it is beginning. But of this, for this time no
more; but let us now go and see her, who must work out well fare.


Celest. Soft: me thinks I hear some body on the stayres; they are now
coming down: Sempronio, make as though you did not hear them: stand close,
and litten what they say; and let me alone to speak for us both. And thou
shall see how I and somely I will handle the matter, both for thee and me.


Sempr. Due so then. Speak thou.

Celest. Trouble me no more, I say, leave importuning me; for to ouercharge
one, who is heavy enough already laden with pain, and ^^uish, were to spur a
sick beast. Alas, poor soul, me thinks (...) so possessed with thy Masters
pain, and so affected with his affliction, that Sempronio seems to be
Calisto; and Calisto, to be Semp^onio; and that both your torments are both but
in one and the same subject. Besides, I would have you think, that I came not
hither to leave this controversy undecided, but will dye rather in the demand
and pursuit of this my purpose, then not see his desire accomplished.


Calisto. Parmeno, stay, stay awhile, make no noise; stand still I pray thee,
and listen a little what they say. So, hu^h, that we may see in what state we
live; what we are like to trust to, and how the world is like to go with us.
O notable woman! O worldly goods, unworthy to be possessed by so high a spirit!
O faithful, and trusty Sempronio! Have thou well observed him (my Parmeno?)
Have thou heard him? Have thou noted his earnestness? Tell me, have I not
reason to respect him? What say thou, man? Thou that art the Clozet of my
secrets, the Cabinet of my Counsel, and Council of my soul?


Parme. Protesting first my innocence for your former suspicion, and cumplying
with my fidelity, since you have given me such free liberty of speech, I will
truly deliver unto you what I think. Hear me therefore, and let not your
affection make you deaf, nor hope of your pleasure blind you; have a little
patience, and be not too hasty; for many through too much eagerness to hit the
pin^e, have shot far beside the white. And albeit I am but young, yet have I
seen somewhat in my days: besides, the observation and fight of many things,
do teach a man much experience. Wherefore, assure your self, and thereon I
durst pawn my life, that they ouerheard what we said, as also our coming
down the stayres, and have of set purpose fallen into this false and feyned
expression of their great love and care, wherein you now place the end of your
desire.


Sempr. Believe me ( Celestina) Parmeno aims unhappily.

Celest. Be silent: For I swear by my haly-doome, that whither comes the Ass,
thither also shall come the saddle. Let me alone to deal with Parmeno, and
you shall see, I will so temper him ever I have done with him, that I will make
him wholly ours. And see what we gain, he shall share with us: for goods
that are not common, are not goods; It is communication that makes combination
in love: and therefore let us all gain, let us all divide the spoil, and let
us laugh and be merry all alike. I will make the slave so tame, and so gentle,
that I will bring him like a bird to pick bread from my first. And so we will
be two to two, and all three join to coozen the fourth. Thou and I will join
together, Parmeno shall make a third, and all of us cheat Calisto.


Calisto. Sempronio?

Sempr. Sir.

Call. What art thou doing, thou that art the key of my life? Open the door. O
Parmeno! now that I see her, I feel my self well, me thinks, I am now alive
again: See what a reverend Matrone it is: What a presence she bears, worthy
respect! A man may now see, how for the most part, the face is the Index of the
mind. O virtuous old age! O inaged vertue^ O glorious hope of my desired end! O
head, the all air of my passion! O relieuer of my torment, and vivification of
my life, resurrection from my death! I desire to draw near unto thee, my lips
long to kiss those hands, wherein consists the fullness of my recovery; but
the unworthiness of my person debars me of so great a favor. Wherefore I
here adore the ground whereon thou treadest, and in reverence of thee, bow
down my body to kiss it.


Celest. Sempronio; Can fair words make me the fatter? Can I live by this?
Those bones which I have already gnawne, does this fool thy Master think to
feed me therewith? Sure the man dreams; when he comes to frye his eggs, he
will then find what is wanting. Bid him shut his mouth, and open his purse: I
missedoubt his words, much more his works. Holla, I say; are you so ticklish? I
will curry you for this gear, you lame Ass: you must rise a little more
early, if you mean to go beyond me.


Parme. Woe to these ears of mine, that ever they should hear such words as
these. I now see, that he is a lost man, who goes after one that is lost. O
unhappy Calisto, deiect wretch, blind in thy folly, and kneeling on the ground,
to adore the oldest, and the rottennest piece of whorish earth, that ever rubbed
her shoulders in the Stews! He is undone, he is overthrown horse and foot,
he is fallen ino a trap, whence he will never get out; he is not capable of
any redemption, counsel, or courage.


Calisto. Wat said my mother? It seems unto me, that she thinks I offer
words for to excuse my reward.


Sempr. You have hit the nail on the head, Sir.

Calisto. Come then with me, bring the keys with you, and thou shall see, I
will quickly put her out of that doubt.


Sempr. In so doing, you shall do well, Sir. Let us go presently: for it is
not good to suffer weeds to grow amongst corn, not suspicion in the hearts of
our friends, but to root it out straight with the weed-hooke of good works.


Calisto. Wittily spoken; come, let us go, let us slack no time.

Celest. Believe me ( Parmeno) I am very glad, that we have lighted on so fit
an opportunity, wherein I may manifest and make known unto thee the singular
love, wherewithal I affect thee; and what great interest (though undeservedly)
thou have in me, I say undeservedly, in regard of that, which I have heard thee
speak against me: whereof I make no more reckoning, but am content to let it
pass. For, virtue teaches us to suffer temptations, and not to render, evil
for evil; and especially when we are tempted by young men, such as want
experience, and are not acquainted with the courses of the world, who out of an
ignorant and foolish kind of loyalty, undo both themselves and their Masters,
as thou thy self do, Calisto. I heard you well enough, not a word you said,
that escaped mine care. Nor do you think, that with these my other outward
senses, old age has made me lose my hearing; for not only that which I see,
hear, and know, but even the very inward secrets of thy heart and thoughts, I
search into, and pierce to the full with these my intellectual eyes, these
eyes of my understanding. I would have thee to know ( Permeno) that Calisto is
loue-sicke, sick even to the death. Nor art thou for this, to censure him to
be a weak and foolish man: for irresistable love subdueth all things. Besides,
I would have thee to know, if thou know it not already, that there are these
two conclusions, that are evermore infallibly true. The first is, that every
man must of force love a woman, and every woman love a man. The second is, that
he who truly loves, must of necessity be much troubled and moved with the
sweetness of that superexcellent delight, which was ordained by him that made all
things, for the perpetuating of mankind, without which, it must needs perish:
and not only in humane kind, but also in fishes, birds, beasts, and all
creatures that creep and crawle upon the earth; Likewise in your souls
vegetative, some plants have the same inclination and disposition, that without
the interpositio^ of any other thing, they be planted in some little distance
one of another, and it is determined and agreed upon by the generall-consent of
your Gardeners, and husbandmen, to be Make and Female. How can you answer
this, Parmeno? Now my pretty (...) fool, you mad wagge, my souls sweet
Genius, my Pea^le, (...) well, my honest poor silly Lad, my pretty little
Monky-face, come hither you little whoreson; Alack, how I pity thy
simp^licity! thou know nothing of the world, nor of it is delights. Let me run
mad, and dye in that fit, if I suffer thee to come near me, as old as I am.
Thou have a harsh and ill favored hoarse voice, by thy brizzled beard, it is
easily guest what manner of man you are. Tell me, is all quiet beneath? No
motions at all to make in Venus Court?


Sempr. O! As quiet as the tail of a Scorpion.

Celest. It were well, and it were no worse.

Parme. Ha, ha, he.

Celest. Laugh'st thou, thou pocky rogue?

Parme. Nay, mother, be quiet: hold your peace, I pray. Do not blame me; and
do not hold me, though I am but young, for a fool. I love Calisto, tied
thereunto out of that true and honest fidelity, which every servant owes unto
his Master; for the breeding that he has given me, for the benefit which I
receive from him, as also because I am well respected, and kindly entreated by
him, which is the strongest chain, that linkes the love of the servant to the
service of his Master: As the contrary is the breaking of it. I see he is out
of the right way, and has wholly lost himself; and nothing can befall a man
worse in this world, then to hunt after his desire, without hope of a good and
happy end; especially, he thinking to recover his game (which himself holds
so hard and difficult a pursuit) by the vain advice, and foolish reasons of
that beast Sempronio, which is all one, as if he should go about with the
broad end of a Spade, to dig li^le worms out of a man's hand. I hate it. I
abhor it. It is abominable: and with grief I speak it I do much lament it.


Celestina. Know thou not, Parmeno, that it is an absolute folly, or mere
simplicity to bewail that, which by wayling cannot be helped?


Parme. And therefore do I wayle, because it cannot be helped: For if by
wayling and weeping, it were posible to work some remedy for my Master, so
great would the contentment of that hope be, that for very joy, I should not
have the power to weep. But because I see all hope thereof to be utterly lost,
with it have I lost all my joy, and for this cause do I weep.


Celest. Thou weepest in vain for that, which cannot by weeping be avoided;
thou can not turn the istreame of his violent passion; and therefore may
truly presume that he is past all^re, Tell me ( Parmeno) has not the like
happened to others, as well as to him?


Parme. Yes. But I would not have my Master through mourning and grieuing,
languish, and grow sick.


Celestina Thy Master is well enough. He is not sick: and were he never so
sick, never so much payned and grieved, I my self am able to cure him. I have
the power to do it.


Parme. I regard not what thou say. For in good things, better is the Act,
then the Power: And in bad things, better the Power, then the Act. So that, it
is beter to be well, then an the way to be well. And better is the possibility
of being sick, then to be sick indeed: and therefore, Power in ill, is better
then the Act.


Celest. O thou wicked villain! How Idly do thou talk, as if thou did not
understand thy self? It seems thou do not know his disease; What have thou
hitherto said? What would thou have? What is it that grieves you, Sir? Why
lamentest thou? Be you disposed to jest, and make your self merry? or are you
in good earnest, and would feign face out truth with falsehood? Believe you
what you list; I am sure he is sick, and that in Act, and that the Power to
make him whole, lies wholly in the hands of this weak old woman.


Parme. Nay rather, of this weak old Whore.

Celest. Now the Hangman be thy ghostly father, my little rascal, my pretty
villain; how dare thou be so bold with me?


Parme. How, as though I did not know thee?

Celest. And who art thou?

Parm. Who? marry, I am Parmeno, son to Alberto thy gossip, who lived some
little while with thee; for my mother recommended me unto thee, when thou
dwelt'st close by the rivers side in Tanners row.


Celest. Good Lord, and art thou Parmeno, Claudina's son?

Parm. The very same.

Celest. Now the fire of the pockes consume thy bones; for thy mother was an
old whore, as my self: Why do thou persecute me, Parmeno? It is he in good
truth, it is he. Come hither unto me; come I say; many a good jerke, and many
a cuffe on the ear have I given thee in my days, and as many kisses too. A
you little rogue, do thou remember, sirrah, when thou lay'st at my beds feet?


Parm. Passing well: and sometimes also, though I was then but a little Apish
boy, how you would take me up to your pillow, and there lie hugging of me in
your arms; and because you sauour'd somewhat of old age, I remember how I
would fling and fly from you.


Celest. A pocks on you for a rogue. Our (impudent!) art thou not ashamed to
talk thus? But to leave off all jesting, and to come to plain earnest; Hear
me now (my child) and hearken what I shall say unto thee. For, though I am
called hither for one end, I am come for another. And albeit I have made my
self a stranger unto thee, and as though I knew thee not, yet thou wast the
only cause that drew me hither. My son, I am sure thou art not ignorant,
how that your mother gave you unto me, your father being then alive; who, after
thou wentst from me, dyed of no other grief, save only what she suffered for
the uncertainty of thy life and person. For whose absence in those latter
years of her elder age, she led a most painful, pensive and careful life.
And when the time came, that she was to leave this world, she sent for me,
and in secret recommended thee unto me, and told me, (no other witness being
by, but heaven the witness to (...) our works, our thoughts, our hearts, whom
she alone interpo^e between her and me) that of all loves I should do so
much (...), as to make inquiry after thee, and when I had found thee, (...)
thee up, and foster thee as mine own: and that as soon as thou (...) come to
man's estate, and were able to know how to govern thy self, and to live in some
good manner and fashion; that then I should discover unto thee a certain place,
where, under many a lock and key, she has left thee more store of Gold and
Silver, then all the revenues come to, that thy Master Calisto has in his
possession. And because I solemnly vowed, and bound my self by promise unto
her, that I would see her desire, as far forth as lay in me, to be well and
truly performed, she peacefully departed this mortal life; and though a man's
faith ought to be inuiolably observed both to the living and the dead, yet more
especially to the dead; for they are not able to do any thing of themselves,
they cannot come to me, and prosecute their right here upon earth. I have spent
much time and money in inquiring and searching after thee, and could never till
now hear what was become of thee: and it is not above three days since, that
I first heard of your being, and where you abode. Verily, it has much grieved
me, that thou have gone traveling, and wandering throughout the world, as thou
have done from place, to place, losing thy time, without either gain of
profit, or of friends. For, (as Seneca says) Travelers have many ends, and
few friends. For, in so short a time they can never fasten friendship with any:
and he that is every where, is said to be no where. Again, that meat cannot
benefit the body, which is no sooner eaten, then eiected. Neither does any
thing more hinder it is health, then your diversities, and changes of meats.
Nor does that would come to be healed, which has daily change of tents, and
never plasters. Nor does that Tree never prove, which is often transplanted and
removed from one ground to another. Nor is there any thing to profitable, which
at the first sight brings profit with it* Therefore (my good son) leave off
these violencies of youth, and following the doctrine, and rule of thy
Ancestors, return unto reason, settle thy self in some one place or other.
And where better, then where I shall advise thee, taking me, and my counsel
along with thee, to whom thou art recommended both by thy father and mother?
And I, as if I were thine own true mother, say unto thee, upon those curses
and maledictions, which thy parents have laid upon thee, if thou should be
disobedient unto me, that yet a while thou continue here, and serve this thy
Master which thou have gotten thee, till thou hear further from me, but not
with that foolish loyalty, and ignorant honesty, as hitherto thou have done;
thinking to find firmness upon a false foundation, as most of these Masters
now a days are. But do thou gain friends, which is a durable and lasting
commodity; stick closely and constantly unto them; do not thou live upon
hopes, relying on the vain promises of Masters, who suck away the substance
of their servants, with hollow-hearted, and idle promises, as the horse-leaches
suck blood; and in the end fall off from them, wrong them, grow forgetful of
their good services, and deny them any recompense or reward at all. Woe be unto
him that grows old in Court. The Masters of these times love more themselves
then their servants; neither in so doing do they do amiss. The like love
ought servants to bear unto themselves. Liberality was lost long ago; rewards
are grown out of date; magnificence is fled the country; and with her, all
nobleness. Every one of them is wholly now for himself, and makes the best
he can of his servants service, serving his turn, as he finds it may stand
with his private interest and profit. And therefore they ought to do no less,
since that they are less then they in substance, but to live after their
law, and to do as they do. My son Parmeno, I the rather tell thee this,
because thy Master (as I am informed) is (as it seems* likewise unto me) a
Rompenecios, one that befooles his servants, and wears them out to the very
stumps, looks for much service at their hands, and makes them small, or no
recompense: He will look to be served of all, but will part with nothing at
all. Weigh well my words, and persuade thy self, that what I have said is
true: Get thee some friends in his house, which is the greatest, and
preciousest Jewel in the world. For, with him thou must not think to fasten
friendship. A thing seldom seen, where there is such difference of estate and
condition, as is between you two. Opportunity, thou see, now offers her
self unto us, on whose fore-top, if we will but take hold, we shall all of
us be great gainers, and thou shall presently have something, wherewithal to
help thy self. As for that which I told you of, it shall be well and safely
kept, when time shall serve; in the mean while, it shall be much for thy
profit, that thou make Sempronio thy friend.


Parme. Celestina, my hair stands an end to hear thee, I tremble at thy
words; I know not what I should do, I am in a great perplexity. One while I
hold thee for my mother, another while Cal^sto for my Master, I desire riches,
but would not get them wrongfully; for, he that rises by unlawful means,
falls with greater speed, then he got up. I would not for all the world thrive
by ill gotten gain.


Celest. Marry, Sir, but so would I: right, or wrong, so as my house may be
raised high enough, I care not.


Parme. Well, we two are of contrary minds. For, I should never live contented
with ill gotten goods; for I hold cheerful poverty, to be an honest thing.
Besides, I must tell you, that they are not poor, that have little, but they
that desire much; And therefore say all you can, though never so much, you
shall never persuade me in this, to be of your belief. I would feign pass
over this life of mi^e without envy: I would pass through solitary woods and
wildernesses without fear: I would take my sleep without ^^^rtings: I would
avoid injuries, with gentle answers: endure violence without reuiling: and
brook oppression by a resolute resistance.


Celest. O my son! it is a true saying; that Wisdom cannot be but only in
aged persons. And thou art but young.


Parm. True, but contented poverty is safe and secure.

Celest. But tell me, I pray thee, whom does fortune more advance, then those
that be bold and venturous? Besides, who is he, that comes to any thing in a
Commonwealth, who has resolved with himself to live without friends? But
(heaven be thanked) thou have wealth enough of thine own, yet thou know not
what need thou may have of friends for the better keeping of them. Nor do
thou think, that this thy inwardnesse with thy Master can any way secure thee.
For the greater a man's fortune is, the less secure it is; and then most
ticklish, when most prosperous. And therefore, to be armed against misfortunes,
we must arm our selves with friends. And where can thou get a fitter,
nearer, and better companion in this kind, then where those three kind of
friendships do concur in one? To wit, goodness, profit, and pleasure. For
goodness; behold the good will of Sempronio, how agreeable, and conformable it
is to thine: and with it, the great similiancy, and suteablenesse, which both
of you have in virtue: For profit; That lies in this hand of mine, if you two
can but agree together: For pleasure, That likewise is very likely. For now you
are both in the prime of your years, young and lusty, and fit for all kind of
sports and pleasures whatsoever; wherein young men, more then old folks, do
join and link together: as in gaming, in wearing good clothes, in jesting, in
eating, in drinking and wenching together. O Parmeno! if thou thy self
would, what a life might we lead? Even as merry as the day is long.
Sempronio, he loves Elteia, Kinsewoman to Areusa.


Parm. To Areusa?

Celest. I, to Areusa.

Parm. To Areusa, the daughter of Eliso?

Celest. To Areusa, the daughter of Eliso.

Parm. Is this certain?

Celest. Most certain.

Parm. It is marvelous strange.

Celest. But tell me man, Do thou like her?

Parm. Nothing in the world more.

Celest. Well, now I know thy mind, let me alone. Here Is my hand; I will give
her thee. Thou shall have her; Man, she is thine own, as sure as a Club.


Parmeno. Nay soft mother, you shall give me leave not to believe you; I trust
no body with my faith.


Celest. He is unwise, that will believe all men; And he is in an error, that
will believe no man.


Parme. I said, that I believe thee, but I dare not be so bold. And therefore
let me alone.


Celest. Alas, poor silly wretch; faint-hearted is he that dares not venture
for his good. Jove gives nuts to them, that have no teeth to crack them. And
beans to those, that have no jaws to chew them. Simple as thou art, thou
may truly say, Fools have fortune: for it is commonly seen, that they who
have least wisdom have most wealth: and that they who have the most
discretion, have the least means.


Parm. O Celestina; I have heard old men say, that one example of luxury or
covetousness, does much hurt, And that a man should converse with those that
may make him better; and to forsake the fellowship of those whom he thinks to
make better. As for Sempronio, neither by his example shall I be won to be
virtuous; nor he by my company be with-drawne from being vicious. And suppose
that I should incline to that which thou say, I would feign know this one
thing of thee, how by example faults may be concealed. And though a man
overcome by pleasure, may go against virtue; yet notwithstanding, let him take
heed how he spot his honesty.


Celest. There is no wisdom in thy words; For, without company, there is no
pleasure in the possession of any thing. Do not thou then draw back, do not
thou torment and vex thy self. For, Nature shunnes whatsoever favors of
sadness; and desires that which is pleasant and delightsome. And delight is
with friends, in things that are sensual; but especially in recounting matters
of love, and communicating them, the one to the other. This did I do my self;
this such a one told me; such a jest did we break; in this sort did I win
her; thus often did I kiss her: thus often did she bite me; thus I embraced
her; thus came we nearer and nearer. O what speech, what grace* what sport,
what kisses! Let us go thither, Let us return hither, Let us have music, Let
us paint Motto's, Let us sing songs, Let us invent some pretty devices; Let us
tilt it; What shall be the Impresse? What the letter to it? Tomorrow she will
walk abroad; Let us round her street; Read this her Letter; Let us go by
night; Hold thou the ladder; Guard well the gate; How did she escape thee?
Look, where the Cuckold her husband goes; I left her all alone; Let us give
another turn; Let us go back again thither. And is there any delight (
Parmeno) in all this, without company? By my say, by my say, they that have
trial can tell you, that this is the delight, this is the only pleasure; As
for that other thing you wot of, your Asses have a better, and can do better
then you, or the best of you all.


Parmeno. I would not, mother, that you should draw me on by your pleasing
persuasions to follow your advice, as those have done, who wanting a good
foundation to build their opinion on, have invited and drawn men to drink of
their heresies, sugring their cup with some sweet kind of poison, for to catch
and captiuate the wills of weake^minded men, and to blind the eyes of their
reason, with the powder of some sweet-pleasing affection.


Celest. What is reason, you fool? What is affection, you Ass? (...) (which
thou have not) must determine that; And (...) gives the upper hand to prudence;
and prudence cannot be (...) without experience; and experience cannot be
found but in old folks, and such as are well stricken in years. And therefore
we are called fathers, and mothers; and good parents do always give their
children good council: as I more especially now do thee; whose life and
credit, I prefer before mine own. And when, or how, can thou be able to
requite this my kindenes^e? For, Parents and Tutors can never receive any
recompense, that may equal their desert


Parme. I am very jealous and suspicious of receiving this doubtful council.
I am afraid to venture upon it.


Celest. Will thou not entertain it? Well, I will then tell thee, He that
wilfully refuses council, shall suddenly come to destruction. And so (
Parmeno) I rid my self of thee, as also of this business.


Parm. My mother (I see) is angry; and what I were best to do, I know not. I am
doubtful of following her council: it is as great an error to believe
nothing, as it is to believe every thing. The more humane and civil courie is,
to have affiance and confidence in her. Especially in that, where besides the
present benefit, both profit and pleasure is proposed. I have heard tell; that
a man should believe his betters, and those whose years carry authority with
them. Now; What is it she advises me unto? To be at peace with Sempronio: and
to peace, no man ought to be opposite. For blessed are the peaceful. Love and
charity toward our brethren, that is not to be shunned and avoided by us; and
few are they, that will forgo their profit. I will therefore seek to please
her, and hearken unto her. Mother, a master ought not be offended with his
Scholars ignorance; at least, very seldom in matters of depth and knowledge.
For though knowledge in its own nature, be communicable unto all, yet is it
infused but into few. And therefore I pray pardon me, and speak a new unto me;
For, I will not only hear and believe thee, but receive thy council as a
singular kindness, and a token of thy great favor, and especial love toward
me. Nor yet would I, that you should thank me for this; Because the praise
and thanks of every action, ought rather to be attributed to the giver then to
the receiver. Command me therefore; for to your commandments shall I ever be
willing, that my consent submit it self.


Celest. It is proper to a man to err; but to a beast, to persevere in an
error. It does much glad me, Parmeno, that thou have cleared thosee thick
clouds, which darkened thy eyesight, and have answered me according to the
wisdom, discretion, and sharp wit of thy father, whose person, now
representing it self fresh to my remembrance, does make my tender eyes to melt
into tears, which thou feast in such abundance to trickle down my cheeks. He
sometimes would maintain hard and strange propositions, but would presently
(such was the goodness of his nature) see his error, and embrace the truth* I
swear unto thee; that in thus seeing thee to thwart the truth, and then
suddenly upon it, laying down all contradiction, and to be conformable to that
which was reason; me thinks, I do as lively now behold thy father: as if he
now were living, and present here before me. O what a man he was, how proper
in his person, how able in his actions, what a part did he bear, and what a
venerall and reverend countenance did he carry! But hush, I hear Calisto
coming, and thy new friend, Sempronio, whose reconcilement with him, I refer
to some fitter opportuni^y. For, two living in one heart, are more powerful
both for action, and understanding.


Calisto. Dear mother, I did much doubt, considering my misfortunes, to find
you alive: but marvel more, considering my desire, that my self come alive
unto you. Receive this poor gift of him, who with it offers thee his life.


Celest. As in your finest gold, that is wrought by the hand of your cunningest
and curiosest Artificer, the workmanship oftentimes does far surpass the
matter: So the fashion of your fair liberality does much exceed the greatness
of your gift. And questionless, a kindness that is quickly conferred,
redoubles it is effect; for he that slacketh that, which he promises, seems
in a manner to deny it, and to repent himself of his promised favor.


Parme. Sempronio, what has he given her?

Sempr. A hundred crowns in good gold.

Parme. Ha, ha, ha.

Sempr. Has my mother talked with thee?

Parme. Peace, she has.

Sempr. How is it then with us?

Parme. As thou will thy self. Yet for all this, me thinks I am still afraid.


Sempr. No more. Be silent. I fear me, I shall make thee twice as much
afraid, ever I have done with thee.


Parm. Now fie upon it. I perceive there can be no greater plague, nor no
greater enemy to a man, then those of his own house.


Calisto. Now mother, go your ways get you home and cheer up your own
house; and when you have done that, I pray hasten hither, and cheer up ours.


Celestina. Good chance attend you.

Calisto. And you too: and so farewell.

The end of the first Act.
ACTVS. II.
THE ARGUMENT.
CELESTINA, being departed from Calisto, and gone home to her own house;
Calisto continues talking with Sempronio, his servant; who like one that is put
in some good hope, thinking all speed too slow, sends away Sempronio to
Celestina, to solicit her for the quicker dispatch of his conceived business;
Calisto and Parmeno in the mean while reasoning together.

INTERLOCVTORS. Calisto, Sempronio, Parmeno. CAlisto. Tell me (my Masters) The
hundred crowns which I gave yonder old Bel-dame, are they well bestowed, or no?


Sempr. Yes Sir, exceeding well. For, besides, the saving of your life, you
have gained much honor by it. And for what end is fortune favorable and
prosperous, but to be a handmaide to our honor, and to wait thereon, which of
all worldly goods is the greatest? For honor is the reward and recompense of
virtue; and for this cause we give it unto the Divine Essence, because we
have not any thing greater to give him. The best part whereof consists in
liberality and bounty: and this close-fistednes, and vncommunicated treasure,
does eclypse and darken, whereas magnificence and liberality does gain, and
highly extol it. What good is it for a man to keep that to himself, which in
the keeping of it, does himself no good? I tell you, Sir, and what I speak is
truth; Better is the use of riches, then the possessing of them. O, how
glorious a thing is it to give? and how miserable to receive? See, how much
better action is then passion: so much more noble is the giver, then the
receiver. Amongst the Elements, the fire, because it is more active, is the
more noble: and therefore placed in the Spheres, in the noblest place. And
some say; that nobleness is a praise proceeding from the merit, and antiquity
of our Ancesters. But I am of opinion, that another man's light can never make
you shine, unless you have some of your own. And therefore do not glory in
the nobleness of your father, who was so magnificent a Gentleman, but in your
own. Shine not out of his, but your own light; and so shall you get your
self honor, which is man's greatest outward good. Wherefore not the bad, but
the good, (such as your self) are worthy to partake of so perfect a virtue.
And besides, I must tell you, that perfect virtue does not suppose that Honor
has it is fellow: and therefore reioce with your self, that you have been so
magnificent, and so bountiful. And thus, Sir, having told you my mind, let
me now advise you that you would be pleased to return back to your chamber,
and there take some rest, sithence, that your business is deposited in such
hands; assuring your self, that the beginning being so good, the end will be
much better: and so let us go presently to your chamber; where I shall treat
more at large with you concerning this business.


Calisto. Me thinks ( Sempronio) it is no good counsel, that I should
here accompanied, and that she should go all alone, who seeks to cure my
ill: it were better that thou should go along with her, and hasten her on,
since thou know, that on her dililigence depends my welfare; on her
slownesse, my painfulnesse, on her neglect, my despair. Thou art wise, I know
thee to be faithful, I hold thee a good servant. And therefore so handle the
matter, that she shall no sooner see thee, but that she may judge of that
pain which I feel, and of that fire which tormenteth me; whose extreme heat
will not give me leave to lay open unto her the third part of my secret
sickness. So did it tie my tongue, and took such hold on my senses, that
they were not only busied, but in a manner wasted and consumed; which thou, as
one that is free from the like passion, may more largely deliver, letting thy
words run with a looser reyne.


Sempr. Sir, I would feign go to fulfill your command: And I would feign stay,
to ease you of your care; your fear puts spurs to my sides; and your
solitariness, like a bridle, pulls me back. But I will obey and follow your
council; which is, to go and labor the old woman. But how shall I go? For,
if I leave you thus all alone, you will talk idly, like one that is
distracted; do nothing but sigh, weep, and take on, shutting your self up in
darkness, desiring solitude, and seeking new means of thoughtfull torment;
wherein if you still persevere, you cannot escape either death or madness. For
the avoiding whereof, get some good company about you, that may minister unto
you occasion of mirth, by recounting of witty conceits, by intertaining you
with Music, and singing merry songs, by relating Stories, by devising
Motto's, by telling tales, by playing at cards, jesting, sporting. In a word,
by inuenting any other kind of sweet and delightful recreation, for to pass
away the time, that you may not suffer your thoughts to run still wandering on
in that cruel error, whereinto they were put by that your Lady and Mistress,
upon the first trance and encounter of your Love.


Calisto. How like a silly fool thou talkest! Know thou not, that it eases
the pain, to bewail it is cause? O how sweet is it to the sorrowful, to
vnsheathe their griefs? What ease do broken (...) bring with them? O what a
diminishing and refreshing to tearefull complaints, is the unfolding of a man's
woes, and bitter (...)? As many as ever writ of comfort, and consolation, do
all of them iumpe in this.


Sempr. Read a little farther, and but turn over the leaf, and you shall
find they say thus: That to trust in things temporal, and to seek after
matter of sorrow, is a kind of foolishness, if not madness. And that Macias,
the Idol of Lovers, forgetful of himself, because his mistress did forget
him; and careless of his well ^are, because she cared not for him, complains
himself thus: That the punishment of love consists in the contemplation
thereof: And that the best remedy against love, is, not to think on thy love.
The ease lies in the forgetting it. Kick not therefore against the pri^ke,
feyne thy self to be merry, pluck up your spirits and be of good cheer, and
all, you shall see, shall be well: for oftentimes, opinion brings things
whither it lists: Not that it should cause us to swerve from the truth; but
for to teach us to moderate our se^ce, and to govern our judgment.


Calisto. Sempronio, my friend, (for so thy love makes me style thee) since it
so grieves thee that I should be alone, call Parmeno hither, and he shall stay
with me: and henceforth, be thou, (as thou have ever been) faithful and
loyal unto me. For, in the service of the servant, consists the Masters
remuneration. O Parmeno!


Parme. Here, Sir.

Calisto. O I think not, for I cannot see thee. Leave her not, Sempronio: Ply
her hard, follow her at an inch. Forget me not, I pray thee. Now Parmeno, what
think thou of that which has past to day? My pain is great; Melibea
stately, Celestina wise, she is her crafts Master, and we cannot do amiss.
Thou have maynly opposed thy self against her: and to draw me to a detestation
of her, thou have painted her forth to the purpose, and set her out in her
colors: and I believe thee. For such and so great is the force of truth, that
it commands even the tongues of our enemies. But be she such, as thou have
described her to be; yet had I rather give her an hundred Crowns, then give
another five.


Parme. Is the wind in that door? Do you begin to complain already? Have
you now better bethought your self? We shall shortly complain too at home;
for I fear me, we shall fast for this frankenesse.


Calisto. It is thy opinion, Parmeno, that I ask; Gratify me therein: Hold,
do thou look? Why hang'st thou down thy head, when thou should answer
me? But I perceive, that as envy is sad, and sadness without a tongue; thine
own will can do more with thee, then fear of my displeasure. What is that
thou grumblest at? What did thou mutter to thy self, as though thou were
angry?


Parm. I say, Sir, that it had been better you had employed your liberality on
some present, or the like services upon Melibea her self, then to cast away
your money upon this old Bawd: I know well enough what she is; and which is
worse, on such a one, as minds to make you her slave.


Calisto. How (you fool) her slave?

Parme. I, her slave. For to whom thou tellest thy secret, to him do thou
give thy liberty.


Calisto. It is something that the fool has said; but I would feign know this
of thee; whether or no, when as there is a great distance betwixt the
intreater, and the entreated, the suitor, and the party sued unto, either out
of authority of obedience, or greatness of estate and dignity, or nobleness
of descent of blood, as there is betwixt my Mistress, and my self; Whether or
no (I pray) it be not necessary to have an intercessour, or mediator for me,
who may every foot go to and fro with my messages, until they arrive at her
ears, of whom, to have a second Audience, I hold it impossible. And if it be
thus with me, tell me, whether thou approuest of what I have done, or no?


Parm. The devil approve it for me.

Calisto. What say thou?

Parme. Marry, I say, Sir, that never any error came yet unaccompanied; and
that one inconvenience is the cause of another, and the door that opens unto
many.


Calisto. Thy saying I approve, but understand not thy purpose.

Parme. Then thus, Sir, your losing of your Hawke the other day, was the cause
of your entering into the Garden, where Melibea was to look if she were there;
your entering, the cause that you both saw her, and talked with her; your talk
engendered love; your love brought forth your pain; and your pain, will be the
cause of your growing careless and wretchlesse both of your body, soul, and
goods. And that which grieves me most, is, that you must fall into the hands of
that same Trot-vp-and down; that maiden-head-monger, that same gadding to and
fro Bawd, who for her villainies, and rogueries in that kind, has been three
several times implumed.


Calisto. Is It e'n so, Parmeno? Is this all the comfort thou can give me?
Tell me rather something that may please me, and give me better content then
this can. And know withal, that the more thou do dispraise, the better do I
like her. Let her cumply with me, and effect my business, and let them
implume her the fourth time too, if they will, I care not. Thou have thy wits
about thee; thou speak (...) having any sense of pain; thou art not
heart-sicke, as I (...) Parmeno, nor is thy mind touched with that sense of
sorrow, (...)


Parme. I had rather, Sir, that you should be angry with me, and reprehend me
out of your choler, for crossing your opinion, then out of your
after-repentance, to condemn me for not counselling you (...) the contrary.
For I should but dissemble with you, if I should not tell you, That then you
lost your liberty, when you did first captiuate, and imprison your will.


Calisto. This Villain would be well eudgelled; Tell me (thou unmannerly
Rascal) Why do thou blaspheme that which I adore? And you, Sir, who would
seem to be so wise, what wot'st thou of honor? Tell me, what is Love? show me
wherein Ciuility consists; Or what belongs to good manners? Thou would feign
be accounted discreet, and would that I should think so, and yet do not
consider with thy self, that the first round in follies ladder, is for a man
to think himself wise. If thou did but feel the pain that I do: with
other water would thou bathe that burning, and wash that raging wound, which
the cruel shaft of Cupid has made in my (...). See, what remedy Sempronio
brings unto me with his feet, the same do thou put away with thy tongue,
with thy vain and uncomfortable words. And feyning thy self (forsooth) to be
faithful, thou art in realty of truth, nothing else but a mere Clot, and Lum^
of earth; a box filled with nothing but the very dregs and (...) of malice:
the very Inn and House, that gives open inter^^^ (...) Envy; not caring so as
thou may defame, and discredit (...) it right or by wrong, how thou put a
dis^^^^ (...) thou knowing that this my pain, and ouer^^^ (...) by reason, nor
will admit advice, but is (...) of counsel, which is as if one should tell
me; that That which is bred in the bone, may be fetched out of the flesh: or
that which is glewed to the very heart and intralls of a man, may be vn^oo^ed
without renting the ^ou^e from the body Sempronio did fear his going, and thy
staying: it was mine own seeking; I would needs have it so; And therefore
worthily suffer the trouble of his absence and thy presence: and better is it,
for a man to be alone, then ill accompanied.


Parme. Sir, it is a weak fidelity, which fear of punishment can turn to
flattery; more especially, with such a Master, whom sorrow and affliction
deprive of reason, and make him a stranger to his natural judgment. Take but
away this same veil of blindness, and these momentary fi^es will quickly
vanish; and then shall you know, that these my sharp words are better to kill
this strong Canker, and to stifle these vio^ent flames, then the soft
smoothings of foot^ing Sempronio, which feed your humor, quicken up your love,
kindle afresh your flames, and join brands to brands, which shall never leave
burning, till they have quite consumed you, and brought you to your grave.


Calisto. Peace, peace, you Var^et; I am in pain and anguish, and thou read
philosophy unto me. But I expect no better at thy hands; I have not the
patience to hear thee any longer. Go, begone; Get forth my horse; See he be
well and clean dressed; (...) him well. For I must pass by the house of my
Melibea, or rather of my Goddesie.


Parm. Holla, boys, where be you? Not a boy about the house. I must be feign
to do it my self; and I am glad it is no worse: for I fear (...) it be long,
we shall come to a worse office, then to be boys of the spur, and to lackey
it at the stirrup. Well, let the world slide, and things be as they may be,
when they cannot be as they should be. My Gossips (I see as it is in the
proverb) are angry with me for speaking the truth. Why, how now you Jade? Are
you neig^ing too? Is not one jealous Lover enough in a house? Or do thou
wind Melibea?


Calisto. When comes this horse? Why, Parmeno, what do thou mean? why bring^
thou him not away?


Parm. Here he is: Sosia was was not within.

Calisto. Hold the stirrup. Open the gate a little wider. If Sempronio chance
to come in the mean while, and the old woman with him, will them to stay; for
I will return presently.


Parme. Go, never to return, and the devil go with thee. Let a man tell
these fools all that he can for their own good, they will never see it; and
I, for my part believe; that if I should now at this instant give him a blow on
the heel, I should beat more brain out of his hee^e then his head. Go
whither thou will for me: For I dare pawn my life, that Celestina and
Sempronio will fleece you ere they have done with you, and not leave you so
much as one Master-feather to maintain your flight. O unfortunate that I am,
that I should suffer hatred for my truth, and receive harm for my faithful
service! Others thrive by their knavery, and I lose by my honesty. The world is
now grown to that pass, that it is good to be bad, and bad to be good; and
therefore I will follow the fashion of the times, and do as other men do:
since that Traitors are accounted wise and discreet, and faithful men are
deemed silly honest fools. Had I credited Celestina, with her six dozen of
years about her, and followed her counsel, I had not been thus ill entreated
by Calisto. But this shall be a warning unto me ever hereafter, to say as he
says. If he shall say, Come, let us eat, and be merry, I will say so too.
If, Let us throw down the house, I also will approve it. If he will burn all
his goods, I will help to fetch the fire. Let him destroy, hang, drown, burn
himself, and give all that he has (if he will) to Bawds; I for my part will
hold my peace, and help to divide the spoil. Besides, it is an ancient and
true received Rule; That it is best fishing in troubled (...)* Wherefore I will
never any more be a dog^e in a mill, to be beaten for my barking.


ACTVS IIJ.
THE ARGUMENT.
SEMPRONIO goes to Celestina's house; He reprehends her for her slacknesse.
They consult what course they shall take in Calisto's b^sia^sse concerning
Melibea. At last comes Elicia; Celestina, she hyes her to the house of
Pleberio, In the mean while, Sempronio remains in the house with Elicia.

INTERLOCVTORS. Sempronio, Celestina, Elicia. SEmpronio. Look what leisure the
old bearded Bawd takes How softly she goes How one leg comes drawling after
another Now she has her money, her arms are broken. Well overtaken, Mother, I
perceive, you will not hurt your self by too much haste.


Celest. How now, son? What news with you?

Sempr. Why, this our sick patient knows not well himself what he would
have. Nothing will content him; he will have his cake baked before it be
dough; and his meat roasted, before it be spitted. He fears thy negligence; and
curses his own covetousness; he is angry with his close fistednesse, and
offended that he gave thee no more.


Celest. There is nothing more proper to Lovers, then impatience Every small
tarriance, is to them a great torment; the least delay breeds dislike; In a
moment what they imagine, must be fully effected; nay, concluded before
begu^ne; especially these new Lovers, who against any luring whatsoever, fly
out to check, they care not whither, without any aduiseme^t in the world, or
once thin^king on the harm which the meat of their desire may (by ouer^^^^
^^ing) occasion unto them, intermingled amidst the affairs and (...)
concerning their own persons, and their servants.


Sempr. What say thou of servants? Think thou, that any (...) is like to
come unto us, by laboring in this business? Or, that we shall be burned with
those Sparkles which scatteringly fly forth of Calisto's (...)? I had rather
see him, and all his love (...) to the devil; upon the (...) discovery
therefore of any danger, ((...) chance to go (...)) I will eat no more of his
bread, I will not stay with him, no not an (...). For, it is better to lose his
serve, then (...) in serving him. But Time will tell me what I (...) do. For,
before his final downe-fall, he will (like a house, that is ready to fall)
give some token himself of his own ruin. And therefore, Ma^^er, let us in
any case keep our persons from peril; let us do what may be done; if it be
possible, let us work her for him this year: if not this, the next; if not the
next, when we may; if never, the worse luck his: Though there is not any thing
so hand to suffer in it is beginning, which time does not soften and reduce to a
gentle sufferance. And there is no wound so painful, which in time does not
slacken much of it is torment. Nor was there ever any pleasure so delightful,
which has not by long continuance been much diminished and lessened. Ill and
good, prosperity and adversity, glory and grief; all these with time lose the
force and strength of their rash and hasty beginning; Whereas matters of
admiration, and things earnestly desired, once obtained, have no sooner been
come, then forgotten, no sooner purchased, but relinquished. Every day we see
new and strange accidents, we hear as many, and we pass them over; leave
those, and hearken after others; them also does time lessen and make
co^tingible, as things of common course. And I pray, what wonder would you
think it, if some should come and tell you; There was such an earthquake in
such a place, or some such other things; tell me, would you not straight forget
it? As also, if one should say unto you, Such a River is frozen, such a blind
man has recovered his sight; thy father is dead; such a thunder bolt fell in
such a place; Granada is taken; the King enters it this day; the Turk has
received an ouer-throw; to morrow you shall have a great Eclypse; such a bridge
is carried away with the flood; such a one is now made a Noble man; Peter is
robbed; Annes has hanged her self. Now in such cases, what will thou say, save
only this? That some three days past, or upon a second view thereof, there
will be no wonder made of it. All things are thus; they all pass after this
manner; all is forgotten and thrown behind us, as if they had never been. Just
so will it be with this my Masters Love; the farther it goes on, the more it
will slacken: For long custom does allay sorrow, weakeneth and subdueth our
delights, and lesseneth wonders. Let us make our profit of him, whilst this
plea is depending; and if we may with a dry root do him good, the easier the
better; if not, by little and little we will solder up this flaw, and make all
whole by Me^^^^^ holding him in scorn and contempt. And if this will do no
good upon him, Better it is, that the Master be pained, then his man (...)


Celestina. We^l have thou said; I hold with thee, and iumpe in thy opinion;
thy words have well pleased me, we cannot err. Yet notwithstanding (my son)
it is necessary, that a good Proctour should follow his Clyents cause
diligently and painfully; that he color his plea with some feyned show of
reason; that he press some quillet or quirke of Law; to go and come into
open Court, though he be checked, and receive some harsh words from the Judges
mouth, to the end that they who are present, may both see and say, that though
he did not prevail, yet he both spoke and labored hard for his fee. So shall
not he want Clyents, nor Celestina suitors in cases of Love.


Sempr. Do as thou think good. Frame it to thine own liking; This is not the
first business thou have taken in hand.


Celest. The first, (my son?) Few virgins (I thank Fortune for it) have thou
seen in this City, which have opened their shops, and traded for themselves,
to whom I have not been a broaker to their first spunne thread, and help them
to vent their wares; there was not that wench borne in the world, but I writ
her down in my Register, and kept a Catalogue of all their names, to the
intent that I might know how many escaped my net. Why, what did thou think
of me, Parmeno? Can I live by the air? Can I feed my self with wind? Do I
inherit any other land? Have I any other house or Vineyard? Know thou of any
other substance of mine, besides this office? By what do I eat and drink? By
what do I find clothes to my back, and shoes to my feet? In this City was
I borne; in it was I bred; Living (though I say it) in good credit and
estimation, as all the world knows. And do thou think then, that I can go
unknown? He that knows not both my name, and my house, thou may hold him a
mere stranger.


Sempr. Tell me, (Mother) what past betwixt you and my fellow Parmeno, when I
went up with Calisto for the Crowns?


Celest. I told him his dream, and the interpretation thereof; and how that
he should gain more by our company, and joining in friendship with us, then
with all his gay g^ozings, and imbroydere^ works which he utters to his
Master; How he would always live poor and in want, and be made a scoff and
laughing stock, unless he would turn over a new leaf, and alter his
opinion; that he should not make himself a Saint, and play the hypocrite
before such an old beaten bitch as my self. I did put him in mind of his own
mother relating unto him what a one she was, to the end that he might not set
my office at naught, her self having been of the same Trade: for should he
but offer to speak ill of me, he must needs stumble first on her.


Sempr. Is it long (mother) since you first knew her?

Celest. This Celestina, which is here now with thee, was the woman that saw
her borne, and help to breed her up: why, I tell thee (man) his mother and I
were nail, and flesh, buckle and thong; Of he I learned the better part of my
trade. We did both eat, both sleep, both enjoy our pleasures, our counsels,
and our bargains, (...) one with another; we lived together like two sisters
both at home and abroad: there was not a farthing which either of us gained,
but was faithfully and truly divided between us. Had she lived, I should
never have lived to be deceived. But it was not my fortune to be so happy, she
died too soon for me. O death, death, how many do thou deprive of their
sweet and pleasing society! How many do thou discomfort with thy unwelcome
and troublesome Visitation? For one that thou eatest being ripe, thou croppest
a thousand that are green; For were she alive, these my steps should not have
been unaccompanied, not driven (as now I am) to walk the streets alone. I
have good cause to remember her; for to me she was a faithful friend, and a
good companion. And whilst she was with me; she would never suffer me to
trouble my body, or my brains about any thing: if I brought bread, she would
bring meat; if I did spread the cloth, she would lay the napkins: she was not
foolish, nor fantastical, nor proud, as most of your women now adays are. And
by my say, I swear unto thee, she would go barefaced from one end of the
City to the other, with her Fan in her hand, and not one, all the way that she
went, would give her any worse word, then Mistress Claudina. And I dare be
bold to say it, that there was not a woman of a better palate for wine in the
world, nor better skilled in any kind of merchandise whatsoever. And when you
have thought that she had been scarce out of doors, with a whip-Sir John, ever
you could scarce say this, she was here again. Every one would inuit and
feast her, so great was the affection which they bare unto her; And she never
came home, till she had taken a taste of some eight or ten sorts of wine,
bearing one pottle in her Iar, and the other in her belly: and her credit was
so good, that they would have trusted her for a Rundlet or two upon her bare
word, as if she had pawned unto them a piece of plate. Why, her word was as
current as gold, in all the Innes and Tauernes in the Town. If we walked the
streets, whenever we found our selves thirsty, we entered straight the next
Tavern that was at hand, and called presently for a quart of wine for to
moysten our mouths withal, though we had not a penny to pay for it. Nor would
they (as from others) take our vailes and our coyfes from off our heads, till
we had discharged the reckoning, but score it up, and so let us go on our way.
O Sempronio; Were it but Cat after kind, and that such were the son, as was the
mother, assure thy self that thy master should remain without a feather, and
we without any farther care. But if I live, I will bring this iron to my
fashion; I will work him like wax, and reckon him in the number of mine own.


Sempr. How do thou think to make him thine? He is a crafty subtle fox;
He will hardly be drawn in; He is a shrewd fellow to deal withal.


Celest. For such a crafty Knave, we must have a Knave and a half, and
intertaine two traitors for the taking of one. I will bring him to have
Areusa, so and make him Cock-sure ours; and he shall give us leave without any
let, to pitch our nets, for the catching of Calisto's coin.


Sempr. But do thou think thou can do any good upon Melibea? Have thou
any good bought to hang by?


Celest. There is not that Surgeon, that can at the first dressing, give a true
judgment of his Patients wound: but what I see, and think for the present, I
will plainly deliver unto thee. Melibea is fair; Calisto fond and frank; he
cares not to spare his purse, nor I my pains; he is willing to spend, and I
to speed him in his business; Let his money be stirring, and let the suite
hang as long as it will. Money can do any thing; it splitteth hard Rocks; it
passes over Rivers dry-foote; there is not any place so high, whereunto an
Ass laden with gold will not get up; his unadvisedness, and feruentnesse of
affection, is sufficient to mar him, and to make us. This I have thought
upon; this I have searched into; this is all I know concerning him and her: and
this is that which must make most for our profit. Well, now must I go to
Pleberio's house. Sempronio, farewell. For though Melibea brave it, and stands
so high upon her pantofles; yet is not she the first that I have made to
stoop, and leave her cackling; they are all of them ticklish, and skittish;
the whole generation of them is given to winching and flinging: but after they
are well weighed, they prove good highway Iades, and travel quietly; you may
kill them, but never tire them. If they journey by night, they wish it may
never be morning. They curse the Cocks, because they proclaim it is day: the
Clockes, because they go too fast: they lie prostrate, as if they looked after
the Pleyades and the North star, making themselves Astronomers, and star
gazers; But when they see the morning star arise, they sigh for sorrow, and
are ready to forsake their bodies. And the clearing of the day, is the clouding
of their joy. And above all, it is worth the while, to note how quickly they
change copy, and turn the Cat in the pan; They entreat him, of whom they were
entreated; they endure torment for him, whom before they had tormented; they
are servants to those, whose Mistresses they were; they break through stone
walls, they open windows, feyne sickness; if the hinges of their doors
chance to creake, they anoint and supple them with oil, that they may perform
their office without any noise. I am not able to express unto thee the great
impression of that sweetness, which the primary and first kisses of him they
love, leaves imprinted in their hearts. They are enemies of the mean, and
wholly set upon extremes.


Sempr. Mother, I understand not these terms.

Celest. Marry, I say, that a woman either loves, or hates him much, of whom
she is beloved, so that, if she entertain not his love, she cannot dissemble
her hate; there are no reins strong enough to bridle their dislike. And
because I know this to be true, it makes me go more merrily and cheerfully
to Melibea's house, then if I had her fast in my fist already. For I know, that
though at the first I must be forced to woo her, yet in the end, she will be
glad to sue to me. And though at present perhaps she threaten me, and flatly
fall out with me; yet at last will she be well pleased, and fall as much a
flattering, as she did a reuiling me. Here in this pocket of mine, I carry a
little parcel of yarne, and other such like trinkets, which I always bear
about me; that I may have some pretense at first to make my easier entrance
and free access, where I am not thoroughly known: As Gorgets, Coyfes, Fringes,
Rowles, Fillets, Hayre-laces, Nippers, Antimony, Ceruse, and sublimated
Mercury, Needles and Pinnes; they shall not ask that thing, which I shall not
have for them. To the end, that look whatsoever they shall call for, I may be
ready provided for them. And this bait upon the first sight thereof shall
work my acceptance, and hold fast the fish which I mind to take.


Sempr. Mother, look well about you. Take heed what you do. For a bad
beginning can never make a good ending. Think on her father, who is noble and
of great power and courage; her mother jealous and furious, and thou, suspicion
it self. No sooner seen, but mistrusted: Melibea is the only child to them
both, and she miscarrying, miscarrieth with her all their happiness; the very
thought whereof, makes me quake and tremble. Go not to fetch wool, and come
home shorn your self; seek not to pluck her wings, and your self without
your plumes.


Celestina. Without my plumes, my son?

Sempro. Or rather implumed, mother, which is worse.

Celestina. Now by my say, in an ill hour had I need of thee to be my
companion. As though thou could instruct Celestina in her own Trade? As if I
knew not better what to do, then thou can teach me? Before ever thou wast
borne, I did eat bread with crust. O! you are a proper man to make a
Commander, and to marshall other men's affairs, when thy self art so dejected
with sinister diuinations, and fear of ensuing harms.


Sempr. Marvel not, Mother, at my fear, since it is the common condition of
all men; That what they most desire, they think shall never come to pass. And
the rather, for that in this case now in hand, I dread both thine, and my
punishment; I desire profit; I would that this business might have a good end;
not because my Master thereby might be rid of his pain, but I of my penury.
And therefore I cast more inconveniences with my small experience, then you
with all your aged Art and cunning.


Elicia. I will bless my self; Sempronio, come; I will make a ^^eake in the
water, I will score it up. This is news indeed: I had thought to have strewed
green rushes against your coming. What? Come hither twice? Twice in one day?


Celest. Peace, you fool. Let him alone. We have other thoughts (I wi^^e) to
trouble our heads withal; matters of more importance, then to listen to your
trumperies. Tell me; Is the house ^eare? Is the young wench gone, that
expected the young Nouice?


Elicia. Gone? yes; and another come, since she went, and gone too.


Celest. Sai'st thou me so, Girl? I hope then it was not in vain.

Elicia. How? in vain? No by my fay was it not; it was not i^ value; for
though he came late, yet better late then never. And little need he to rise
early, whom his stars have a purpose to help.


Celest. Go, hye you up quickly to the top of all the house, as high as you
can go, and bring me down hither the bottle of that oil of Serpents, which
you shall find fas^ned to that piece of rope, which I brought out of the fields
with me that other night, when it rained so fast, and was so dark: then open
my chest where the paintings be, and on your right hand you shall find a paper
written with the blood of a Bat, or Flitter-mouse; bring it down also with
you, ogether with that wing of the Dragon, whereof yesterday we did cut off the
claws. And take heed, you do not shead the Maydeaw, which was brought me for
to make my confection.


Elicia. It is not here, mother; you never remember where you lay your things.


Celest. Do not reprove me, I pray thee, in mine old age; mis^use me not,
Elicia. Do not you feyne untruths, though Sempronio be ^eere, be not you
proud of it. For he had rather have me for his counselor, then you for his
play-fellow, for all you love him so well. Enter into the chamber where my
ointments be, and there in the skin of a black Cat, where I willed you to
put the eyes of the shee-Wolfe, you shall not fail to find it: and bring down
the blood of the he Goat, and that little piece of his beard which you your
self did cut off.


Elicia. Take it to you (mother.) Lo, here it is; while you stay here, I will
go up, and take my Sempronio with me.


Celest. I conjure thee (thou sad god Pluto) Lord of the infernal (...),
Emperor of the damned court, Captain general and proud Co^mander of the
wicked spirits, Grand signor of those sulp^ureous fires, which the flaming
hills of Aetna flash forth in most fearful, and most hideous manner;
Governor, and Superuisor both of the torments, and tormenters of those sinful
souls, that lie bowling in Phlegeton; Prince, and chief Ruler of those three
hellish Furies, Tesiphone, Meghera, and Alecto; Administrator of all the black
things belonging to the kingdoms of Stix and Dis, with all their pitchy Lakes,
infernal shades, and litigious Chaos; Maintainer of the flying Harpies, with
all the whole rabblement of frightfull Hydraes; I Celestine, thy best known,
and most noted Clyent, conjure thee by the virtue and force of these red
Letters, by the blood of this bird of the night, wherewith they are charactred,
by the power and weight of these names and signs, which are contained in this
paper, by the^e* and bitter poison of those Vipers, whence this oil was
extracted, wherewith I anoint this ^^ew of yarne, thou come presently without
delay to obey my will, to inuelop, and wrap thy self therein, and there to
abide, and never depart thence, no, not the least moment of time, until that
Melibea, with that prepared opportunity, which shall be offered unto her, shall
buy it of me, and with it, in such sort be entangled and taken, that the more
she shall behold it, the more may her heart be molified, and the sooner wrought
to yield to my request: That thou will open her heart to my desire, and wound
her very soul with the love of Calisto; and in that extreme, and violent
manner, that despising all honesty, and casting off all shame, she may
discover her self unto me, and reward both my message, and my pains; Do
this, and I am at thy command, to do what thou will have me: But if thou do
not do it, thou shall forthwith have me thy Capital foe, and Professed enemy.
I shall strike with light, thy sad and darksome dungeons; I shall cruelly
accuse thy continual lyings, and daily false-hoods. And lastly, with my
charming words, and enchanting terms, I will chain and constringe thy most
horrible name. Wherefore, again and again; once, twice, and thrice, I conjure
thee to fulfill my command. And so presuming on my great power, I depart hence,
that I may go to her with my clew of yarne; wherein I verily believe, I carry
thy self inwrapped.


ACTVS IIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
CELESTINA, going on her way, talks to her self, till she comes to Pleberio's
gate, where she meets with Lucrecia one of Pleberio's maid-seruants; she boords
her, and enters into discourse with her, who being ouer-heard by Alisa,
Melibea's mother, and understanding it was Celestina, causes her to come near
the house. A messenger comes to call away Alisa, she goes her ways; Celestina
in the mean while being left alone with Melibea, discouers unto her the cause
of her coming.

INTERLOCVTORS. Celestina, Lucrecia, Alisa, Melibea. CElestina. Now that I am
all alone, I will, as I walk by my self, weigh and consider that which
Sempronio feared, concerning my travel in this business. For, those things
which are not well weighed, and considered, though sometimes they take good
effect, yet commmonly fall out ill. So that much speculation brings forth much
good fruit; for although I dissembled with him, and did set a good face on the
matter, it may be, that if my drift and intent should chance to be found out by
Melibea's father, it would cost me little less then my life: Or at least, if
they should not kill me, I should rest much impaired in my credit, either by
their tossing me in a blanket, or by causing me to be cruelly whipped; so that my
sweet meats shall have sour sauce: and my hundred Crowns in Gold be purchased
at too dear a rate; Ay wretched me^ into what a Labyrinth have I put my self?
What a trap am I like to fall into, through mine own folly? For that I might
show my self solicitous and resolute, I have put my self upon the hazard of
the dice. Woe is me; what shall I do? To go back, is not for my profit; and
to go on, stands not with my safety. Shall I persist? or shall I desist? In
what a strait am I? In what a doubtful and strange perplexity? I know not
which I were best to choose. On my daringnesse depends manifest danger; on my
cowardice shameful damage. Which way shall the Ox go, out he must needs
plough? Every way, go which way I will, discouers to my eyes deep and
dangerous furrows; desperate downefalls; if I be taken in the manner; if the
theft be found about me, I shall be either killed, or carted, with a
paper-crowne set upon my head, having my fault written in great Text-letters.
But in case I should not go, what will Sempronio then say? Is this all thou
can do? Thy power, thy wisdom, thy stoutnesse, thy courage, thy large
promises, thy fair offers, thy tricks, thy subtilties, and the great care
(forsooth) thou would take; What? are they all come to this? And his Master
Calisto, what will he say? what will he do? or what will he think? save
only this; That there is much deceit in my steps; and that I have discovered
this blot to Pleberio, like a preuaricating Sophistresse, or cunning
Ambi-dexter, playing the traitor on both sides, that I might gain by both?
And if he do not entertain so hateful a thought, he will rail upon me like
a madman; he will vpbraid me to my face, with most reproachful terms; He
will propose a thousand inconveniences, which my hasty deliberation was the
cause of; saying, Out you old whore; Why did thou increase my passions with
thy promises? False Bawd as thou art; For all the world besides, thy feet can
walk, for me only thy tongue; Others can have works; I only words. Others
can have remedy at thy hands; I only the man that must endure torment. To all
others, thy force can extend it self; and to me is it only wanting. To all
others thou art Light; to me Darkness. Out thou old tretcherous, disloyal
wertike; Why did thou offer thy self and service unto me? For, it was thy
offer that did put me in hope: and that hope did delay my death, prolonged my
life, and did put upon me the Title of a glad man. Now, for that thy promises
have not proved effectual, neither shall thou want punishment, nor I woeful
despair: so that, look I on which side I will (miserable man that I am) it is
ill here, and it is ill there; pain and grief on either hand: But when
extremes shall want their mean, and no means to avoid either the one or the
other; of two cuils, it is the wiser course to incline to the lesser. And
therefore I had rather offend Pleberio, then displease Calisto. Well then, I
will go. For greater will my shamebe, to be condemned for a Coward, then my
punishment, in daring to accomplish what I promised. Besides, Fortune still
friendeth those that are bold and valiant. Lo, yonder is the gate; I have seen
my self in greater danger then this in my days, Coraggio, Coraggio,
Celestina; Be of good cheer; Be not dismayed; For, there are never suitors
wanting for the mitigating, and allaying of punishment. All Diuinations are in
my favor, and show themselves prospicious in my proceedings; or else I am no
body in this my Art, a mere bungler, an Idiot, an Ass. Of four men that I
meet by the way, three of them were Ihon's; whereof two were Cuckolds. The
first word that I heard, passing along the street, was a Loue-complaint. I have
not stumbled since I came forth, as at other times I used to do. ^e thinks
the very stones of the street did sunder themselves one from another, to give
me way as I past. Nor did the skirts of my clothes wrumple up in troublesome
folds, to hinder my feet. Nor do I feel any faintness, or weariness in my
legs. Every one saluteth me. Not a dog that has once barked at me; I have
neither seen any bird of a black feather, neither Thrush, nor Crow; nor any
other of the like unlucky nature; and which is a better sign of good luck
then all these, yonder do I see Lucrecia, standing at Melibea's gate, which is
kinsewoman to Elicia: it cannot but go well with us; it is impossible we
should miss of our purpose; All is Cocke-sure.


Lucrecia. What old witch is this, that comes thus trayling her tail on the
ground? Look how she sweepes the streets with her gown? Fie, what a dust
she makes?


Celestina. By your leave, sweet Beauty.

Lucrecia. Mother Celestina, you be welcome. What wind, I trow, drives you this
way? I do not remember, that I have seen you in these parts this many a day.
What accident has brought you hither?


Celest. My love (daughter, my love) and the desire I have to see all my good
friends; and to bring you commendations from your Cousin Elicia: as also to see
my old and young Mistress, whom I have not seen since I went from this end of
the Town.


Lucrecia. Is this your only errand from home? Is it possible, you should come
so far for this? I promise you, you make me much to marvel; For I am sure
you were not wont to stir your stumps, but you knew wherefore; nor to go a
foot forth of doors, unless it were for your profit.


Celest. What greater profit (you fool) would you have, then a man to cumply
with his desires? Besides, such old women as we never want business:
especially my self, who having the breeding of so many men's daughters as I
have, I go to see if I can sell a little yarne.


Lucrecia. Did not I tell you so before? I wot well what I said; you never put
in a penny, but you take out a pound: Be your pains never so little, you will
be sure you will be well paid for it. But to (...) that pass, my old mistress
has begun a web; she has need to buy it, and thou have need to sell it.
Come in, and stay here awhile, you and I will not fall out.


Alisa. Lucrecia, who is that you talk withal?


Lucrecia. With that old woman forsooth, with the scotch on her nose, who
sometimes dwelt hard by here in Tanners Row, close upon the Riuer-side.


Alisa. Now I am further to seek then I was before; if thou will give me to
understand an unknown thing, by a thing that is less known, is to take up
water in a Sieue.


Lucrecia. Madame! Why, this old woman is better known then the herb Rue.
Do not you remember her that stood on the Pillory for a Witch? That sold young
wenches by the great and by wh^le sale? and that has mard many thousands of
marriages, by sundring man and wife, and setting them at odds?


Alisa. What Trade is she of? What is her Profession? it may be, by that I
shall know her better.


Lucrecia. Fosooth, she persumes Calls, Vailes, and the like; she makes your
sublimate Mercury, and has some thirty several Trades besides; she is very
skillful in herbs; she can cure little children: And some call her, The old
woman, The Lapidary, for her great dealing in stones.


Alisa. All this makes me never a whit the wiser. Tell me her name, i^ thou
^nowst it.


Lucrecia. If I knew it? Why, there is neither young nor old in all this City,
but knows it. And should not I then know it?


Alisa. If you know it so well, why then do not you tell it me?

Lucrecia. I am ashamed, forsooth.

Alisa. Go too, you fool; Tell me her name; Do not anger me by this your
delay.


Lucrecia. Her name (saving your Reverence) is Celestina.

Alisa. Hi, hi, hi! Now beshrew your fingers; O my heart! O my sides! I am not
able to stand for laughing, to see that the lothing which thou have of this
poor old woman, should make thee ashamed to name her unto me. Now I call her
to mind; Go too; you are a wagge; No more of this. She (poor soul) is come
to beg somewhat of me. Bid her come up.


Lucrecia. Aunt, it is my Mistress pleasure, you come up.

Cel. My good Lady; All blessings abide with you, and your noble daughter. My
many griefs and infirmities have hindered my visiting of this your house, as in
duty I was bound to do; But heaven knows how fair are the intralls of my
inward affection, how free from any spot of foulness. It knows the sincerity
of my heart, and trunesse of my love. For, distance of place displaceth not
that love, which is lodged in the heart: So that what heretofore in my self I
did much desire, now my necessity has made me to perform. And amongst other
my many Crosses and miseries in this life, my Crosses in my purse grow daily
less and less; so that I have no better remedy to help my self withal, and
to relieve this my poor estate, then to sell this little parcel of yarne of
mine own spinning to make Coyfes, and Kerchiefes; and understanding by your
maid, that you had need thereof (howbeit I am poor in every thing, I praise my
fate, save the richness of this grace) it is wholly at your command, if either
it or I may do you any service.


Alisa. Honest neighbor, thy discourse and kind offer move me to compassion:
and so move me, that I had rather light upon some fit occasion, whereby I might
supply thy wants, then diminish thy web, still thanking thee for thy kind
offer: and if it be such as will serve my turn, I shall pay you well for it.


Celest. Madame, by my life, as I am true old woman, or by any other oath you
shall put me to, it is such, as all the whole Town is not able to match it.
Look well upon it; it is as fine as the hair of your head, even and equal,
as nothing more strong, as the strings of a Vial; white as a flake of Snow,
spun all with mine own fingers; reeled and wound up with mine own hands.
Look you (Lady) on some of the same in skaines; Did you ever see better? Three
Royals, as I am true woman, I received no longer ago then yesterday for an
ounce.


Alisa. Daughter Melibea, I will leave this honest woman with you; For me
thinks it is now high time, if I have not stayed too long, to go visit my
sister, Wife unto Chremes: for I have not seen her since yesterday; and
besides, her Page is now come to call me, and tells me that her old fit has
already been on her this pretty while.


Celest. Now does the Devil go preparing opportunity for my Stratagem, by
re-inforcing this sickness upon the other. Go on, my good friend, stand
stiffly to your tackling; be strong and shrink not. For now is the time or
never; see you leave her not: and remove away this woman from me. But soft; I
fear she hears me.


Alisa. Say, (friend) what is that thou sai'st?

Celest. I say (Madame) Cursed be the devil and my evil Fortune, that your
sisters sickness is grown now upon her in such an unlucky hour, that we
shall have no fit time to dispatch our business: But I pray, what is her
sickness?


Alisa. A pain in her side, which takes her in such grievous manner, that if
it be true which her Page tells me, I fear me it will cost her her life. Good
neighbor, let me entreat you for my sake to recommend her recovery unto your
best devotions and prayers.


Celest. Here (Lady, I give you my faithful promise, that as soon as I go
hence, I will hyemee to my Vestalls, where I have many devout virgins, my
friends, upon whom I will lay the same charge as you have laid upon me.


Alisa. Do you hear, Melibea? Content our neighbor, and give her that which
is reason for her yarne. And you mother, I pray hold me excused, for I doubt
not, but you and I shall have another day, when we shall have more leisure to
enjoy one another.


Celest. Madame, there is no need of pardon, where there is no fault
committed. Jove pardon you, and I do. For I thank you, you have left me
here with very good company. Jove grant she may long enjoy her noble youth,
and this her flourishing prime; a time wherein more pleasures and delights are
found, then in this old decay. Carcass of mine, which is nothing else but a
very Spittle-house of diseases, an Inn full of infirmities, a Storehouse, or
Magazine of sad and melancholy thoughts, a friend to brangling and brawling, a
continual grief, and incurable plague: pitying that which is past, punished
in that which is present: and full of wretched care in that which is to come: A
near neighbor unto death; a poor Cabin, without one bough of shelter,
whereinto it raynes on all sides; a stick of Willow; a staff of weak Osiers,
which is doubled with any the least stresse you put it to.


Melib. Tell me (mother) why do you speak so ill of that, which the whole
world so earnestly desires to enjoy and see?


Celest. They desire so much their more hurt; they desire so much their more
grief; they desire to live to be old; because by living to be old, they live.
And life (you know) is sweet; and living, they come to be old. Hence is it,
that your children desire to be men; and your men to be old men; and your old
men, to be more and more old; and though they live in never so much pain, yet
do they still desire to live. For, (as it is in the Proverb) Feign would the
Hen live, for all her pip; she would not be put out of her life, to be put
out of her pain. But who is he (Lady) that can recount unto you the
inconveniences of old age? The discommodities it brings with it? it is torments,
it is cares, it is troubles, it is infirmities, it is colds, it is heates, it is
discontentments, it is brawles, it is janglings, it is griefs, which like so many
weights lie heavy upon it? Those deep furrows and deep wrinkles in the face?
That change and alteration in the hair? That fading of fresh and lively
color? That want of hearing? That weakness of sight? That hollownesse in the
eyes? Seeing, as if they were shut up in a shade? That sinking and falling of
the jaws? That toothlesnesse of the gummes? That failingnesse of force and of
strength? That feebleness of legs? That slownesse in feeding? Besides,
(Madame) which makes me sigh to think upon it, when all these miseries I have
told you of, come accompanied with poverty, all sorrows to this must stoop
and strike sail, when the appetite shall be great, and the provision small;
The stomach good, and the diet naught; For I never knew any worse habit, then
that of hunger.


Melibea. I perceive, so goes the market, as it goes with you. And as you find
your penniworths, so you speak of the Fair. And though you perhaps complain,
the rich will sing another song.


Celest. Daughter, and Mistress, there is no way so fair, but has some
foul; if you have one mile of good, you have three of bad. At the foot of
every hill, you have three Leagues of ill follows. And of a thousand that live
contentedly, you have ten thousand do the contrary: True contentedness, rest,
renown, glory, and quietness, run from the rich by other by-conduits, and
gutters of subtilty and deceit; which pipes, whereby they are conveyed, are
never perceived, because they are paued and brickt over with smooth and well
wrought flatteries. He is rich that has Gods blessing. I mary, that is wealth
indeed* And shall I tell you, Lady? Safer it is with him that is despised, then
with him that is feared. And a far better sleep does the poor man take,
then he who is bound to keep that with care which he has gotten with
labor, and must leave with sorrow. My friend will not dissemble with me, but
the rich man's will with him; I am loved for mine own sake; the rich man for
his wealths sake. A rich man shall never hear the truth; every one will
flatter him, and seek to please his humor in whatsoever he shall say.
Besides, he lies open to every man's envy; and you shall scarce find one rich
man amongst a thousand, but will ingeniously confess, that it had been better
for him to have bin in a middling estate, or in good honest poverty. For riches
make not a man rich but busied; not a Master, but a Steward. More are they that
are possessed by their riches, then they that possess their riches. To many
they have been a means of their death; and most men they have robbed of their
pleasure, and their good and commendable qualities; and to say the truth, they
are enemies to all goodness. Have you not heard say, Men have lien down, and
dreamed of their riches, and behold, they have waked, and found nothing in
their hands? Every rich man has a dozen of sons, or Nephews, which repeat
no other prayer, nor tender any other Orison to God, but that he would be
pleased to take him out of this world; and desire nothing more, then to see the
hour that they may come to enjoy his estate; to see him under ground, and what
was his, in their hands; and with a small charge, to lay him up in his last and
everlasting mansion here on earth.


Melibea. Me thinks, mother, it should be a great grief unto you, to think
upon those good days of yours, which are past and gone. Would you not be
willing to run them over again?


Celest That Trauellour (Lady) were a fool, who having tired out himself with
a hard days travel, would, to begin his journey again, desire to return to
the same place, from whence he came. For all those things, whose possession is
no whit pleasing, it is better to enjoy them as they are, then to desire their
longer stay. For then are they so much the nearer to their end, by how much the
farther they are from their beginning. Nor is there any thing in the world more
sweet, or more pleasing to him that is truly weary, then his Inn, wherein he
may rest himself. So that though youth be a thing very io^und, yet he that is
truly old, does not desire it. But he indeed that wants reason and true
understanding, that man in a manner loves nothing else, but the days that are
past and gone.


Melibea. Were it but only to live, it is good to desire that which I say.


Celest. As soon (Lady) dies the young Lamb as the old Sheep; they go both
to the shambles together; there is no man so old, but he may live one year
more; nor no man so young, but he may dye to day: so that in this you have
little, or no advantage of us.


Melibea. Thou have scarr'd me with thy words; thy reasons put me in
remembrance that I have seen thee heretofore. Tell me (mother) art not thou
Celestina, that dwelt in Tanners Row, near the River?


Celest. Even the very same.

Melibea. By my fay you are an old woman. Well, I see it is a true saying; That
days go not away in vain. Now (never trust me) I did not know you; neither
should I, had it not been for that slash over your face; then were you fair,
now wonderfully altered.


Lucrecia. She changed? Hi, hi, hi! the devil she is: she was fair when she
met with him (saving your reverence) that scotcht her over the nose.


Melibea. What say thou fool? Speak, what is it thou-saist? What laugh'st
thou at?


Lucrecia. As though I did not know Mother Celestina?

Celest. Madame, Take you hold on time, that it slip not from you. As for my
complexion, that will never change: have you not read what they say? The day
will come, when thou shall not know thy self in a glass? Though I am now
grown gray before my time, and seem double the years I am of; of four
daughters which my mother had, my self was the youngest. And therefore, I am
sure, I am not so old as you take me to be.


Melibea. Friend Celestina, I am very glad both to see and know thee; and I
have taken great pleasure in thy discourse. Here, take your money and
farewell; for thou look (poor soul) as if thou had eaten nothing all
this day.


Celest. O more then mortal image! O precious pearl! How truly have you
guest? O! with what a grace do thy words come from thee? I am ravished hearing
thee speak. But yet it is not only eating, that maintains a man or woman;
especially me, who use to be fasting a whole, nay, two days together, in
soliciting other folks businesses. For, I intend no other thing, my whole life
is nothing else; but to do good offices for the good, and (if occasion serve)
to dye for them. And it was evermore my fashion, rather to seek trouble to my
self by serving of others, then to please and content my self. Wherefore, if
you will give me leave, I will tell you the necessitated cause of my coming,
which is another manner of matter then any you have yet heard; and such as we
were all undone, if I should return in vain, and you not know it.


Melibea. Acquaint me (mother) with all your necessities and wants, and if I
can help you in them, or do you any good, I shall willingly do it, as well
out of our old acqaintance, as out of neighborhood, which in good and honest
minds, is a sufficient bond to tie them thereunto.


Celestina. My wants, Madame? My necessities do you mean? Nay, others (as I
told you) not mine. For mine own, I pass at home with my self in mine own
house, without letting the whole Country to know them: Eating when I may, and
drinking when I can get it. For, for all my poverty, I never wanted a penny to
buy me bread, nor a Quarte, that is, the eighth part of six pence to send for
wine, no, not in all this time of my widdow-hood. For before, I never took
thought for any, but had always a good Vessel still in my house. And when one
was empty, another was full. I never went to bed, but I did first eat a toast
well steept in wine, and two dozen of draughts, sipping still the wine after
every sop, for fear of the Mother, wherewith I was then wont to be troubled.
But now, that I husband all things my self, and am at mine own finding, I am
feign to fetch my wi^e in a little poor Jar, which will scarce hold a
pot^le. And sometimes in punishment of my sins (which Cross I am willing to
bear) I am forced to go six times a day with these my silver hayres about my
shoulders, to fill and fetch my wine my self at the Tavern. Nor would I by my
good will dye, till I see my self have a good Rundlet or Terse of mine own
within mine own dootes. For (on my life) there is no provision in the world
like unto it. For as the saying is; It is bread and wine, not the young man
that is spruce and fine, that makes us rid the way, and travel with mettle;
yet let me tell you, that where the good man is missing, all other good is
wanting. For ill does the spindle move, when the beard does not wagge above.
And this I thought good to tell you by the way, upon those speeches which I
used concerning others, and not mine own necessities.


Melibea. Ask what thou will, be it either for thy self, or any body else,
whom it pleases thee.


Celest. My most gracious and courteous Lady, descended of high and noble
parentage; your sweet words, and cheerful gesture, accompanied with that
kind and free proffer, which you are pleased to make to this poor old woman,
gives boldness to my tongue, to speak what my heart even longs to utter. I
come lately from one, whom I left sick to the death, who only with one word,
which should come from your noble mouth, and entrusted in this my bosom to
carry it hence with me, I verily assure my self, it will save his life, so
great is the devotion which he bears to your gentle disposition, and the
comfort he would receive by this so great a kindness.


Melibea. Good woman; I understand thee not, unless thou deli^er thy mind unto
me in plain terms. On the one side thou do anger me, and provoke me to
displeasure; on the other thou do move and stir me to compassion. Neither
know I how to return thee a convenient answer, because I have not fully
comprehended thy meaning; I should think my self happy, if my words might
carry that force, as to save the life of any man, though never so mean. For to
do good, is to be like unto the Deity. Besides, he that does a benefit,
receives it when it is done to a person that desires it. And he that can cure
one that is sick, not doing it, is guilty of his death; and therefore give not
over thy petition, but proceed and fear nothing.


Celest. All fear fled (fair Lady) in beholding your beauty For, I cannot be
persuaded, that Nature did paint in vain one face fairer then another, more
inrich't with grace and favor, more fashionable, and more beautiful then
another; were it not to make them Magazines of virtue, mansions of mercy,
houses of compassion and pity, Ministers of her blessings, and dispensers of
those good gifts and graces, which in her bounty she has bestowed upon them,
and upon your self in a more plentiful manner. Besides, sithence we are all
mortal, and borne to dye; as also, that it is most certain, that he cannot
be said truly to be borne, who is only borne for himself; for then should
men be like unto brute beasts, (if not worse;) Amongst which, there are some,
that are very pitiful: as your Unicorn, of whom it is reported, that he will
humble and prostrate himself at the feet of a Virgin. And your dog, for all
his fierceness, and cruelnesse of nature, when he comes to bite another, if
he throw himself down at his feet, he will let him alone, and do him no
harm; and this is all out of pity. Again, to come to your birds, and fowls
of the air; your Cock eats not any thing, but he first calls his Hens
about him, and gives them part of his feeding. The Pellicane, with her beak
breaks up her own breast, that she may give her very bowels and intrals to
her young ones to eat. The Storkes maintain their aged parents as long in the
nest, as they did give them food, when they were young and unable to help
themselves. Now, if God and Nature gave such knowledge unto beasts and birds;
why should we that are men, be more cruel one to another? Why give we not
part of our graces, and of our persons, to our neighbors? Especially when they
are inuolued and afflicted with secret infirmities, and those such, that where
the Medicine is, thence was the cause of the malady?


Melibea. For Gods love, without any more dilating, tell me who is this sick
man, who feeling such great perplexity, has both his sickness and his cure,
flowing from one, and the selfsame Fountain?


Celest. You can not choose (Lady) but know a young Gentleman in this City,
nobly descended, whose name is Calisto.


Melibea. Enough, enough; No more (good old woman;) Not a word, not a word
more, I would advise you. Is this the sick patient, for whom thou have made so
many prefaces to come to thy purpose? For what, or whom came thou hither?
Came thou to seek thy death? Know thou for whom (thou bearded Impudent)
thou have trodden these dangerous steps? What ails this wicked one, that thou
pleadest for him with such passion? He is foolesicke, is he not? Is he in his
wits, I trow? What would thou have thought, if thou should have found me
without some suspicion and jealousy of this fool? What a wind-lace have thou
fetched, with what words have thou come upon me? I see it is not said in vain;
That the most hurtful member in a man, or woman, is the tongue. I will have
thee burned, thou false Witch, thou enemy to honesty, thou Causeresse of secret
errors; Fie upon thee Filth; Lucrecia, out of my sight with her, send her
packing; away with her I pray, she makes me ready to swound: ay me, I faint, I
dye; she has not left me one drop of blood in my body. But I well deserve
this, and more, for giving ear to such a paltry huswife as she is. Believe
me, were it not, that I regarded mine honor, and that I am unwilling to
publish to the world his presumptuous audaciousnesse and boldness, I would so
handle thee (thou accursed Hagge) that thy discourse, and thy life, should have
ended both together.


Celest. In an ill hour came I hither. If my spells and coniuration fail me.
Go to, go to; I wot well enough to whom I speak. This poor Gentleman, this
your brother, is at the point of death, and ready to dye.


Melibea. Dare thou yet speak before me? and mutter words between thy
teeth, for to augment my anger, and double thy punishment? Would thou have me
soil mine honor, for to give life to a fool, to a mad man? Shall I make my
self sad, to make him merry? Would thou thrive by my loss? And reap profit
by my perdition? And receive remuneration by my error? Would thou have me
overthrow, and ruin my fathers house and honor, for to raise that of such an
old rotten Bawd as thou art? Do thou think, I do not perceive thy drift?
That I do not track thee step by step? Or that I understand not thy damnable
errand? But I assure thee, the reward that thou shall get thereby, shall be no
other, save (that I may take from thee all occasion of farther offending
heaven) to give an end to thy evil days. Tell me (Traitor as thou art) how
did thou dare to proceed so far with me?


Celest. My fear of you (Madame) does interrupt my excuse; but my innocence
puts new courage into me: your presence again disheartens me, in seeing you so
angry. But that which grieves and troubles me most, is, that I receive
displeasure without any reason, and am hardly thought on without a cause. Give
me leave (good Lady) to make an end of my speech, and then will you neither
blame it, nor condemn me; then will you see, that I rather seek to do good
service, then endeavor any dishonest course; and that I do it more to add
health to the Patient, then to detract any thing from the fame and worth of the
Physician. And had I thought that your Ladyship would so easily have made this
bad construction out of your late noxious suspicion, your license should not
have been sufficient warrant to have imboldened me to speak any thing, that
might concern Calisto, or any other man living.


Melibea. Let me hear no more of this mad man, name not this fool unto me;
this leaper over walls; this Hob-goblin; this night-walker; this fantastical
spirit; long-shanked, like a Stork; in shape and proportion, like a picture in
Arras, that is ill-wrought; or an ill-fauour'd fellow in an old suit of
hangings; Say no more of him, unless you would have me to fall down dead
where I stand. This is he who saw me the other day, and began to court me
with I know not what extrauagant phrases, as if he had not been well in his
wits, professing himself to be a great Gallant. Tell him (good old woman) if
he think that I was wholly his, and that he had won the field, because it
pleased me rather to consent to his folly, then correct his fault, and yield to
his errand, then chastise his error; that I was willing rather to let him go
like a fool as he came, then to publish this his presumptuous enterprise.
Moreover, advise him, that the next way to have his sickness leave him, is to
leave off his loving, and wholly to relinquish his purpose, if he purpose to
impart health to himself; which if he refuse to do, tell him from me, that
he never bought words all the days of his life at a dearer rate. Besides, I
would have him know, that no man is overcome, but he that thinks himself so to
be. So shall I live secure, and he contented. But it is evermore the nature of
fools, to think other like themselves. Return thou with this very answer
unto him; for other answer of me shall he none, nor never hope for any: for it
is but in vain to entreat mercy of him, of whom thou can not have mercy. And
for thine own part, thou may thank God, that thou scapest hence scot-free;
I have heard enough of you heretofore, and of all your good qualities, though
it was not my hap to know you.


Celestina. Troy stood out more stoutly, and held out longer. And many fiercer
Dames have I tamed in my days; Tush? No storm lasts long.


Melibea. You mine enemy, what say you? Speak out, I pray, that I may hear
you. Have thou any thing to say in thy excuse, whereby thou may satisfy my
anger, and clear thy self of this thy error and bold attempt?


Celesti^a. Whilst your choler lives, my cause must needs dye. And the longer
your anger lasts, the less shall my excuse be heard. But wonder not that you
should be thus rigorous with me: For a little heat will serve to set young
blood a boiling.


Melibea. Little heat, say you? Indeed thou may well say little; because thy
self yet lives, whilst I with grief endure thy great presumption. What words
can thou demand of me for such a one as he is, that may stand with my good?
Answer to my demand, because thou say thou have not yet concluded. And
perhaps thou may pacify me for that which is past.


Celestina. Mary, a certain Charm, Madame, which (as he is informed by many
of his good friends) your Ladyship has, which cures the toothache; as also
that same admirable Girdle of yours, which is reported to have been found and
brought from Cumae the Cave there, and was worn, it is thought, by the Sibilla,
or Prophetess of that place; which Girdle they say, has such a singular and
peculiar property and power, with the very tutch to abate and ease any ache or
anguish whatsoever. Now this Gentleman I told you of, is exceedingly pained
with the toothache, and even at deaths door with it. And this was the true
cause of my coming: But since it was my ill hap to receive so harsh and
unpleasing an answer, let him still for me continue in his pain, as a
punishment due unto him, for sending so unfortunate a messenger. For since in
that muchnesse of your virtue I have found much of your pity wanting; I fear
me, he would also want water, should he send me to the Sea to fetch it. And
you know (sweet Lady) that the delight of vengeance, and pleasure of revenge
endures but a moment, but that of pity and compassion continues for ever and
ever.


Melibea. If this be that thou would have, why did thou not tell me of it
sooner? Why went thou about the bush with me? What needed all those
circumstances? Or why did thou not deliver it in other words?


Celest. Because my plain and simple meaning made me believe, that though I
should have proposed it in any other words whatsoever, had they been worse
then they were, yet would you not have suspected any evil in them. For, if I
were failing in the fitness of my preface, and did not use ^o due and
convenient a preamble as I should have done, it was, because truth needs no
colors. The very compassion that I had of his pain, and the confidence of
your magnificency, did choke in my mouth, when I first began to speak the
expression of the cause. And for that you know (Lady) that sorrow works
turbation, and turbation does disorder and alter the tongue, which ought
always to be ty'de to the brain; for heavens love, lay not the fault on me;
and if he has committed an error, let not that redound to my hurt; for I am
no farther blameable of any fault, then as I am the messenger of the faulty.
Break not the rope where it is weakest. Be not like the Cobweb, which never
shows it is force, but on poor little Flies. No humane Law condemns the
father for the sons offense, nor the son for the fathers: nor indeed (Lady)
is it any reason, that his presumption should occasion my perdition; though
considering his desert, I should not greatly care, that he should be the
delinquent, and my self be condemned, since that I have no other Trade to live
by, save to serve such as he is; This is my occupation, this I make my
happiness. Yet withal (Madame) I would have you to conceive, that it was
never in my desire to hurt one, to help another, though behind mybacke, your
Ladyship has perhaps been otherwise informed of me. But the best is, it is
not the vain breath of the vulgar, that can blast the truth; assuredly I mean
nothing in this, but only plain and honest dealing. I do little harm to
any; I have as few enemies in this City, as a woman can have; I keep my word
with all men; and what I undertake, I perform as faithfully, as if I had
twenty feet, and so many hands.


Melibea. I now wonder not, that your Ancients were wont to say; That one only
teacher of Vice, was sufficient to mar a great City. For I have heard such
and so many tales of thy false and cunning tricks, that I know not whether I
may believe, thy errand was for this charm.


Celestina. Never let me pray: or if I pray, let me never be heard, if you can
draw any other thing from me, though I were to be put to a thousand torments.


Melibea. My former late anger will not give me leave to laugh at thy excuse.
For I wot very well, that neither oath nor torment shall make thee to speak
the truth. For it is not in thy power to do it.


Celestina. You are my good Lady and Mistress, you may say what you list, and
it is my duty to hold my peace; you must command, and I must obey, but your
rough language (I hope) will cost your Ladyship an old petticoate.


Melibea. And well have thou deserved it.

Celest. If I have not gained it with my tongue, I hope I have not lost it with
my intention.


Melibea. Thou do so confidently plead thy ignorance, that thou make me
almost ready to believe thee; yet will I in this thy so doubtful an excuse,
hold my sentence in suspense, and will not dispose of thy demand upon the
relish of so light an interpretation. Neither for all this would I have thee to
think much of it, nor make it any such wonder, that I was so exceedingly
moved; For two things did concur in thy discourse, the least of which was
sufficient to make me run out of my wits. First, in naming this Gentleman
unto me, who thus presumed to talk with me: then, that thou should entreat
me for him, without any further cause given; which could not but engender a
strong suspicion of intention of hurt to my honor. But since all is well meant,
and no harm intended, I pardon a^l that is past; for my heart is now somewhat
lightened, sithence it is a pious, and a holy work, to cure the sick, and help
the distressed.


Celest. I, and so sick (Madame) and so distressed, that did you know it as
well as I, you would not judge him the man, which in your anger you have
censured him to be. By my say, the poor Gentleman has no gall at all, no ill
meaning in his heart. He is indewed with thousands of graces; for bounty, he
is an Alexander; for strength, an Hector; he has the presence of a Prince; he
is fair in his carriage, sweet in his behavior, and pleasant in his
conversation; there is no melancholy, or other bad humor, that reigns in
him; Nobly descended, as your self well knows; a great Tilter; and to see him
in his armor, it becomes him so well, that you would take him to be another
Saint George. Hercules had not that force and courage as he has; His
diportment, his person, his feature, his disposition, his agility, and
actiuenesse of body, had need of another manner of tongue to express it, then
mine. I ache him all together, and for all in all, you shall not find such
another; and for admired form, a miracle; and I am verily persuaded, that that
fair and gentle Narcissus, who was inamored with his own proper beauty, when
as in a glass he viewed himself, in the water was nothing so fair as he,
whom now one poor tooth, with the extremity of its pain, does so torment,
that he does nothing but complain.


Melibea. The Age, I pray; How long has he had it?


Celest. His age (Madame?) Mary, I think he is about some three and twenty.
For here stands she, who saw him borne, and took him up from his mothers
feet.


Melibea. This is not that which I ask thee; Nor do I care to know his age. I
ask thee how long he has been troubled with his toothache?


Celest. Some eight days (Madame) but you would think he had had it a year,
he is grown so weak with it, and the greatest ease, and best remedy he has,
is, to take his Vial, whereto he sings so many songs, and in such doleful
notes, that I verily believe, they did far exceed those, which that great
Emperor and Musician Hadrian composed concerning the souls departure from the
body; the better to endure without dismayment, his approaching death. For
though I have but little skill in music, me thinks he makes the Vial, when
he plays thereon, to speak; and when he sings thereunto, the birds with a
better will listen unto him, then to that Musician of old, which made the trees
and stones to move. Had he been borne then, Orpheus had lost his prey. Weigh
then with your self (Sweet Lady) if such a poor old woman as I am, have not
cause to count my self happy, if I may give life unto him, to whom the heavens
have given so many graces? Not a woman that sees him, but praises Natures
workmanship, whose hand did draw so perfect a piece; and if it be their hap
to talk with him, they are no more mistresses of themselves, but are wholly at
his disposing; and of Commanders, desire to be commanded by him. Wherefore,
seeing I have so great reason to do for him, conceive (good Lady) my purpose
to be fair and honest, my courses commendable, and free from suspicion and
jealousy.


Melibea. O how I am fallen out with mine own impatience! How angry with my
self, that he being ignorant, and thou innocent of any intended Ill; thou
have endured the distemperature of my enraged tongue? But the great reason I
had for it, frees me from any fault of offense, urged thereunto by thy
suspicious speeches: but in requital of thy sufferance, I will forthwith
fulfill thy request, and likewise give thee my Girdle. And because I have not
leisure to write the charm, till my mother comes home, if this will not serve
the turn, come secretly for it to morrow morning.


Lucrecia. Now, now, is my Mistress quite undone. All the world cannot save
her; she will have Celestina come secretly to morrow. I smell a Rat; there is a
Padde in the straw; I like not this, Come secretly to morrow; I fear me, she
will part with something more then words.


Melibea. What sai'st thou, Lucrecia?

Lucrecia. Mary, I say, Madame, you have worded well. For it is now somewhat
late.


Melibea. I pray (mother) say nothing to this Gentleman of what has passed
betwixt you and me, lest he should hold me either cruel, sudden, or dishonest.


Lucrecia. I did not lie even now; I see well enough how ill the world goes.


Celest. Madame, I much marvel you should entertain any the least doubt of my
service. Fear you not; for I can suffer, and cover any thing: and I well
perceive, that your great jealousy and suspicion of me, made you (as commonly
it does) to interpret my speeches to the worst sense. Well, I will take my
leave, and go hence with this Girdle so merrily, as if I did presently see his
heart leaping for joy, that you have graced him with so great a kindness; and
I doubt not, but I shall find him much eased of his pain.


Melibea. I will do more for your sick Patient then this, if need require, in
requital of your great patience.


Celest. We shall need more, and you must do more then this, though perhaps
you will not so well like of it, and scarce thank us for it.


Melibea. Mother, what is that thou talkest of thanks?

Celestina. Mary I say (Madame) That we both give you thanks, that we are both
at your service; and rest both deeply indebted to your Ladyship; and that the
payment is there most certain, where the party is most bound to satisfy.


Lucrecia. Here Is Cat in the Pan. What Chop-Logicke have we here?


Celestina. Daughter Lucrecia; Hold thy peace; Come hither to me. If to morrow
I may see thee at my house, I will give thee such a Lie, as shall make thy
hair as yellow as gold; but tell not your Mistress of it. Thou shall also
have a powder of me to sweeten thy breath, which is a little of the strongest.
There is not any in this kingdom, that can make it but my self. And there is
not any thing in a woman that can be worse then a stinking breath.


Lucrecia. A blessing on your aged heart; for I have more need of this, then of
my meat.


Celestina. And yet (you fool) you will be talking and prating against me.
Hold thy peace; for thou know not what need thou may have of me. Do not
exasperate your Mistress, and make her more angry now, then she was before.
But let me go hence in peace.


Melibea. What sai'st thou to her, mother?


Celest. Nothing (Madame) we have done already.

Melibea. Nay, you must tell me what you said to her; for I cannot abide, that
any body should speak any thing in my presence, and I not have a part therein.
And therefore, without any more ado, let me know it.


Celest. I entreated her to put your Ladyship in mind of the Charm, that it
might be writ out ready for me; and that she should learn of me to temper
her self in the time of your anger, putting her in mind of that ancient Adage;
From an angry man, get thee gone but for a while; but from an enemy, for ever.
But you (Madame) had only a quarrel to those words of mine which you
suspected, and not any enmity to my person. And say, they had bin such as you
conceited them; yet were they not so bad, as you would have made them to be.
For it is every days experience, to see men pained and tormented for women;
and women as much for men. And this, Nature works; and Nature (you know) is
crafts master, and works nothing that is ill: So that my demand (you see) was
(as my desire was it should be) in it self commendable, as having it is growth
from so good a root. Many the like reasons could I render you, were not
prolixity tedious to the hearer, and hurtful to the speaker.


Melibea. Thou have shown a great deal of temper, as well in saying little,
when thou saw me angry, as also in thy great and singular sufferance.


Celestina. Mad^me, I endured your chiding with fear, because I knew you were
angry with reason. Besides, a fit of anger is but like a flash of lightning;
which made me the more willing to give way, till your heat were ouerpast.


Melibea. This Gentleman is beholding unto you, whom I recommend to your care.


Celest. Not so, Madame; His deserts challenge more at my hands. And if by my
entreaties, I have done him any good, I fear me, by my over long-stay, I have
done him as much harm. And therefore if your Ladyship will license me, I will
haste to see how he does.


Melibea. Had thou spoke for it sooner, sooner had thou been sped. Go
thy ways, and a good luck with thee: for neither thy coming hither has done
me any good; nor thy going hence can do me any harm; Thy message being as
bootlesse, as thy departure shall be harmless.


ACTVS V.
THE ARGUMENT.
CELESTINA having taken her leave of Melibea, trudges along the street mumbling
and muttring to her self. Being come home, there she found Sempronio, who
staid expecting her return. They go both talking together, till they come to
Calisto's house. And being espied by Parmeno, he tells it his Master, who wills
him to open the door.

INTERLOCVTORS. Celestina, Sempronio, Parmeno, Calisto. CElestina. O cruel
encounter! O daring and discreet attempt! O great and singular sufferance! O
how near had I been to my death, if my much subtilty and cunning craft had
not shifted in time the sails of my suite! O brauing menaces of a gallant
Lady! O angry and enraged Damsel! O thou Devil whom I coniured! O how well
have thou kept thy word with me in all I that desired! I am much bound unto
thee; so handsomely have thou appeased this cruel Dame by thy mighty power,
and afforded me so fit a place and opportunity, by reason of her mothers
absence, to utter my mind unto her. O thou old Celestina; cheer up thy heart,
and think with thy self; that things are half ended, when they are well
begun! O thou oil of Serpents! O thou delicate white thread; how have you
bestirred your selves in my business! whose favorable furtherance if I had
not found, I would utterly have broken and destroyed all the enchantments which
either I have already, or hereafter are to be made; nor would I ever any more
have had any belief in herbs, stones, or words. Be merry then (old Stinkard)
Frollicke with thy self (old wench) for, thou shall get more by this one
suite, then by soldring of fifteen cracked Maidenheads. A pocks upon these long
and large playtings in my Petticoates; Fie how they rumple and fold themselves
about my legs, hindering my feet from hasting thither, whither I desire my
good news should come. O good fortune, what a friend art thou to the valiant!
what a foe to those that are fearful! Nor by flying does the Coward fly
death. O how many failed of that which I have effected! How many have struck
at, but mist that nail, which my self only have hit on the head! What in so
strong and dangerous a strait as this, would these young Graduates in my Art
have done! Perhaps have bolted out some foolish word or other to Melibea,
whereby they would have lost as much by their prattling, as I have gained by my
silence. And therefore it is an old saying; Let him play that has skill: and
that the better Physician is he that has experience, then he that has
learning; For experience, and frequent warnings, make men Artists in their
professions; and it must be such an old woman as I am, who at every little
Channel holds up her coats, and treades the streets with leysurely steps,
that shall prove a Proficient in her trade. O girdle, my pretty girdle, let me
hug thee a little! O how my heart leaps in looking upon thee! If I live, I
will make thee bring her to me by force, who is so unwilling to come to me of
her own accord, that I had much ado to get a good word from her.


Semp. Either mine eyes are not matches, or that is Celestina. Now the Devil
go with her; how her gown comes dragging on the ground? how the skirts of her
coat trouble her? how her mouth goes? Sure, she is muttring something to her
self.


Celest. Why do thou keep such a crossing of thy self? I believe, thou
blessest thy self to see me.


Semp. I will tell thee: why? Rarity (you know) is the mother of admiration;
and admiration being conceived in the eyes, enters straight into the mind:
and the mind is enforced again by the eyes, to discover it self by these
outward signs. Who did ever see thee walk the streets before with thy head
hanging in thy bosom; with thy eyes cast down to the ground? Who did ever see
thee go thus mumbling of thy words to thy self? and to come in such
post-haste, as if thou were going to get a Benefice? so that the rarity and
strangeness thereof, makes those who know thee, to wonder what it should
mean? But to let this pass; Tell me of all loves, what good news thou
bringst. Say: Is it a Son, or a Daughter? That is, whether we have sped well or
ill? Forever since one of the Clock I have waited here for you; all which
while, I have had no greater or better token of comfort, then that of your long
staying.


Celest. This foolish Rule (my Son) is not always true; for had I stayed but
one hour longer, I might perhaps have left my nose behind me, and two other
noses, had I had them, and my tongue to boot: so that the longer I had stayed,
the dearer it would have cost me.


Sempr. Good mother, as you love me, go not hence, till you have told me all.


Celest. Sempronio, my friend, neither have I time to stay here, nor is this a
fit place to tell it thee. Come, go along with me to Calisto, and thou shall
hear wonders (my Bully.) For by communicating my self to many, I should as it
were deflowre my Embassage, whose maidenhead I mean to bestow on your Master;
for, I will that from mine own mouth, he hear what I have done; for though
thou shall have parcel of the profit, I mind to have all the thanks for my
labor.


Sempr. What? Are you at your parcels now? Do you think, Celestina, to put me
to my parcels? Tho you shall have your parcel; mary, come up: I tell you
plainly, I do not like this word, that I do not. And therefore parcel me no
more of your parcels.


Celest. Go to, you fool; Hold your peace, be it part or parcel, man, thou
shall have what thou will thy self. Do but ask, and have; what is mine, is
thine: Let us laugh and be merry, and benefit our selves the best that we can:
Hang all this trash, this putrified dirt, rather then thou and I should fall
out about dividing the spoil; yet must I tell you, (which is no more then your
self knows) that old folks have more need then young; Especially you, who
live at full table, upon free cost.


Sempr. There goes more (I wisse) to a man's life, then eating and drinking.


Cel. What, Son? A dozen of points, a hat, or a stone-bow, to go from house
to house shooting at birds, aiming at other birds with your eye, that take
their standing in windows. I mean pretty wenches (you fool) such birds (you
mad-cap) as have no wings to fly from you: you know my meaning, Sir; for there
is no better Bawd, for them, then a bow: under color whereof, thou may enter
any house whatsoever, making it thy excuse to seek after some bird thou
shootst at, etc. It is your only delicate trick you can use. But woe (
Sempronio) unto her, who is to uphold and maintain her credit, and begins to
grow old, as I now do.


Sempr. O cogging old Hagge; O old Bawd, full filled with mischief; O covetous
and greedy Cormorant; O ravenous glutton! I perceive she would as willingly
coozen me, as I would my Master; and all to enrich her self. But seeing she is
so wickedly minded, and cares not who perish, so as she may thrive, I will
mar her market; I will look to her water hereafter; I will keep her from
fingring any more Crowns; nor will I any longer rent out the gains unto her,
which I make of my Master, but reserve the profits for my self: or rather
(which is the surer and honester course) seek to save his purse, and play the
good husband for him. For he that rises by lewd and unlawful means, comes
tumbling down faster then he clambred up. O! how hard a thing is it to know
man? True is that vulgar saying, No manner of merchandise, or beast, is half
so hard to be known. Cursed old witch, she is as false as truth is truth; I
think the Devil brought me acquainted with her: it had been better for me,
to have fled from this venomous Viper, then to put her, as I have done, in my
bosom; but it was mine own fault, I can blame no body but my self: and
therefor let her gain what she can gain, be it by right or wrong, I will
keep my word with her.


Celestina. What say thou Sempronio? Whom do thou talk to? Go thou
gnawing of my skirts? What is that thou grumblest at? Why come thou not
forward?


Sempr. That which I say (mother Celestina) is this; that I do not marvel
that you are mutable: for therein you do, but as others have done before you,
following that common tracke that many more have trod in: you told me, you
would defer this business, lead^ng my Master along in a fools paradise; and
now thou runn'st headlong without either sense or wit, to tell Calisto of all
that has passed. Know thou not, that men esteem those things most, which
are most difficult to be achieved? And prize them the more, the more hardly
they come by them? Besides, Is not every day of his pain, unto us a double
gain?


Celest. A wise man altreth his purpose, but a fool perseuereth in his folly:
a new business requires new counsel; and various accidents, various advice. Nor
did I think (Son Sempronio) that fortune would have befriended me so soon.
Besides, it is the part of a discreet messenger, to do that which the time
requires; especially, when as the quality of the business cannot conceal or
admit of dissembled ^ime. And moreover, I know that thy Master (as I have
heard) is liberal, and somewhat of a womanish longing; and therefore will give
more for one day of good news, then for a hundred, wherein he is pained. And
with his pain, mine will be increased: his in loving, and mine in trudging to
and fro. For your quick and speedy pleasures beget alteration; and great
alteration does hinder deliberation. Again, where will you find goodness,
but in that which is good? And nobleness of blood, but in large and long
continued rewards? Peace, you fool, let me alone with him, and you shall see
how your old woman will handle him.


Sempr. Then tell me what passed concerning that noble Lady. Acquaint me but
with one word of her mouth; for trust me, I long as much to know her answer,
as my Master does.


Celest. Peace, you fool; What? Does your complexion change? Does your color
alter? I know by your nose, what porridge you oue. You had rather have the
taste, then sent of this business. Come I prithee, let us hye us, for thy
Master will be ready to run mad, if we stay ouer-long.


Sem. And I am little better, because you will not stay and tell me.

Parme. Master, Master?

Calisto. What Is the matter, you fool?


Parm. I see Sempronio and Celestina coming toward the house. And at every
step they make a stop; and look where they stand still, there Sempronio, with
the point of his sword, makes streakes and lines in the ground. It is some
earnest matter sure that they are debating, but what it should be, I cannot
devise.


Calisto. O thou careless absurd Ass; Can thou discry land, and not make to
the shore? See them coming, and not hye thee to open the door? O thou
Supreme Deity: with what come they? What news do they bring? whose stay has
been so long, that I have longed more for their coming, then the end of my
remedy. O my sad ears, prepare your selves for that which you are now to
hear: for in Celestina's mouth rests either my present case, or eternal
heart-griefe. O that I could fall into a slumber, and pass away this short,
this litlte, little space of time, in a dream wherein I might see the
beginning, and ending of her speech. Now I verily believe, that more painful
to a Fellon, is the expecting of that his cruel and capital sentence, then
the Act it self, of his certain and fore-knowne death. O leaden-heeled
Parmeno; slower then the Snayle, dead-handed as thou art, dispatch, I say, and
vnbolt this troublesome door, that this honorable woman may enter in, in
whose tongue lies my life.


Celest. Do thou hear him; Sempronio? Your Master is now of another temper;
these words are of another tune, then those we lately heard both of Parmeno,
and him, at our first coming hither. The matter I see is well amended; there
is never a word I shall tell him, but shall be better to old Celestina, then a
new petticoate.


Sempr. Make at your coming in, as though you did not see Calisto, using some
good words as you go.


Celest. Peace, Sempronio; Though I have hazarded my life for him, yet
Calisto's own worth, and his, and your joint entreaties, merit much more then
this. And I hope, he will well reward me for my pains, being so frank and
Noble a Gentleman as he is.


ACTVS VJ.
THE ARGUMENT.
CELESTINA being entered Calisto's house, Calisto with great affection and
earnestness, demands of her, what had happened betwixt her and Melibea? While
they continue talking together, Parmeno hearing Celestina speak wholly for her
self, and her own private profit, turning himself toward Sempronio, at every
word he gives her a nip, for the which he is reprehended by Sempronio. In the
end, old Celestina discouers to Calisto all the whole business, and shows him
the Girdle she brought from Melibea. And so taking her leave of Calisto, she
gets her home to her own house, taking Parmeno along with her.

INTERLOCVTORS. Calisto, Celestina, Parmeno, Sempronio. CAlisto. What good
news (mother?) speak (dear mother.)


Celest. O my good Lord and Master Calisto, How is it? how is it with you? O my
new Lover (and not without just cause) of fairest Melibea! How can thou make
this old woman amends, who has hazarded her life in thy service? What woman
was ever driven to such narrow shifts? The very thought whereof, makes my heart
to faint, emptying my vital veins of all their blood. I would have given my
life for less then the price of this old tottred Mantle, which you see here
on my back.


Parme. Thou art all (I see) for thy self. That is it thou shoot'st at. Thou
art like a Lettice, that grows betwixt two Cole-worts; If thou be let alone,
thou will ouer-top them. The next word I look for, is, that she beg a Kirtle
for her Mantle: thou art all (I perceive) for thy self; and wilt not ask any
thing, whereof others may have part. The old woman will implume him, not
leaving him so much as one feather; how cunningly does she work him? how
craftly pitch her ne^s to catch me and my Master, seeking to make me
faithless, and him foolish? Do but mark her ( Sempronis) be still, and give
her but the hearing, and you shall see, she will not demand any money of my
Master, because it is diuisible.


Sempro. Peace, (thou despairefull fellow) lest Calisto kill thee, if he chance
to hear thee.


Calisto. Good mother, either cut off thy discourse, or take thou this sword
and kill me.


Parm. Now, what a Devil ailes he? He shakes and quiuers like a fellow that
has had his senses ouer-toucht with quicke-siluer. Look, he cannot stand on
his legs; would I could help him to his tongue, that I might hear him
speak again: sure, he cannot live long, if this fft continue. We shall get
well by this his love, shall we not? Every man his mourning weed, and there is
an end.


Celest. Your sword, Sir. Now I hope not: What? Take your sword and kill you?
There Is a word indeed to kill my heart. No; let your sword serve to kill your
enemies, and such as wish you harm. As for me, I will give thee life, man, by
that good hope, which I have in her, whom thou love best.


Calisto. Good hope, mother?


Celestina. I, good hope; and well may it be called so, since that the gates
are set open for my second return. And shall I tell you? she will sooner
receive me in this poor tottred Gown and Kirtle, then others in their silks,
and cloth of gold.


Parme. Sempronio, sow me up this mouth; for I can no longer hold. A pocks on
her, she has hedged in the Kirtle to her Gown. Could not one alone have
contented her?


Sempr. You will hold your peace, will you not? By Jove you were best be quiet,
or I shall set you hence in a devils name. What? Is there no ho with you? Say
she beg her apparel of him, what is that to thee? she does well in it; and I
commend her for it, having such need thereof as she has. And thou know,
Where the Flamin sings, there has he his offerings, he must have food and
raiment.


Par. True, he has so; but as his service is, so is his allowance; he sings
all the year long for it: and this old Jade would in one day, for treading
some three steps, cast off all her rugged hayres, and get her a new coat;
which is more then she could well do these fifty years.


Sem. Is this all the good she taught thee? Is all your old acquaintance come
to this? Is this all the obligation you owe her for her pains in breeding you
up? Sure, she has brought her Hogs to a good market, in bestowing so great
kindness on so very a Pigge.


Par. I could be well content, that she should pill and pole, ask and have,
shave and cut, but not cut out all the cloth for her own coat.


Sempr. It is her fault, I must confess, but other Vice has she none, save
only that she is a little too covetous. But let her alone, and give her leave
to provide straw, first, for to thatch her own walls, and to lay the ioyses
first of her own house, then afterward shall she board ours; else had it
been better for her she had never known us.


Calisto. Mother, as you love goodness, if you be a good woman, tell me what
was she doing? How got you into the house? How was she apparelled? On which
side of the house did you find her? What countenance did she show thee at thy
first entrance? How did she look on thee?


Celest. With such a look and countenance, as your brave fierce bulls use
toward those that cast sharp darts against them, when they come for to be
baited: or like your wild bores, when they make toward those Mastiues which
set upon them.


Calisto. Be these thy good hopes? These signs of health? What then are those
that are mortal? Why, death it self could not be half so deadly. For that
would ease and rid me of this my torment, then which none is greater, none more
grievous.


Semp. These are my Masters former fires; he renewes afresh his wonted flames:
What a strange kind of man is he? He has not the patience to stay to haere
that which so earnestly he has desired.


Parmeno. Now Sir; Who talks now? I must not speak a word; but did my Master
hear you, he would cudgel your coat, as well as mine.


Sempr. Some evil fire consume thee: for thou speak prediudicially of all;
but I offend no man. Let some intolerable mortal disease, or some pestilent
plague seize upon thee, and consume thee; Thou quarrelsome, contentious,
envious, and accursed Caytiffe; Is this thy friendship, this the amity thou
have contracted with Celestina and me? Go with the Devils name, if this be thy
love.


Calisto. If thou will not (thou that art sole Queen, and sovereign of my
life) that I dye desperate, and that my soul go condemned from hence to
perpetual pain (so impatient am I of hearing these things) delay me no
longer, but certify me briefly, whether thy glorious demand had a happy end,
or no? As also whether that cruel and stern look of that impious face, whose
frowns murder as many as they are bent against, sorted to a gentle
intertaining of thy suite? For all that I have heard hitherto, are rather
tokens of hate, then of love.


Celestina. The greatest glory, which is given to that secret office of the
Be, which little creature of nature, the discreeter sort ought to imitate, is,
that whatsoever be touches, he conuerteth it into a better substance, then in
it self it was. In like manner has it so befalne me, with those coy and
squeamish speeches of Melibea, and all other her scornful and disdainefull
behauiours; all her sour looks and words I turned into honey; her anger into
mildness; her fury into gentleness; and her running from me, into running to
me. Tell me, man, What did thou think Celestina went thither for? What
would she make there, whom you have already rewarded beyond her desert, unless
it were to pacify her fury, to oppose my self to all accidents, to be your
shield and buckler in your absence, to receive upon my mantle all the blows
that were struck at you, to endure those reuilings, bitter tauntings, and
those disdainful terms, which, such as she is, usually make show of, when
they are first sued unto for their love. And why forsooth do they this? Only
to the end, That what they give, may the better be esteemed; and therefore, they
still speak worst of him, whom they love best; and make a show of most
dislike, where they like most. Which if it should not be so, there would be no
difference between the love of a common whore, and an honest Damsel that sta^
is upon her honor; if every one should say yea, as soon as she is asked. And
therefore, when they see a man loves them (though themselves burn, and fry in
the liueliest flames of love) yet for mo^esties sake, they will outwardly show
a coldness of affection, a sober countenance, a pleasing kind of
strangeness, a constant mind, a chaste intent, and power forth words as
sharp as Vinegar, that their own tongues wonder at this their great
sufferance, making them forcibly to confess that with their mouths, whose
contrary is contained in their hearts. But because I would have thee have some
ease of thy sorrows, and take some repose, whilst I relate at large unto thee
all the words that passed between her and me, and by what means I made my
first entrance into Melibea's house; Know for thy comfort, that the end of her
discourse was very good.


Calisto. Now (dear mother) that you have given me assurance, that I may
boldly with comfort expect the extremest vigor of her answer; say what thou will, and I shall be attentive thereunto. Now my heart is at rest; now my
thoughts are quiet; now my veins receive and recover their lost blood; now
have I lost my fear; now do I find some joy; now am I cheerful. Let us (if
it please you) go up; where, in my chamber you shall report that at full,
which I have heard in brief,


Celestina. With all my heart, Sir, Come, let us go.


Parme. O what starting holes does this fool seek for to fly from us, that
he may, at his pleasure, weep for joy with Celestina, and discover unto her a
thousand secrets of his light, and doting appetite! First, to ask her, I know
not how often of every particular: and then have her answer him to the same, six
several times one after another, and never to make an end, but over, and over,
and over with it again, having no body by to tell him how tedious he is; Fie
upon him, I am sick to think upon it. Go your ways (you fool) Get you up with
a murraine; but we will not stay long after you.


Calisto. Mark (mother) how Parmeno goes mumbling to himself; see how the
slave crosses himself, to hear what thou have brought to pass by thy great
diligence! Observe in what a maze he stands! Look, look, Celestina; do thou
see what he is doing? See, and the villain does not cross himself again?
Come up, up, up; and sit you down (I pray) whilst I on my knees give ear to
thy sweet answer. Say on; And tell me quickly, by what means thou gotst
into the house?


Celest. By selling a parcel of thread which I had; by which trick, I have
taken in my days, more then thirty of as good worth and quality as her self,
(So it pleased fortune to favor me in this world) and some better women, I
wisse, and of greater rank, were she more honorable then she is.


Calisto. Greater (mother) perhaps in body, but not in nobleness of birth, not
in state, not in beauty, not in discretion, not in stateliness, linked with
gracefulness and merit, not in virtue, nor in speech.


Parme. Now the fools steel begins to strike fire; now his bells begin to
iangle; mark how his clock goes; it never strikes under twelve; the finger of
his dyall point is still upon high noone; all upon the most. Sempronio, tell
the clock, keep true reckoning, how standst thou gazing like a wide-mouthed
driueling fool, hearing his fooleries, and her lies?


Sempr. O thou venomous tongued Villain; thou railing Rascal; Why should
thou alone stop thy ears at that, to which all the world besides is willing to
harken? And say they are but tales and fables which she tells him; yet were it
only but for this, that their discourses are of love, thou oughtst to lend
them a willing attention.


Celest. Noble Calisto, Let thy ears be open to that which I shall tell thee,
and thou shall see what thy good fortune, and my great ear have effected for
thee. For, when I was about to pitch a price of my thread, and to sell it,
Melibea's mother was called away to go visit a sister of hers, that lay
exceeding sick: and because she could not stay with me her self (so necessary
was her absence) she left Melibea to conclude the bargain, and to drive such a
price with me, as she should think fit.


Calisto. O joy beyond compare! O singular opportunity! O seasonable time! O
that I had layne hid underneath thy mantle, that I might have heard her but
speak, on whom heaven has so plentifully powered forth the fullness of his
graces!


Celestina. Under my mantle (noble Sir?) Alack, poor soul as I am, what
would you have done there? Why, she must needs have seen you at least through
thirty holes, should not fortune give me a better.


Parm. Well, I will get me gone; I say nothing, Sempronio; hear you all for
me: I will be hanged, if the fool my Master do not measure with his
thoughts, how many steps there be between this and Melibea's house. And if he
not contemplate every kind of action and gesture she might use; as how she
looked, how she stood, when she was bargaining for the thread: All his senses,
all the powers and faculties of his soul are wholly taken up, and possessed with
her: but he will find in the end, that my counsel would have done him more
good, then all the cunning tricks, and coozenages of Celestina.


Calisto. What Is the matter with you there? I am hearing of a cause, that
concerns no less then my life; and you keep a tattling and a prattling there
(as you still use to do) to trouble and molest ^me in my business, and
provoke me to anger: as you love me, hold your tongues, and you will dye with
delight; such pleasure will you take in the repetition of her singular
diligence; Go on (dear mother) what did thou do, when thou saw thou
wast left all alone?


Celest. O Sir, I was so ouer-ioyed, that whosoever had seen me, might have
read in my face the merriment of my heart.


Calisto. It is so now with me; But how much more had a man beforehand
conceived some such image in his mind? But tell me, wast thou not stricken
dumb with this so sudden and unexpected an accident?


Celest. No. But rather grew thereby the bolder to utter my mind unto her; it
was the thing that I desired; it was even as I would have wished it: There was
nothing could have fell out so pat for me, as to see my self all alone with
her: then began I to open the very bowels and intralls of my heart; then did
I deliver my embassage, and told her in what extreme pain you lived, and how
that one word of her mouth, proceeding favorably from her, would ease you of
your mighty torment. And as one standing in suspense, looking wisely and
steadily upon me, somewhat amazed at the strangeness of my message, harkening
very attentively, till she might come to know who this should be, that for
want of a word of her mouth, lived in such great pain, and what manner of man
he might be, whom her tongue was able to cure? In naming you unto her, she did
cut off my words, and with her hand struck her self a blow on the breast, as
one that had heard some strange and fearful news; charging me to cease my
prattle, and to get me out of her sight, unless I would her servants should
become my Executioners, and make short work with me in these my old and latter
days; aggravating my audacious boldness; calling me Witch, Sorceresse, Bawd,
old Whore, false Baggage, bearded Miscreant, the Mother of mischief; and many
other more ignominious names, wherewithal they fear children. And when she
had ended with her Bugge-beares, she began to fall into often swownings and
trances, making many strange gestures, full of fear and amazement, all her
senses being troubled, her blood boiling within her, throwing her self this
way and that way, bearing in a strange kind of manner the members of her body
one against another; and then in a strong and violent fashion, being wounded
with that golden shaft, which at the very voycing of your name, had struck her
to the heart, writhing and winding her body, her hands and fingers being
clinched one within another, like one struggling and striving for life, that
you would have thought, she would have rent them asunder, hurling and rolling
her eyes on every side, striking the hard ground with her tender feet. Now, I
all this while, stood me still in a co^ner, like a cloth that is shrunk in the
wetting, as close as I could for my life, not saying so much as any one word
unto her; yet glad with all my heart, to see her in this cruel and pitiful
taking. And the more her throws and pangs were, the more did I laugh in my
sleeue at it; because I thereby knew, her yielding would be the sooner, and her
fall the nearer: yet must I tell you, that whilst her anger did foame out it is
froth, I did not suffer my thoughts to be idle, nor give them leave to run a
wooll-gathering, but recollecting my self, and calling my wits about me, I
took hold on Times fore-top, and found a salve to heal that hurt, which my
self had made.


Calisto. Dear mother, thou have told me that, which whilst I was hearing
thee, I had fore-casted in mine own judgment, I did still dream it would
come to this; but I do not see how thou could light upon a fit excuse, that
might serve the turn, and prove good enough to cover and color the suspicion
of thy demand; though I know, that thou art exceeding wise, and in all that
thou do (to my seeming) more then a woman. Sithence, that as thou did
prognosticate her answer, so did thou in time provide thee of thy reply. What
could that Tuscane Champion (so much famoused thorowout all Italy) have done
more? Whose renown (had thou then been living) had been quite lost; who
three days before she dyed, diuined of the death of her old husband, and her
two sons. Now do I believe that, which is so commonly spoken; that a woman
is never to seek for an answer; and though it be the weaker Sex, yet is their
wit more quick and nimble then that of men.


Celest. Say you me so, Sir? Well, let it be so then, I told her, your torment
was the toothache; and that the word which I craved of her, was a kind of
Prayer, or Charm, which she knew to be very good, and of great power against
that pain.


Calisto. O admirable craft! O rare woman in thy art! O cunning creature! O
speedy remedy! O discreet deliverer of a message! What humane understanding is
able to reach unto so high a means of help? And I verily persuade my self,
that if our age might purchase those years past, wherein Aeneas and Dido
lived, Venus would not have taken so much pains, for to attract the love of
Elisa to his son, causing Cupid to assume the form of Ascanius, the better
to deceive her: but would (to make short work of the business) have made
choice of thee to mediate the matter: and therefore do I hold my death happily
employed, since that I have put it into such hands, and I shall evermore be of
this mind, that if my desire obtain not it is wished effect, yet know I not
what could be done more, according to nature, for my good and welfare. What
think you now my Masters? What can ye imagine more? Was there ever the like
woman borne in this world? Had she ever her fellow?


Celestina. Sir, do not stop me in the course of my speech. Give me leave to
go on, for night draws on. And you know, He that does ill, hates the light.


Calisto. How? What Is that? No, by no means; For heavens sake, do not offer
it, you shall have Torches, you shall have Pages, any of my servants, make
choice of whom you will to accompany you home.


Parme. O yes, in any case! I pray take care of her; because she is young and
handsome, and may chance to be ravished by the way. Sempronio, thou shall go
with her, because she is afraid of the Crickets, which chripe in the dark,
as she goes home to her house.


Calisto. Son Parmeno, what is that thou said?


Parme. I said, Sir, it were meet, that I and Sempronio should accompany her
home; For it is very dark.


Calisto. It is well said, Parmeno: you shall by and by, proceed, I pray, in
your discourse; and tell me what farther past between you. What answer made
she for the Charm?


Celest. Mary, that with all her heart I should have it.


Calisto. With all her heart? O Jove! How gracious and how great a gift!


Celest. Nay, this is not all; I craved more then this.


Calisto. What, my honest old woman?


Celest. Her Girdle, which continually she wore about her, affirming that it
was very good for the allaying of your pain; because of some Supereminent
Influence from the Sibilla Cumanae.


Calisto. But what said she?


Celestina. Give me Albricias; reward me for my good news, and I will tell
you all.


Calisto. Take my whole house, and all that is in it, on condition you tell me;
or else besides what thou will.


Celestina. Give but this poor old woman a Mantle, and I will give that into
thy hand, which she wears about her.


Calisto. What do thou talk of a Mantle? Tut, a Kirtle, a Petticoate, any
thing, all that I have.


Celest. It is a Mantle that I need; that alone shall content me; Enlarge not
therefore your liberality; Let not any suspectfull doubt interpose it self in
my demand; My request is reasonable, and you know, it is a common saying; To
offer much to him, that asks but a little, is a kind of denial.


Calisto. Run, Parmeno, call hither my Taylour, and let him presently cut her
out a Mantle and a Kirtle of that fine pure cloth, which he took to cottening.


Parm. So, so; all for the old woman; because like the Be, she comes home
laden with lies, as he does with honey; as for me, I may go work out my
heart, and go hang my self when I have done; whilst she with a pockes must
have every day change of raiment.


Calisto. Now the Devil go with him, with what an ill will does he go? I
think there is not any man living so ill served as I am; maintaining men that
devise nothing but mischief, murmurers, grudgers of my good, repiners of my
prosperity, and enemies to my happiness. Thou Villain, what go thou
mumbling to thy self? Thou envious wretch, what is that thou say? for I
understand thee not. Do as I command you, you were best, and that quickly
too. Get you gone with a murraine, and vex me no more, for I have grief
enough already to bring me to my grave. There will as much of the piece be left
(which remnant you may take for your self) as will serve to make you a Ierkin.


Parm. I say nothing, Sir, but that it is too late to have the Taylour for to
come to night.


Call. And have not I told you, that I would have you not divine of things
aforehand, but to do as I bid you? Let it alone then till to morrow; and for
you (mother) let me entreat you out of your love to me, to have patience until
then; for that is not auferred, which is but deferred. Now I pray let me see
that glorious girdle, which was held so worthy to ingirt so goodly a body, that
these my eyes, together with the rest of my senses, may enjoy so great a
happiness, since that together, they have all of them been a little affected
with passion. My afflicted heart shall also rejoice therein, which has not had
one minute of delight, since it first knew that Lady. All my senses have been
wounded by her, all of them have brought whole basket-fulls of trouble to my
heart. Every one of them has vexed and tormented it all they could; the eyes,
in seeing her; the ears in hearing her; and the hands in touching her.


Celest. Ha; What Is that? Have you touched her with your hands? you make me
startle.


Calisto. Dreaming of her, I say in my sleep.


Celestina. O! in your dreams; that is another matter.


Calisto. In my dreams have I seen her so often, night, by night, that I fear
me, that will happen unto me, which befell Alcibiades, who dreamed that he
saw himself inwrapped in his mistresses mantle, and was the next day murdered,
and found none to remove him from forth the common street, no, nor any to cover
him, save only she who did spread her Mantle over him. Though I, for my part,
be it alive, or dead, would any way be glad to see my self clothed with any
thing that is hers.


Celestina. You have punishment, Sir, enough already; for when others take
their rest in their beds, thou preparest thy self to suffer thy next days
torment. Be of good courage, Sir. Pluck up your heart: after a Tempest,
follows a Calm; afford thy desire some time; take unto thee this Girdle: for
if death prevent me not, I will deliver the Owner thereof into thy hands.


Calisto. O new guest! O happy girdle! which have had such power and worth in
thee, as to hedge in that body, and be its enclosure, which my self am not
worthy to serve. O ye knots of my passion, it is you that have entangled my
desires; Tell me, if thou were present at that uncomfortable answer of fairest
she, whom thou seruest, and I adore. And yet the more I torment my self for
her sake, mourning and lamenting night and day, the less it auailes me, and
the less it profits me.


Celest. It is an old Proverb; He that labors least, oftentimes gets most.
But I will make thee by thy laboring, to obtain that which by being
negligent, thou should never atchieue. For Camora was not won in an hour;
yet did not her besiegers for all this despair. No more was Rome built in one
day; nor Troy ruined in a year.


Calisto. O unfortunate that I am! For Cities are incircled, and walled in
with stones; and stones by stones are easily ouer-throwne. But this my dear
Lady has her heart environed with steel; there is no mettle that can prevail
against her; no shot of that force* as to make a breach: and should Ladders be
reared to scale the walls, she has eyes which let fly darts of repulsion,
and a tongue which discharges whole volleis of reproaches, if you once
approach, forceing you to stand farther off, and so inaccessible is her Castle,
that you cannot come near it by half a league.


Celest. No more, good Sir, no more; bridle your passion; for the stout
courage, and hardy boldness of one man, did get Troy. Doubt not then, but one
woman may work upon another, and at last win her unto thee; thou have little
frequented my house, thou art ignorant of my courses, thou know not what I
can do.


Calisto. Say, Mother, what thou will, and I will believe thee, since thou have
brought me so great a Jewel, as is this. O thou glory of my soul, and
incirler of so incomparable a creature; I behold thee, and yet believe it not.
O girdle, girdle, thou lovely lace! Wast thou mine enemy too? Tell me the
truth; if thou were, I forgive thee: For it is proper unto good men, to
forgive; but I do not believe it. For had thou likewise been my foe, thou
would not have come so soon to my hands, unless thou had come to disblame
and excuse thy doings. I conjure thee, that thou answer me truly, by the
virtue of that great power, which thy Lady has over me.


Celestina. Cease (good Sir) this vain and idle humor; for my ears are tired
with attention, and the Girdle almost worn out with your often handling.


Calisto. O wretch that I am! far better had it been for me, had the
heavens made me so happy, that thou had been made and wouen of these mine
own arms, and not of silk, as now thou art, that they might have daily
rejoiced in clasping and enclosing with due reverence those members, which thou
without sense or feeling, not knowing what it is to enjoy so great a glory,
hold still in strict imbracements. O what secrets should thou then have
seen of that so excellent an image?


Celest. Thou shall see more, and enjoy more, in a more ample and better
manner, if thou lose it not by talking as thou do.


Calisto. Peace (good mother,) give me leave a little; for this, and I, well
understand one another. O my eyes call to your remembrance, how that ye were
the cause of my ill; and the very door, through which my heart was wounded; and
that he is seen to do the hurt, who does give the cause of the harm. Call to
your remembrance, I say, that ye are debtours to my welfare. Look here upon
your medicine, which is come home to your own house to cure you.


Sempr. Sir, it is not your rejoicing in this girdle, that can make you to
enjoy Melibea.


Calisto. How like a fool thou pratest, without either wit or reason? Thou
disturber of my delight, what meanest thou by this?


Sempr. Mary, that by talking, and babbling so much as you do, you kill both
your self, and those which hear you; and so by consequence, overthrow both
thy life and understanding; either of which to want, is sufficient to leave you
darkling, and say good night to the world. Cut off your discourse therefore,
and listen unto Celestina, and hear what she will say unto thee.


Calisto. Mother, are my words troublesome unto you? or is this fellow drunk?


Celest. Howbeit they be not, yet should you not talk thus as you do; but
rather give an end to these your long complaints. Use a girdle like a girdle,
that you may know to make a difference of your words, when you come to
Melibea's presence; let not your tongue equal the apparel, with the person;
making no distinction betwixt her, and her garments.


Calisto. O my much honored Matrone, my mother, my comfortresse! Let me glad
my self a little with this messenger of my glory. O my tongue! Why do thou
hinder thy self in entertaining any other discourse? leaving off to adore that
present Excellency, which, peradventure, thou shall never see in thy power? O
ye my hands! With what presumption, with what slender reverence do you touch
that Treacle, which must cure my wound? Now that poison cannot hurt me,
wherewith that cruel shot of Cupid has it is sharp point deeply indipped.
For now I am safe, since that she who gave me my wound, gives me also my
medicine. O dear Celestina! Thou that art the delight of all old Dames, the
joy of young wenches, the ease of the afflicted, and comfort of such
comfortless wretches as my self; do not punish me more with fear of thee,
then I am already punished with shame of my self; suffer me to let loose the
reins of my contemplation; give me leave to go forth into the streets with
this jewel, that they who see me, may know, that there is not any man more
happy then my self.


Sempr. Do not infistulate your wound, by clapping on it still more and more
desire. Sir, it is not this string, nor this girdle alone, wherein your remedy
must depend.


Calisto. I know it well, yet have I not the power to abstain from adoring so
great a relic? so rich a gift?


Celest. That Is a gift, which is given gratis; but you know that she did this
for to ease your toothache; and to cloze up your wounds; and not for any
respect or love, which she bears to you: But if I live, she shall turn the
leaf, ere I leave her.


Calisto. But the Charm you talked of?


Celestina. She has not given it me yet.


Calisto. And what was the cause why she did not?


Celestina. The shortness of time; and therefore willed me that if your pain
did not decrease, I should return to her again to morrow.


Calisto. Decrease? Then shall my pain decrease, when I see a decrease of her
cruelty.


Celest. Sir, content your self with that, which has hitherto bin said and
done; she is already bound, I have showed you, how (as farreforth as she is
able) she will be ready to yield you any help for this infirmity of yours,
which I shall crave at her hands. And tell me, I pray, if this be not well for
the first bowt. Well, I will now get me home; and in any case, have a care,
that if you chance to morrow to walk abroad, that you go muzzled about the
cheeks with a cloth, that she seeing you so bound about the chaps, may not
accuse me of petitioning a false-hood.


Calisto. Nay, to do you service, I will not stick to clap on four double
clothes: but of all loves tell me, past there any thing more between you? For
I dye out of longing, for to hear the words which flow from so sweet a mouth.
How did thou dare, not knowing her, be so bold, to show thy self so
familiar, both in thy entrance, and thy demand?


Celest. Not knowing her? They were my neighbors for four years together; I
dealt with them; I conuersed with them; I talked with them; and laughed together
with them day and night. O! how merry we have been! Her mother, why she
knows me better then her own hands: and Melibea too, though now she be
grown so tall, so great, so courteous, and discreet a Lady.


Parmeno. Sempronio, a word with you in your ear.


Sempronio. Say on: What Is the matter?


Parmeno. Mary this: Celestina's attention gives matter to our Master to
enlarge his discourse; give her a touch on the toe; or make some sign to her
that she may be gone, and not wait thus, as she does upon his answers. For,
there is no man, be he never so much a fool, that speaks much, when he is
all alone.


Calisto. Did thou say Melibea was courteous? I think it was but in a mock.
Was her like ever borne into the world? Did God ever create a better, or more
perfect body? Can the like proportion be painted by any pensill? Is she not
that Paragon of beauty, from whence all eyes may copy forth a true pattern of
inimitable excellence? If Hellen were now alive, for whom so great a slaughter
was made of Greeks and Troianes, or fair Polix^na, both of them would have
done their reverence to this Lady, for whom I languish. If she had been present
in that contention for the Apple with the three Goddesses, the name of
contention had never been questioned: For without any contradiction, they would
all of them have yielded, and jointly have given their consent, that Melibea
should have borne it from them: so that it should rather have been called the
Apple of concord, then of discord. Besides, as many women as are now borne, and
do know her, curse themselves and their fortune; complaining of heaven,
because it did not remember them, when it made her, consuming as well their
bodies as their lives with envy, being ready to eat their own flesh for very
anger, still augmenting martyrdomes to themselves, thinking to equal that
perfection by art, which Nature had bestowed upon her without any labor. They
pill, and dis-haire their eyebrows with nippers, with playsters of Pitch or
Barme, and other the like instruments* They seek after Wall-wort, and the like
herbs, roots, sprigs, and flowers to make Lies, wherewithal to bring their
hair to the color of hers, spoiling and martyring their faces, clothing them
with diverse colorings, glissenings, paintings, unctions, ointments, strong
waters, white and red pargetings, which, to avoid prolixity, I repeat not.
Now judge then, whether she whom Nature has so richly beautified, be worthy
the love and service of so mean a man as my self?


Celest. Sempronio, I understand your meaning; but give him leave to run on;
for he will fall anon from his Ass, and then his journey will be at an end:
you shall see, he will come by and by to a full point, and so conclude.


Calisto. In her, Nature, as in a glass did wholly behold her self; that she
might make her most absolutely perfect; for those graces, which she had
dif^used unto diverse, she had jointly united them in her, and ouer-viewed this
her work with so curious an eye, that nothing might be added to make it
fairer. To the end that they might know, who had the happiness to see her, the
worthiness and excellency of her Painter: only a little fair Fountaine-water
with a comb of yuorie, is sufficient (without any other slibber-slabbers) to
make her surpass all other of her Sex, in beauty and courtesy. These are her
weapons; with these she kills and ouer-comes; and with these has she bound me
in so hard and strong a chain, that I must for ever remain her prisoner.


Celestina. Sir, put a period to your words, trouble your self no more; for
this chain which shackles thee, is not so strong, but my file is as sharp to
cut it in sunder, which I will do for thee, that thou may be at liberty. And
therefore give me now license to take my leave of you; For it grows very late;
and let me have the girdle a^ng with me. For you know, I must needs use it.


Calisto. O disconsolate that I am! my misforunes still pursue me; for with
thee, or with this girdle, or with both, I would willingly have been
accompanied all this dark and tedious night. But because there is no perfect
happiness in this our painful and unhappy life; let solitariness wholly
possess my soul, and cares be my continual companions. What ho? Where be
these men? Why Parmeno, I say!


Parmeno. Here, Sir.


Calisto. Accompany this Matrone home to her house; and as much pleasure and
joy go with her, as sorrow and woe does stay with me.


Celest. Sir, fare you well. To morrow I shall make my return, and visit you
again; not doubting but my gown and her answer shall meet here together;
for now time does not serve. And in the interim, let me entreat you to be
patient. Settle your thoughts upon some other things, and do not so much as
once think upon her.


Calisto. Not think upon her? It is impossible. Nay, it were profane to
forget her, for whom my life only pleases me.


ACTVS VIJ.
THE ARGUMENT.
CELESTINA talks with Parmeno, inducing him to concord, and amitte with
Sempronio; Parmeno puts her in mind of the promise she made him, for the having
of Areusa, whom he exceedingly loved. They go to Areusa's house, where that
night Parmeno remained. Celestina hies her home, to her own house; and
knocking at the door, Elicia opens it unto her, blaming her for her tarrying
so long.

INTERLOCVTORS. Celestina, Parmeno, Areusa, Elicia. CElestina. Parmeno, my
son; since we last talked together, I have not had any fit opportunity to
express unto thee the infiniteness of that love which I bear unto thee, and
as all the world can well witness for me, how well I have spoken of thee in
thy absence. Every man, ear has been filled with the good reports I have
made of thee. The reason thereof I need not to repeat; for I ever held thee to
be my son, at least, by adoption; and therefore thought thou would have
showed thy self more natural and loving toward me. But in stead thereof,
thou gave me bad payment, even to my face; crossing, whatsoever I said;
thinking ill of all that I spoke; whispering and murmuring against me in the
presence of Calisto. I was well persuaded, that after thou had once yielded
to my good counsel, that you would not have turned your heel, and kicked
against me as you did, nor have fallen off from your promise. But
notwithstanding all this, I perceive some old relic yet still remaining of my
former folly. And so speaking rather to satisfy thine own humor, then that
thou ^^nst render any reason for it; thou do hinder thy self of profit, to
give thy tongue contentment. Hear me (my son) if thou have not heard me
already. Look I, say, and consider with thy self, that I am old, and well
stricken in years; and good counsel only lodges with the elder sort, it
being proper to youth, to follow pleasure and delight. But my hope is, that of
this thy error, thy youth only is in fault: and I trust that you will bear
your self better toward me hereafter, and that you will alter your ill
purpose, together with your tender years; For as it is in the Proverb: Our
customs suffer change, together with our hayres; and we vary our disposition,
as we vary our years. I speak this (my son) because as we grow in age, so
grow we in experience; new things daily offering themselves to our view: for
youth looks no farther then to things present, occupying his eye only in that
he sees set before him; but riper years omit neither things present, things
past, nor things to come. And son Parmeno, if you would but bethink your
self of the love I have heretofore borne you, I know it cannot escape your
knowledge, that the first nights lodging that you took, when you were a
stranger, and came newly to this City, was in my house. But you young men care
not for us that are old; but govern your selves according to the savor and
relish of your own palates; you never think that you have, or shall have need
of us: you never think upon sickness; you never think, that this flower of
your youth shall fade. But do you hear me, (my friend) and mark what I say
unto you; That in such cases of necessity, as these, an old woman, (be she
well experienced) is a good help, a comforter, a friend, a mother; nay, more
then a mother: A good Inn, to give ease and rest to a sound man; and a good
Hospital for to cure a sick man; a good Purse in time of need; a good Chest,
to keep money in prosperity; a good Fire in winter, environed with spits of
good rost-meat; a good Shade in summer, and a good Tavern to eat and drink
in. Now my pretty little fool, what sai'st thou to all this? What do thou
think of it? I know, thou art by this time ashamed of that which thou have
spoken to day; thou can not say B to a Battle-doore; thou art struck so
dumb, and so dead: and therefore I will press thee no further, nor crave any
more at thy hands, then that which friendship craves of thee, which is, Look
upon Sempronio; next under heaven, my self have made him a man; I could wish
you would live and love together as brothers and friends: for being in league
with him, thou shall live in the favor and love of thy Master, and in good
repute with all the world: for Sempronio, I tell thee, is well beloved, he is
diligent, a good Courtier, a proper servant, a fellow of a good fashion, and
one that is willing to embrace thy friendship, which will turn to both your
profits, if you will but hand-fast your affections each to other. Besides, you
know, that you must love, if you will be beloved. Trowtes cannot be taken with
dry breeches. And if the Cat will have fish, she must wet her foot. Nor does
Sempronio owe this of right unto thee; nor is he bound to love thee, unless
thou exchange love for love: it is mere simplicity, not to be willing to
love, and yet look to be beloved of others. And as great folly, to repay
friendship with hatred.


Parm. Mother, I confess my second fault; and craving pardon for what is past,
I offer my self to be ordered by you in all my future proceedings. But yet me
thinks it is impossible, that I should hold friendship with Sempronio; he is
frappish, and I cannot bear; he is chollericke, and I can carry no coals. How
then is it possible to make a true contract betwixt two such contrary natures?


Celest. But you were not wont to be thus froward.


Parm. In good fay (mother) you say true. But the more I grow in years, the
less I grow in patience; Tush, I have forgotten that lesson, as if I had never
known what it meant; I am (I confess) the man I was, nor is Sempronio
himself; neither can he, nor will he stead me in any thing. I never yet
tasted any the least kindness from him.


Celest. A sure friend is known in a doubtful matter; and in adversity is his
faith proved. Then comes he nearest unto him, when he is farthest from
comfort; and with greater desire does he then visit his house, when as
prosperous fortune has forsaken it. What shall I say unto thee, Son, of the
virtues of a good and fast friend? There is nothing more to be beloved;
nothing more rare: he refuses no burden. You two are equals, and paritie of
persons, similitude of manners, and simpathy of hearts are the maine props that
vp-hold friendship. Take heed (my son;) for if thou have any thing, it is
safely kept for thee. Be thou wise to gain more, for this is gained already to
your hands. Your father, O what pains took he for it! But I may not put it
into your hands, till you lead a more reposed life, and come to a more
complete and full age.


Parm. Mother, what do you call a reposed life?


Celest. Mary son, to live of your self. Not to go through other men's
houses, nor to set thy foot under another man's table: which thou shall still
be enforced to do, unless thou learn to make profit of thy service; for out
of very pity to see thee go thus totred and torn, not having a ragge almost
to hang on thy breeche, did I beg that mantle which thou saw, of Calisto,
not so much for the mantles sake, as for that there being a Tailor belonging to
the house, and thou before being without a Ierkin, he might bestow it upon
thee. So that I speak not for mine own profit, (as I heard you say) but for
thy good. For, if you rely only upon the ordinary wages of these Gallants, it
is such, that what you get by it after ten years service, you may put it in
your eye and never see the worse. Enjoy thy youth, good days, good nights,
good meat, and good drink; when thou mai'st have these things, lose them not;
Let that be lost that will be lost. Do not thou mourn for the wealth which
was left thy Master (for that will but shorten thy days) sithence we can
enjoy it no longer then we live. O Son Parmeno, (and well may I call thee
son, since I had the breeding of thee so long a time) follow my counsel,
seeing it proceeds out of pure love, and an earnest desire, to see thee grow up
in honor. O! how happy should I be, might I but see thee and Sempronio agree;
see you two friends, and sworn brothers in every thing, that ye may come to
my poor house to be merry, and to see me now and then, and to take your
pleasure each of you with his Wench!


Parme. His Wench, mother?


Celest. I, his Wench; and a young one too: As for old flesh, my self am old
enough, and such a wench as Sempronio would be glad of with all his heart, with
the one half of that regard and affection which I show to thee. What I speak,
comes from my intralls, and the very bowels of me.


Parmeno. Mother, you shall not be deceived in me.


Celest. And if I should, the matter is not great; For what I do, I do for
charity, and for that I see thee here alone in a strange Land, and for the
respect which I bear unto those bones of her, who recommended thee unto me.
When you are more man, you will think of all this, and come to a truer
knowledge of things, and then thou will say, that old Celestina gave me good
counsel.


Parme. I know that as well now, though I am but young, as if I were elder: and
howbeit I spoke against you to day, it was not because I thought that to be ill
spoken which you said; but because I saw, when I told my Master the truth, and
advised him for the best, he ill entreated me, and therefore henceforth let us
shake hands, and use him accordingly; do what thou will unto him, I will hold
my peace; for I have already too much offended, in not crediting thee in this
business concerning him.


Celest. In this and all other, thou shall not only trip, but fall, as long as
thou shall not take my counsel with thee, which comes from thy true and
faithful friend.


Parmeno. Now, I bless the time wherein I served thee: counting those days
happy, under which thou bredst me up of a child, since old age brings with it
such store of fruit.


Celestina. Son, no more. For mine eyes already run over, and my tears
begin to break over those banks, which should bound them in. O! had I in
all this world, but such another friend? Such another companion? Such a
comfortresse in my troubles? Such an easer, and lightner of my hearts
heaviness? Who did supply my wants? Who knew my secrets? To whom did I
discover my heart? Who was all my happiness, and quietness, but thy mother?
She was nearer and dearer unto me, then my gossip, or mine own sister. O! how
well-fauored was she, and cheerful of countenance? How lusty? How quick?
How neat? How portly and maiesticall in her gate? How stout and manly? Why,
she would go you at midnight without or pain, or fear, from Churchyard, to
Churchyard, seeking for implements appertaining to our Trade, as if it had
been day. Nor did she omit either Christians, Moors, or Jews, whose Graves
and Sepulchers she did not visit. By day she would watch them, and by night
she would dig them out; taking such things as should serve her turn. So that
she took as great pleasure in darkness of the night, as thou do comfort in
the brightness of the day. She would usually say; that the night was the
sinful man's cloak, that did hide and cover all his rogueries, that they might
not be seen, though perhaps she had not the like dexterity and skill in all
the rest of those tricks that apperta^ined to her Trade: yet one thing shall I
tell thee, because thou shall see what a mother thou have lost, though I was
about to keep it in; but it makes no matter, it shall out to thee. She did
pull out seven teeth out of a fellows head that was hanged, with a pair of
Pincers, such as you pull out stubbed hairs withal; whilst I did pull off
his shoes. She was excellent at a Circle, and would enter it far better then
my self, and with greater boldness, though I also was very famous for it in
those days, more I wisse, then I am now; who have together with her, lost
almost my cunning. What shall I say more unto thee, but that the very Devils
themselves did live in fear of her? She did hold them in horror, and dread,
making them to tremble and quake, when she began to exercise her exorcismes,
her spells, her incantations, her charms, her coniurations, and other words of
most horrisonous roaring, and most hideous noise. She was as well known to
them all, as the beggar knows his dish; or as thy self in thine own house.
One Devil coming tumbling in upon the neck of another, as fast, as it
pleased her to call them up, and not one of them durst tell her a lie; such
power had she to bind them: so that ever since she died, I could never
attain to the truth of any thing. Parmeno, may this woman no better thrive,
then she pleases me with those her wordy praises.


Celest. What sai'st thou, my honest Parmeno? My son, nay, more then my son.


Parm. I say, How should it come to pass, that my mother should have this
advantage of you, being the words which she and you spoke, were both one?


Celest. How? Make you this so great a wonder? Know you not, the Proverb tells
us: That there is a great deal of difference betwixt Peter and Peter? Trust
me truly, we cannot all be alike in all. We cannot all of us attain to
those good gifts and graces of my deceased Gossip. And have not you your self
seen amongst your Artizans some good, and some others better then they? So
likewise was it betwixt me and your mother. She was the only woman in our
Art, she had not her fellow: and for such a one was she of all the world both
known and sought after, as well of Caualleroes, as married men, old men, young
men, and children, besides, Maids and Damsels, who did as earnestly pray for
her life, as for that of their own fathers and mothers. She had to do with
all manner of persons; she talked with all sorts of people. If we walked the
streets, as many as we met, they were all of them her God-sonnes. For her
chiefest profession for some sixteen years together, was to play the
Midwife: so that albeit thou knew'st not these secrets, because thou wast then
but young, now it is fit that thou should know them, sithence that she is
dead, and thou grown up to be a man.


Parm. Tell me, mother: When the Justice sent Officers to apprehend you, at
which time I was then in your house, was there any great acquaintance between
you?


Celest. Any great acquaintance? You are disposed to jest. Our cases were both
alike; they took us both alike; they accused us both alike; and they did
punish us both alike, which (if I be not deceived) was the first punishment
that ever we had. But thou wast a little one then. I wonder how thou* should
remember it; For, it is a thing of all other, the most forgotten, that has
happened in this City; so many, and so daily in this world are those new
occurrents, which obliterate the old. If you go but out into the marketplace,
you shall every day see, Peguey Pague; the Peccant and his punishment.


Parmeno. It is true, but the worser part of wickedness, is the perseverance
therein.


Celest. How deadly the fool bites! He has hit me home, and pricked me to
the quick; I will therefore be now Tom-tell-troth. And assure thy self,
sithence thou have galled me, I will wring thee till I make thee winch and
fling; I will tickle thee on the right vein.


Parme. What say you mother?


Celest. Mary I say, son, that besides this, your mother was taken four
several times, she her self alone: and once she was accused for a Witch;
For she was found one night by the watch, with certain little candles in her
hand, gathering I know not what earth in a cross way; for which she stood
half a day in the open marketplace upon a Scaffold, with a high paper Hat,
like the coffin of a Suger-loafe, painted full of Devils, whereon her fault was
written (being brought thither, riding through the streets upon an Ass, as the
fashion is in the punishment of Bawds and Witches.) Yet all this was nothing;
for men must suffer something in this wicked world, for to vp-hold their lives,
and their honors. And mark, I pray, what small reckoning they made of it,
because of her great wisdom and discretion. For she would not for all this,
give over her old occupation; and from that day forward followed it more
earnestly, then she did before, and with happier proof. This I thought good
to tell you, to cross that opinion of yours, touching perseverance in that,
wherein we have once already erred; for all that she did, did so well become
her, and such a grace had she with her, that upon my conscience, howbeit she
stood thus disgracefully upon the Scaffold, every one might perceive, that she
cared not a button for those that stood beneath, staring and gazing upon her;
such was her behavior and carriage at that instant: look they might their
fill, but I warrant you, she was not a farthing in debt, no not to the proudest
of them all; wherein, I thought fit to instance, to show thereby unto you; that
they, who have any thing in them as she had, and are wise, and of worth, fall
far more easily and sooner into error, then any other. Do but weigh and
consider with your self, what a manner of man Virgil was; how wise in all
kind of knowledge; and yet I am sure you have heard, how in a wicker basket
he was hung out from a Tower, all Rome looking upon him; yet for all this, was
he neither the less honored, neither lost he the name of Virgil.


Parm. That is true which you say; but it was not enjoined by the Justice.


Celest. Peace, you fool, thou art ignorant what a sinister and course kind
of Justice was used, and rigorously executed upon thy mother, to the most
extremity, which, as all men confess, is a mere injury. And the rather,
because it was commonly spoken of all men, that wrongfully, and against all
right and reason, by suborning of false witnesses, and cruel torments, they
enforced her to confess that, which in realitie of truth was not. But because
she was a woman of a great spirit, and good courage, and her heart had been
accustomed to endure, she made matters lighter then they were; And of all
this, she reckoned not a Pin: for a thousand times have I heard her say; If
I broke my leg, it was all for my good; for this made me better known then
I was before. And certainly so she was, and the more noted and respected,
nay, and thriued the better by it, both she and I, and the more plentiful our
harvest and incomes of customers of the best, and we loved and lived merrily
together to her last. And be but thou unto me, as she was; that is to say, a
true and faithful friend; and withal, endeavor thy self to be good, since
thou have so good a pattern to follow. And for that which thy father left
thee, thou have it safely kept for thee.


Parm. Let us now leave talking of the dead, and of patrimonies, and let us
parley of our present businesses, which concerns us more then to draw things
past unto our remembrance. If you be well remembered, it is not long since that
you promised me, I should have Areusa, when as I told you at my Masters house,
that I was ready to dye for love; so seruent is my affection toward her.


Celest. If I did promise thee, I have not forgot it; nor would I you should
think, that I have lost my memory with my years. For I have thrice already,
and better, given her the check, concerning this business, in thy absence;
but now I think the matter is grown to some ripeness. Let us walk toward
her house; for now, do what she can, she shall not avoid the Mate. For this
is the least thing of a thousand, that I will undertake to do for thee.


Parm. I was quite out of hope ever to have her; for I could never come to any
conclusion with her, no, not to find so much favor, as but to speak with
her, or to have but a word with her. And as it is in the proverb: In love it
is an ill sign, to see his Mistress fly, and turn the face. And this did
much dis-hearten me in my suite.


Celest. I marvel not much at thy discouragement, considering I was then a
stranger unto thee; at least, not so well acquainted with thee as now I am: and
that thy self did not then know, (as now thou do) that thou mai'st command
her, who is the Doctresse of this Art; but now thou shall see, what favor
thou shall find for my sake; what power I have over these wenches; how much I
can prevail with them; and what wonders I can work in matters of Jove: but
hush, tread softly; Lo, heeres the door, let us enter in with still and quiet
steps, that the neighbors may not hear us. Stay, and attend me here at the
stairs foot, whilst I go up and see what I shall be able to do with her,
concerning the business we talked of; and it may be, we shall work more with
her, then either thou or I did ever dream of.


Areusa. Who Is there? Who is that, that at this time of night comes up into my
chamber?


Celestina. One, I assure you, that means you no ill; one that never treads
step, but she thinks on thy profit; one that is more mindful of thee, then
of her self; one that loves thee as her life, though I am now grown old.


Areusa. Now the Devil take this old Trot! what news with you, that you come
thus stealing like a Ghost, and at so late an hour? How think you
(Gentlewoman) is this a fair hour to come to ones chamber? I was even putting
off my clothes to go to bed.


Celestina. What? To bed with the Hen, daughter? So soon to roost? ^ye for
shame; Is this the way to thrive? Think you ever to be rich, if you go to bed
so timely? Come, walk a turn or two, and talk with me a little; let others
bewail their wants, not thou. Herbs feed them that gather them. Who but would,
if he could, lead such a life?


Areusa. How cold it is! I will go put on my clothes again: beshrew me if I am
not cold at my very heart.


Celestina. Nay, by my fay shall you not; but if you will go into your bed,
do; and so shall we talk more conveniently together.


Areusa. Yes indeed, I have need so to do; for I have felt my self very ill
all this day; so that necessity, rather then laziness, has made me thus
early to take my sheets, in stead of my petticoat, to wrap about me.


Celest. Sit not up, I pray any longer, but get you to bed, and cover your
self well with clothes, and sink lower in, so shall you be the sooner warm.
O! how like a Siren do thou look? How fair, how beautiful? O! how
sweetly every thing smells about thee, when thou heauest and turnest thy self
in thy bed? I assure you, every thing is in very good order: how well have I
always been pleased with all thy things, and thy doings? You will not think,
how this neatness, this handsomeness of yours in your lodging does delight
me; to see every thing so trim and tricksie about you; I promise you, I am
even proud of it. O! how fresh do thou look? What sheets? What quilts be
here? What pillowes? O! how white they be? Let me not live, if every thing
near does not like me wonderful well: My Pearl, my Jewel of gold, see
whether I love you or no, that I come to visit you at this time of night? Let
my eye take its fill in beholding of thee; it does me much good to touch thee,
and to look upon thee.


Areusa. Nay (good mother) leave, do not touch me; pray you do not, it does
but increase my pain.


Celest. What pain (Sweet heart?) Tell me (pretty Ducke.) Come, come, you do
but jest, I am sure.


Areusa. Jest? Let me never taste of joy, if I jest with you; it is scarce
four hours since, that every minute I was ready to dye with pain of the
Mother, which rising in my breast, swelled up to my throat, and was ready to
stifle me; that I still looked when I should leave the world; and therefore am
not so gamesome and wanton as you think I am: now I have little mind of that.


Celest. Go to, give me leave a little to touch you; and I will try what I
can do. For I know something of this evil, which every one calls the Mother,
and the passion thereunto belonging.


Areusa. Lay your hand higher up toward my stomach.


Celest. Alack (poor heart) how I pity thee: that one so plump, so fair, so
clear, so fresh, so fragrant, so delicate, so dainty a creature, that art
indeed the very abstract of beauty, the most admired model for complexion,
feature, comeliness, and rarest composure; every Limme, every Lineament
carrying such an extraordinary luster and ornament by reflection from thee. I
say, How do I pity thee, that any ache, sickness, or infirmity should dare
to seize, or presume to vsurp over such a Peerless Potent, a commanding
Power, as thy imperious unparalleled beauty! But I dare say, it is not so, nor
so; No no, your disease is selfe-conceited, and the pride of your good parts,
this puffs you and makes you slight and contemn all. Go to, go to,
(daughter) you are to blame if it be so, and I tell you, it is a shame for you,
that it is, not to impart these good graces and blessings, which heaven has
bestowed upon you, to as many as wish you well; For they were not given you in
vain, that you should let them wither, and lose the flower of your youth under
six linings of Woollen, and Linen; have a care, that you be not covetous of
that, which cost you but little; do not like, a Miser, hoord up your beauty;
make not a hidden treasure of it, sithence in it is own nature it is as
communicable, and as commonly current as money from man to man. Be not the
Mastiue in the garden, nor the Dog in the manger: and since thou can not take
any pleasure in thy self, let others take their pleasure* and do not think
thou wast borne for nothing: for when thou wast borne, man was borne: and when
man was borne, woman was borne; nothing in all this wide world was created
superfluous, nor which Nature did not provide for with very good consonancy,
and well suiting with reason. But think on the contrary, That it is a fault to
vex and torment men, when it is in thy power to give them remedy.


Areusa. Tush, mother, these are but words, and profit me nothing; give me
something for my evil, and leave your jesting.


Celest. In this so common a grief, all of us, (the more misfortune ours) are
in a manner Physicians to our selves; that which I have seen practiced on
others, and that which I found good in my self, I shall plainly deliver unto
you: but as the states of our bodies are diverse, and the qualities differing;
so are the medicines also diverse, and the operations different. Every strong
sent is good: as Penny-royall, Rue, Wormwood, smoke of Partridge feathers, of
Rosemary, and of the Soles of old shoes, and of Muske-roses, of Incense, of
strong perfumes, received kindly, fully, and greedily, does work much good;
much slaketh and eases the pain, and by little and little returns the Mother
to it is proper place. But there is another thing that passes all these, and
that I ever found to be better then any one, or all of them put together; but
what it is, I will not tell you, because you make your self such a piece of
niceness.


Areusa. As you love me, (good mother) tell me: see thou me thus payned,
and concealest thou thy self?


Celest. Go to, go to, you understand me well enough; do not make your self
more fool then you are.


Areusa. Well, well, well; now trust me no more, if I understood thee* But
what is it thou would have me to do? you know that my friend went yesterday
with his Captain to the wars; would you have me to wrong him?


Celestina. O! take heed, great wrong, I promise you.


Areusa. Yes indeed, for he supplies all my wants; he will see I shall lack
nothing; he holds me honest; he does love me, and uses me with that
respect, as if I were his Lady and Mistress.


Celest. Suppose all this to be true, be it in the best sort it may be, yet
what of all this? This retiredness is no cure for your disease; you must be
free and communicable, for I must tell you, there are griefs and pangs cannot
easily be posted off, and dispossessed, and some not to be removed but by being
a mother, (you know my meaning;) and such is your disease, and you can never
recover it, but by living sole and simple (as you now do) without company.


Areusa. It is but my ill hap, and a curse laid upon me by my parents, else
had I not been put to prove all this misery and pain, which now I feel. But
to let this pass, because it is late, tell me I pray, what wind drove you
hither?


Celest. You know already what I have said unto you concerning Parmeno; who
complains himself unto me, that you refuse to see him; that you will not
vouchsafe him so much as a look: what should be the reason, I know not,
unless because you know, that I wish him well, and make account of him, as of
my son. I have a better care of your matters, and regard your friends in a
kinder fashion. Not a neighbor that dwells near you, but she is welcome unto
me, and my heart rejoices as often as I see them, and all because they
converse with thee, and keep thee company.


Areusa. It is true (A^nt) that you say; and I acknowledge my beholdingness.


Celest. I know not whether you do or no: Do thou hear me (girl?) I ^^ust
believe works; for words are wind, and are sold every where for nothing; but
love is never paid, but with pure love: and works with works. Thou know the
alliance between thee and Elicia, whom Sempronio keeps in my house. Parmeno
and he are fellows and companions, they both serve the Gentleman you wot of;
and by whom you may gain great good, and grace unto your self. Do not
therefore deny him that, the granting whereof will cost thee so little; you are
kinse-women, and they companions: see, how pat all things fall! far^ie better
then we our selves could have wished; and to tell you truly, I have brought him
along with me: how say you? Shall I call him up?


Areusa. Now, heavens forbid. Fie; What did you mean? Ay me; I fear me, he
has heard every word.


Celest. No: for he stays beneath; I will call to him to come up; for my sake
show him good countenance; take notice of him; speak kindly unto him;
entertain him friendly; and if you think fit, let him enjoy you, and you him;
and both one another; for though he gain much, I am sure, you shall lose
nothing by the bargain.


Areusa. Mother, I am not ignorant, that as well these, as all other your
former speeches unto me, have ever been directed to my good and benefit: but
how is it possible, that I should do this, that you would now have me? For
you know to whom I am bound to give an account, as already you have heard; and
if he know I play false, he will kill me. My neighbors, they are envious and
malicious, and they will straightway acquaint him therewith. And say, that no
great ill should befall me, save only the losing of his love; it will be more
then I shall gain, by giving contentment to him, for whom you entreat, or
rather command me.


Celest. For this fear of yours, my self have already provided: for we
entered in very softly.


Areusa. Nay, I do not speak for this night, but for many other that are to
come. Tush, were it but for one night, I would not care.


Celestina. What? Is this your fashion? Is this the manner of your carriage?
And you use these niceties, you shall never have a house with a double room,
but live like a beggar all the days of your life. What? are you afraid of our
Sweetheart now he is absent? What would you then do, were he now in Town? It
has ever been my ill fortune, to give counsel unto fools, such as cannot
see their own good; say what I will, they will err; still stand in their own
light. But I do not much wonder at it; For though the world be wide, yet there
are but few wise in it. Great is the largeness of the earth, but small the
number of those that have experience. Ha, daughter! Did you but see your
cousins wisdom, or but know what benefit my breeding, and counsel has
brought her, how cunning, how witty, and what a Mistress in her art; you
would be of another mind; say, what I will unto her, she patiently indures my
reprehensions, she hearkens to my advice, and does all what I will have her
do; she will sometimes boast, that she has at one time had one in bed with
her; another waiting at the door; and a third sighing for her within the
house; and yet has given good satisfaction to them all. And art thou afraid,
who have but two to deal withal; Can one cock fill all thy Cisternes? One
conduit-pipe water all thy Court? If this be your diet, you may chance to rise
a hungered, you shall have no meat left against another time; I will not rent
your fragments; I cannot live upon scraps; One could never please me; I could
never place all my affection upon one; two can do more then one; they give
more, and they have more to give. It goes hard (Daughter) with that Mouse, that
has but one hole to trust to; for if that be stopped, she has no means to
hide her self from the Cat: he that has but one eye, you see in what danger
he goes? One sole Act makes not a Habit. It is a rare, and strange thing to
see a Partridge fly single; to feed always upon one dish, brings a loathing
to the stomach; one Swallow makes not a Summer; one witness alone is of no
validity in Law. He that has but one suite of clothes, and she that has
but one gown to her back, quickly wears them out. What would you do
(daughter) with this number of one? Many more inconveniences can I tell thee of
this single soale number (if one may be a number.) If you be wise, be never
without two; for it is a laud^ble and commendable company, as you may see it in
your self; who has two ears, two feet, and two hands; two sheets upon one
bed; and two smockes wherewith to shift you; and the more you have, the better
it is for you; for still, (as it is in the Proverb) The more Moors, the
better market; and honor without profit, is no other but as a Ring upon the
finger. And because one Sack cannot hold them both, apply your self to your
profit, Son Parmeno, come up.


Areusa. O let him not come up if you love me: the pockes be my death, if I am
not ready to swound, to think on it; I know not what to do for very shame. Nay
fie, mother, what mean you to call him up? you know that I have no
acquaintance with him; I never exchanged a word with him, in all my life; Fie,
how I am ashamed!


Celest. I am here with thee (wench;) I, who will stand betwixt him and thee; I
will quit thee of this shame, and will cover thee close, and speak for you
both: For he is as bashful as you for your life.


Parme. Gentlewoman, heavens preserve this gracious presence of yours.


Areusa. You are welcome, gentle Sir.


Celest. Come hither you Ass, whither go you now, to sit moping down in a
corner? Come, come, be not so shamefast, for it was the bashful man whom the
Devil brought to Court; for he was sure, he should get nothing there; hearken
both of you, what I shall now say unto you: You, my friend Parmeno, know
already what I promised you: and you (daughter) what I entreated at your hands.
Laying aside therefore the difficulty, in drawing thee to grant that which I
desi^ed, few words I conceive to be best, because the time will not permit me
to be long. He for his part has hitherto lived in great pain and grief for
your sake: and therefore you seeing his torment, I know you will not kill him:
and I likewise know, that your self likes so well of him, that it shall not
be amiss, that he stay with you here this night in the house.


Areusa. For my mayden-heads sake (mother) let it not be so, pray do not
command it me.


Parme. Mother, as you love my life, as you love goodness, let me not go
hence, until we be well agreed: for she has wounded me with her eyes, to
death, and I must dye through love, unless you help me; offer her all that
which my father left with you for me; tell her, I will give her all that I
have. Besides, do you hear? Tell her, that me thinks, she will not vouchsafe
to look upon me.


Areusa. What does this Gentleman whisper in your ear? Thinks he that I will
not perform ought of your request.


Celest. No, daughter, no such matter; he says that he is very glad of your
good love and friendship, because you are so honest, and so worthy; and that
any benefit shall light well, that shall fall upon you. Come hither (Modesty)
Come hither you bashful fool.


Areusa. He will not be so uncivil, as to enter into another bodies ground
without leave, especially, when it lies in several.


Celest. So uncivil? Do you stand upon leave? Would you have him stand with
cap in hand, and say, I pray shall I? Will yo^ give me leave forsooth? And I
know not what fiddle-come-faddles? Well, I will stay no longer with you: and I
will pass my word, that you shall rise to morrow painelesse.


Areusa. Nay fie, good Sir, for modesties sake, I beseech you let me alone:
content your self, I pray, I pray let be. If not for my sake, yet look back
upon those gray hairs of that reverend old Dame, which stands by you, and
forbear for her sake. Get you gone, I say, for I am none of those you take me
to be, I am none of your common hackneyes, that hire out their bodies for
money. Would I might never stir, if I do not get me out of the house, if
you do but touch so much as a cloth about me.


Celest. Why, how now Areusa, what is the matter with you? Whence comes this
strangeness? Whence this coyness of yours? This niceness? Why (Daughter) do
you think that I know not what this means? Did I never see a man and woman
together before? And that I know not all their tricks and devices? What they
say, and what they do? I am sorry to hear that I do. Besides, I must tell
you, I was once as wanton as you are now, and thought my penny as good silver
as yours: and many a friend I had that came unto me: yet did I never in all my
life exclude either old man, or old woman out of my company, or that ever I
refused their counsel, were it public or private, By my little honesty, I had
rather thou had given me a box on the ear, then to hear what I hear. You
make of me, as if I had been borne but yesterday. O! how cunning forsooth, how
close you be? for to make your self seem honest, you would make me a fool.
I must be a kind of Ignoramus, without shame, secrecy, and experience. Ye
would discredit me in my Trade, for to win your self credit in your own.
But the best is, betwixt Pirate and Pirate, there is nothing to be got but
blows and empty barrels. And well I wot, that I speak far better of thee,
behind thy back, then thou can think of thy self before me.


Areusa. Mother, if I have offended, pardon me, for I had rather give
contentment to you, then to my self. I would not anger you for a world.


Celestina. No, I am not angry, I do but tell you this against another time,
that you may beware you do so no more. And so good night, for I will be gone,
I will get me away alone by my self.


Areusa. Good night, Aunt.


Parm. Mother, will you that I wait upon you? Shall I accompany you home?


Celest. No mary shall you not; that were but to strip one, and cloth another;
or again, it needs not, for I am old, and therefore fear not to be forced in
the streets. I am past all danger of rauishing.


Elicia. The dog barks. The old Witch comes hobbling home.


Celest. Tha, tha, tha.


Elicia. Who is there? who knockes at door?


Celest. Daughter, Come down, and open the door.


Elicia. Is this a time to come in? You are disposed still to be out thus a
nights. To what end (I trow) walk you thus late? What a long time (mother)
have you been away? What do you mean by it? You can never find the way
home, when you are once abroad: but it is your old wont, you cannot leave it;
and so as you may pleasure one, you care not and you leave a hundred
discontented: you have been sought after to day, by the father of her that was
betrothed, which you brought from the Prebendary upon Easter day, whom he is
purposed to marry within these three days, and you must needs help her,
according as you promised, that her husband may not find her virginity cracked.


Celest. Daughter, I remember no such matter. For whom is it that you speak?


Elicia. Remember no such matter? Sure, you have forgot your self. O! what a
weak memory have you? Why, your self told me of it, when you took her
hence; and that you had renewed her maidenhead seven times at the least.


Celest. Daughter, make it not so strange, that I should forget. For he that
scatters his memory into many parts, can keep it steadfast in no part. But
tell me, Will he not return again?


Elicia. See whether he will return or no? He has given you a bracelet of
Gold, as a pledge for your pains: and will he not then return again?


Celest. O! wast he that brought the bracelet? Now I know whom you mean. Why
did you not prepare things in a readiness, and began to do something
against I came home? For in such things you should practice your self when I
am absent, and try whether you can do that by your self, which you so often
have seen me do; otherwise, you are like to live all your lifetime like a
beast, without either art, or in-come: and then when you grow to my years,
you will too late lament your present laziness; for an idle, and lazy youth
brings with it a repentfull, and a painful old age. I took a better course I
wisse, when your Grandmother showed me her cunning: for, in the compass of
one year, I grew more skillful then her self.


Elicia. No marvel; for many times, (as it is in the Proverb) a good Scholar
goes beyond his Master; and it is all in the will and desire of him that is to
learn; for no Science can be well employed on him, who has not a good mind
and affection thereunto. But I had as liefe dye, as go about it. I am sick
(me thinks) when I set my self to it; and you are never well, but when you
are at it.


Celest. You may say what you like. But believe me, you will dye a beggar for
this. What? do yo think to live always under my wing? Think you never to
go from my elbow?


Elicia. Pray let us leave off this melancholy talk; now is now; and then is
then. When time serves, we will follow your counsel; but now let us take our
pleasure, while we may. As long as we have meat for to day, let us not think
on to morrow: Let to morrow care for it self; as well dies he that gathers
much, as he that lives but poorly; the Master, as the servant; he that is of
a Noble Lineage, as he that is of a meaner stock: and thou with thy art, as
well as I without it; we are not to live for ever: and therefore let us laugh
and be merry, for few are they that come to see old age; and they who do see
it, seldom dye of hunger. I desire nothing in this world, but meat, drink,
and clothing, and a part in pleasure. And though rich men have better means to
attain to this glory, then he that has but little; yet there is not one of
them that is contented, not one that says to himself, I have enough. There is
not one of them, with whom I would exchange my pleasures for their riches. But
let us leave other men's thoughts and cares to themselves; and let us go sleep,
for it is time; and a good sound sleep without fear, will fat me more, and
do me more good, then all the Treasure and wealth or Venice.


ACTVS VIIJ.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe day appears; Parmeno departs, and takes his leave of Areusa, and goes to
his Master Calisto. He finds Sempronio at the door; they enter into amity;
go jointly to Calisto's chamber; they find him talking with himself; being
risen, he goes to Church.

INTERLOCVTORS. Parmeno, Areusa, Calisto, Sempronio. PArmeno. It is day. O what
a spite is this? Whence is it, that it is so light in the chamber?


Areusa. What do you talk of day? Sleep, Sir, and take your rest; for it is
but even now, since we lay down. I have scarce shut mine eyes yet, and would
you have it to beday? I pray you open the window by you, the window there by
your beds head, and you shall then see whether it be so or no?


Parm. Gentlewoman, I am in the right; it is day: I see it is day: I am not
deceived. No, no; I knew it was broad day, when I saw the light come through the
chinks of the door. O what a Villain am I? Into how great a fault am I fallen
with my Master? I am worthy of much punishment. O how far days is it?


Areusa. Far days?


Parme. I, far days; very far days.


Areusa. Never trust me; Alas, I am not eased of my Mother yet. It pains me
still; I know not what should be the reason of it.


Parmeno. Dear love, what would thou have me to do?


Areusa. That we talk a little on the matter concerning my indisposition.


Parme. What should we talk (Love) any more? if that which has been said
already be not sufficient, excuse that in me, which is more necessary; for it
is now almost high noone: and if I stay any longer, I shall not be welcome to
my Master. To morrow is a new day, and then I will come to see you again; and
as often afterward as you please: and therefore was one day made after
another, because that which could not be performed in one day, might be done
in another: as also, because we should see one another the oftener. In the
mean while, let me entreat you to do me the favor, that you will come and
dine with us to day at Celestina's house.


Areusa. With all my heart; and I thank you too. Farewell, good luck be with
you. I pray pull the door after you.


Par. And fare you well too. O singular pleasure! O singular joy! What man
lives there this day, that can say he is more fortunate then I am? Can any man
be more happy? any more successful then my self, that I should enjoy so
excellent a gift? so curious a creature? and no sooner ask then have? Believe
me, if my heart could brook this old woman's treasons, I could creep upon my
knees to do her a kindness. How shall I be able to requite her? O heavens!
To whom shall I impart this my joy? To whom shall I discover so great a secret?
To whom shall I discover some part of my glory? It is true that the old woman
told me; That of no prosperity, the possession can be good without company;
and that pleasure not communicated, is no pleasure. O! who can have so true a
feeling of this my happiness, as my self? But lo, yonder is Sempronio,
standing at our door; he has been stirring betimes; I shall have a pittious
life with my Master, if he be gone abroad; but I hope he is not; if he be,
he has left his old wont. But being he is not now himself, no marvel if he
break custom.


Sempr. Brother Parmeno, if I knew that country, where a man might get wages
by sleeping, it should go hard, but I would make a shift to get thither. For,
I would not then come short of any man; I would scorn to be put down; but
would gain as much as another man, be he who he will be that bears a head.
But what is the matter, that thou, like a careless and retchles fellow,
loytring, I know not where, have been so negligent, and slow in thy return? I
cannot devise, what should be the cause of this thy so long stay, unless it
were to give old Celestina a warming to night; or to rub her feet, as you were
wont to do, when you were a Little-one.


Parme. O Sempronio, my good friend, I pray thee do not interrupt, or rather
corrupt my pleasure; Do not intermix thy anger with my patience; do not
inuolue thy coffeehouse with my quiet; Do not soil with such troubled
water, the clear liquor of those gladsome thoughts, which I harbor in my
heart; Do not sour with thy malicious taunts and hatefully reprehensions, the
sweetness of my delight. Receive me cheerful, embrace me with joy, and I
shall tell thee wonders of my late happy proceedings.


Sempr. Come, out with it, out with it. Is it any thing touching Melibea? Say,
Lad, have thou seen her?


Parm. What talk thou to me of Melibea? It is touching another, that I wish
better unto then Melibea. And such a one (if I be not deceived) as may compare
with her both in hand^omnes, and beauty. Melibea? Why, she is not worthy to
carry her shoes after her: as though forsooth, the world and all that therein
is, be it beauty, or otherwise, were only enclosed in Melibea?


Sempr. What means this fellow? Is he mad? I would feign laugh, but I cannot.
Now I see, we are all in love: the world is at an end. Calisto loves Melibea;
I, Elicia: and thou out of mere envy, have found out some one, with whom thou
might lose that little wit thou have.


Parm. Is it folly (say you) to love? Then am I a fool. But if foolishness
were a pain, some in every house would complain.


Sempr. I appeal to thy self; by thine own judgment thou art no better: For
my self have heard thee give vain and foolish counsel to Calisto, and to
cross Celestina in every word she spoke, to the hinderance of both our
profits. O Sir, you were glad of this; it was meat alone to you. Who, you? No,
not for a world, would you bear a part with us. But since I have caught you in
my clutches, I will hamper you in faith. Now, that thou art in those hands, that
may hurt thee, they shall do it; assure thy self they shall.


Parm. It is not, Sempronio, true courage, nor manly valor, to hurt or hinder
any man, but to do good, to heal, and help him: and far greater is it to
be willing so to do. I have evermore made reckoning of thee, as of mine own
brother. Let not that be verified of thee, which is commonly spoken amongst us;
that a slight cause should part true friends; I tell you, you do not use me
well. Nay, you deal very ill with me; I know not whence this rancor should
arise. Do not vex me ( Sempronio;) Torment me not with these thy wounding
words. And shall I tell you? It is a very strange and strong kind of patience,
which sharp taunts and scoffs, which like so many needles and bo^kins set to
the heart, cannot pierce and prick through.


Sempr. I say nothing, but that now you have your wench, you will allow one
pilchard more to the poor boy in the Stable.


Parme. You cannot hold, your heart would burst, if you should not vent your
choler. Well, I will give way, and should you use me worse, I will pocket up
all your wrongs: and the rather, because it is an old saying, No humane passion
is perpetual.


Semp. But you can use Calisto worse; aduising him to that, which thou thy
self seek'st to shun: never letting him alone, but still urging him to leave
loving of Melibea: wherein, thou art just like unto a sign in an Inn, which
gives shelter to others, and none to it self. O Parmeno, now mai'st thou see,
how easy a thing it is to find fault with another man's life, and how hard to
amend his own. I say no more, your self shall be your own Judge: and from
this day forward, we shall see how you behave your self, sithence you have now
your porrenger, as well as other folks. If thou had been my friend (as thou
professest) when I stood in need of thee, thou should then have favored
me, and made show of thy love, and assisted Celestina in all that had been
for my profit, and not to drive in at every word a nail of malice. Know
moreover, that as wine in the Lees, when it is drawn to the very dregs,
drives drunkards from the Tavern: the like effect has necessity, or
adversity with a fained friend: and false mettle, that is gilded but slightly
over, quickly discouers it self to be but counterfeit.


Parmeno. I have oftentimes heard it spoken, and now by experience I see it is
true; that in this wretched life of ours, there is no pleasure without sorrow;
no contentment without some cross, or counterbuffe of fortune. We see our
fairest days, our clearest Sunne-shines are ouer-cast with clouds, darkness
and rain: our solaces and delights are swallowed up by dolours and by death:
laughter, mirth, and merriment are waited on by tears, lamentations, and other
the like mortal passions. In a word; Sweet meat will have sour sauce: and
much ease and much quietness, much pain and much heaviness. Who could come
more friendly, or more merrily to a man, then I did now to thee? And who could
receive a more unkind welcome, or unfriendly salutation? Who lives there, that
sees himself, as I have seen my self, raised with such glory to the height
of my dear Areusa's love? And who, that sees himself more likely to fall from
thence, then I, being so ill entreated, as I am of thee? Nay, thou will not
give me leave to tell thee, how much I am thine, how much I will further thee
in all I am able, how much I repent me of that which is past, and what good
counsel and reprehensions I have received of Celestina, and all in favor of
thee, and thy good, and the good of us all. And now, that we have our Masters
and Melibea's game in our own hands; now is the time that we must thrive or
never.


Sempronio. I like your words well, but should like them better, were your
works like unto them: which as I see the performance, so shall I give them
credence; but tell me, I pray thee, what is that, me thought, I heard you talk
even now of Areusa? Do you know Areusa, that is Cousin to Elicia?


Parme. Why, what were all the joy I now enjoy, did I not enjoy her?


Sempronio. What does the fool mean? He cannot speak for laughing. What
do thou call this thy inioying her? Did she show her self unto thee out at
a window? Or what is the matter?


Parm. No great matter. Only I have left her in doubt, whether she be with
child or no.


Sempr. Thou have struck me into a maze; continual travel may do much;
often dropping makes stones hollow.


Parme. How? continual travel? Why, I never thought of having her till
yesterday; then did I work her; and now she is mine own.


Sempr. The old woman had a finger in this business, had she not?


Parmeno. Why should you think so?


Sempr. Because she told me how much she loved you, how well she wished you,
and that she would work her for you; you were a happy man, Sir, you had no
more to do, but to come and take up. And therefore they say, It is better with
him whom fortune helps, then with him that rises early. But was she the
godfather to this business?


Parm. No, but she was the godmother, which is the truer of the two. And you
know, when a man comes once to a good tree, he will stay a while by it, and
take the benefit of the shade. I was long a coming, but when I came, I went
quickly to work: I dispatched it in an instant. O brother, what shall I say
unto thee of the graces that are dwelling in that wench, of her language, and
beauty of body? But I will defer the repetition thereof to a fitter
opportunity.


Sempr. She can be no other but cousin to Elicia; thou can not say so much
of her, but that this other has as much, and somewhat more. But what did she
cost thee? Have thou given her any thing?


Parme. No, not any thing, but whatsoever I had given her, it had been well
bestowed: for she is capable of every good thing; and such as she, are by so
much the better esteemed, by how much the dearer they are bought: and like
Jewels, are the higher prized, the more they cost us. But, save in this my
Mistress, so rich a thing was never purchased at so low a rate. I have invited
her to day to dinner to Celestina's house; and if you like of it, let us all
meet there.


Semp. Who, brother?


Parme. Thou and she, and the old woman and Elicia; and there we will laugh
and be merry.


Sempr. O good heavens, how glad a man have thou made me! Thou art frank, and
of a free and liberal disposition, I will never fail thee: now I hold thee to
be a man; now my mind gives me, that Fate has some good in store for thee:
all the hatred and malice which I bare thee for thy former speeches, is now
turned into love; I now doubt not, but that the league which tho^ have made
with us, shall be such as it ought to be. Now I long to embrace thee; Come, let
us now live like brothers; and let the devil go hang himself. All those
contentious words notwithstanding, whatsoever have passed between us, let there
be now no falling out, and so have peace all the year long; for, the falling
out of friends, is evermore the renewing of love; let us feast and be merry,
for our Master will fast for us all.


Parme. What does that man in desperation do?


Sempr. He lies where you left him last night, stretching himself all along
upon his palate, by his bedside; but the Devil a wink that he sleeps; and
the Devil a whit that he wakes, but lies like a man in a trance, between
them both, resting, and yet taking no rest. If I go in unto him, he falls a
rowting, and a snorting; If I go from him, he either sings or raues: nor can
I for my life comprehend (so strange is his carriage herein) whether the man
be in pain or ease; whether he take grief or pleasure in it.


Parme. What a strange humor is this? But tell me ( Sempronio) Did he never
call for me? Did he not remember me when I was gone?


Sempr. He remembered not himself; Why should he then remember you?


Parme. Even in this also fortune has been favorable unto me. And since all
things go so well, whilst I think on it, I will send thither our meat, that
they may the sooner make ready our dinner.


Sempro. What have thou thought upon to send thither, that those pretty fools
may hold thee a complete Courtier, well bred and bountiful?


Par. In a plentiful house a supper is soon provided: that, which I have
here at home in the Larder, is sufficient to save our credit. We have good
white bread, wine of Monuiedro, a good gammon of Bacon, and some half doozen
couple of dainty Chickens, which my Masters Tenants brought him in the other
day, when they came to pay their rent; which if he chance to ask for* I will
make him believe, that he has eaten them himself: and those Turtledoues,
which he willed me to keep against to day; I will tell him, that they were a
little to blame, and none of the sweetest, and that they did so stink, that I
was feign to throw them away; and you shall justify it, and bear me witness.
We will take order, that all that he shall eat thereof, shall do him no
harm; and that our own Table (as good reason it is it should) be
wellfurnished; and there with the old woman, as often as we meet, we will talk
more largely concerning this his love, to his loss, and our profit.


Semp. Calst thou it love? Thou mai'st call it sorrow with a vengeance. And by
my fay, I swear unto thee, that I verily think, that he will hardly now
escape either death or madness: but since it is, as it is, dispatch your
business, that we may go up, and see what he does.


Calisto. In peril great I live,
And strait of force must dye:
Since what desire does give,
That, hope does me deny.

Parme. Hark, hark, Sempronio! Our Master is a riming: He is turned Po^t, I
perceive.


Sempr. O whore-sonne Sot! What Poet, I pray? The great Antipater Sidonius, or
the great Poet Ovid, who never spoke but in Verse? I, it is he; the very same:
we shall have the Devil turn Poet too shortly, he does but talk idly in
his sleep; and thou think the poor man is turned Poet.


Calisto. This pain, this martyrdom,
O heart, well do thou prove,
Since thou so soon wast won
To Melibea's love.

Parm. Lo, did I not tell thee he was turned true Rimer?


Calisto. Who is that, that talks in the Hall? Why ho?


Parmeno. Anon, Sir.


Calisto. How far night is it? Is it time to go to bed?


Parme. It is rather, Sir, too late to rise.


Calisto. What sai'st thou fool? Is the night past and gone then?


Parmeno. I, Sir, and a good part of the day too.


Calisto. Tell me ( Sempronio) does not this idle-headed Knave lie, in making
me believe it is day?


Sempr. Put Melibea (Sir) a little out of your mind, and you will then see,
that it is broad day: for through that great brightness and splendor, which
you contemplate in her clear shining eyes, like a Partridge dazeled with a
buffit, you cannot see, being blinded with so sudden a flash.


Calisto. Now I believe it, and it is far day too. Give me my clothes; I must
go to my wonted retirement to the Mirtle-groue, and there beg of Cupid, that
he will direct Celestina, and put my remedy into M^libea's heart, or else that
he will shorten my sorrowful days.


Sempr. Sir, do not vex your self so much: you cannot do all that you would
in an hour: nor is it discretion for a man to desire that earnestly, that may
unfortunately fall upon him. If you will have that concluded in a day, which is
well, if it be effected in a year, your life cannot be long.


Calisto. I conceive your meaning; you would infer that I am like Squire
Gallego's boy, who went a year without breeches, and when his Master commanded
a pair to be cut out for him, he would have them made in a quarter of an hour.


Sempronio. Heaven forbid (Sir) I should say so: for you are my Master, and I
know besides, that as you will recompense me for my good counsel, so you will
punish me, if I speak amiss; though it be a common saying, that the
commendation of a man's good service, or good speech, is not equal to the
reprehension and punishment of that which is either ill done or spoken.


Calisto. I wonder ( Sempronio) where thou got'st so much philosophy?


Sempr. Sir, all that is not white, which differs from black; nor is all that
gold which glisters. Your accelerated, and hasty desires, not being measured by
reason, make my counsels to seem better then they be. Would you, that they
should yesterday, at the first word, have brought Melibea manacled, and tied to
her girdle, as you would have sent into the market for any other merchandise?
Wherein there is no more to do, then to go into the market, and take the
pains to buy it. Sir, be of good cheer; give some ease and rest to your
heart; for no great happiness can happen in an instant. It is not one stroke
that can fell an Oak; prepare your self for sufferance, for wisdom is a
laudable blessing; and he that is prepared, may withstand a strong encounter.


Calisto. Thou have spoken well, if the quality of my e^ill would consent to
take it so.


Sempr. To what end serves understanding, if the will sha^^ (...) reason of her
right?


Calisto. O thou fool, thou fool! The sound man says to the sick, Heaven
send thee thy health. I will no more counsel, no more kearken to thy reasons:
for, they do but revive, and kindle those flames afresh, which burn and
consume me. I will go and invoke Cupid; and will not come home, till you
call me, and crave a reward of me for the good news you shall bring me, upon
the happy coming of Celestina: nor will I eat any thing, till Phoebus his
horses shall feed, and graze their fill in those green meddowes where they use
to bait, when they come to their iourneys end.


Semp. Good Sir, leave off these circumlocutions; leave off these poetical
fictions; for that speech is not comely, which is not common unto all: which
all men partake not of, as well as your self: or which few do but understand.
Say, till the Sun set, and every one will know what you mean. Come, eat in
the mean while, some Conserues, or the like confection, that you may keep
some life in you, till I return.


Calisto. Sempronio, my faithful servant, my good counselor, my loyal
follower; Be it as thou will have it: for I assure my self (out of the
vnspottednesse of thy pure service) that my life is as dear unto thee as thine
own.


Sem. Do thou believe it, Parmeno? I wot well that thou will not swear it.
Remember, if you go for the Conserues, that you nimme a barrel for those you
wot of; you know who I mean. And to a good understanding every thing will
light in his lap: or (as he phrase is) fall into his Cod-pisse.


Calisto. What say thou, Sempronio?


Sempr. I speak, Sir, to Parmeno, that he should run quickly and fetch you
a slice of Conserues, of Citron, or of Limons.


Parm. Lo (Sir) here it is.


Calisto. Give it me hither.


Sempr. See, how fast it goes down! I think the Devil makes him make such
quick work. Look, if he does not swallow it whole, that he may the sooner
have done?


Calisto. My spirits are returned unto me again; I promise you it has done me
much good. My Sons both, farewell. Go look after the old woman, and wait
for good news, that I may reward you for your labor.


Parme. So, now he is gone. The devil and ill fortune follow thee; for in the
very same hour have thou eaten this Citron, as Apuleius did that poison which
turned him into an Ass.


ACTVS IX.
THE ARGUMENT.
SEMPRONIO and Parmeno go talking each with other to Celestina's house; being
come thith^^, they find there Elicia and Areusa. They sit down to dinner;
being at dinner, Elicia and Sempronio fall out; being risen from Table, they
grow friends again. In the mean while comes Lucrecia, servant to Melibea, to
call Celestina to come and speak with Melibea.

INTERLOCVTORS. Sempronio, Parmeno, Celestina, Elicia, Areusa, Lucrecia.
SEmpronio. Parmeno, I pray thee bring down our Cloakes, and our Rapiers; for I
think it be time for us to go to dinner.


Parme. Come, let us go presently; for I think they will find fault with us,
for staying so long. Let us not go through this, but that other street, that
we may go in by the Vestals, so shall we see, whether Celestina have ended
her devotions, and take her along with us.


Sempr. What? Do you think to find her at her Theme now? Is this a fit
hour? This a time for her to be at her Orizons?


Parme. That can never be said out of time, which ought to be done at all times.


Sempr. It is true, but I see, you know not Celestina; when she has any thing
to do, she never thinks upon heaven, the devil a whit that she cares then for
devotion; when she has any thing in the house to gnaw upon, farewell all
holiness, farewell all prayers: and indeed, her going to any of these
Ceremonies, is but to spy and pry only upon advantages for such persons as she
may preuaricate and make for her profit. And though she bred thee up, I am
better acquainted with her qualities, then you are. That which she does
ruminate: how many cracked maiden-heads she has then in cure; how many Lovers
in this City; how many young wenches are recommended unto her; what Stewards
afford her provision; which is the more bountiful: and how she may call every
man by his name; that when she chances to meet them, she may not salute them
as strangers. When you see her lips go, then is she inuenting of lies, and
devising s^eights, and tricks for to get money; then does she thus dispute with
her self; In this manner will I make my speech; In this fashion will I cloze
with him. Thus then will he answer me; And to this I must thus reply. Thus
lives this creature, whom we so highly honor.


Parm. Tush, this is nothing; I know more then this. But because you were angry
the to' there day, when I told Calisto so much, I will forbear to speak of it.


Sempr. Though we may know so much for our own good, yet let us not publish
it to our own hurt; For, to have our Master to know it, were but to make him
discard her for such a one as she is, and not to care for her; and so leaving
her, he must needs have ^^ther, of whose pains we shall reap no profit, as
we shall be sure to do by her, who by fair means, or by foul, shall give us
part of her gains.


Parme. Well, and wisely have thou spoken; but hush: the door is open, and
she in the house. Call before you go in; peradventure, they are not yet fully
ready; or things are not in that order as they would have it; and then will
they be loath to be seen.


Semp. Go in, man, never stand upon those niceties; for we are all of a house.
Now, just now, they are covering the Table.


Celest. O my young amorous youths, my Pearls of gold! Let the year go about
as well with me, as you are both welcome unto me.


Parmeno. What complements has the old Bawd? Brother, I make no question, but
you well enough perceive her foystings, and her flatteries.


Sempronio. O! you must give her leave, it is her living. But I wonder what
devil taught her all her knacks, and her knaueries.


Parme. What? Mary, I will tell you. Necessity, Poverty, and Hunger; then which
there are no better. Tutours in the world: No better quickeners, and reuiuers
of the wit. Who taught your Pyes, and your Parrats to imitate our proper
Language, and tone, with their slit tongues, save only necessity?


Celest. Hola: wenches, girls: where be you, you fools? Come down; Come
hither quickly* I say; for there are a couple of young Gallants that would
ravish me.


Elicia. Would they would never have come hither for me. O! it is a fine time
of day! is this a fit hour, when you have invited your friends, to a feast?
You have made my cousin to wait here these three long hours: but this same
lazy-gut ( Sempronio) was the cause I warrant you, of all this stay; for he
has no eyes to look upon me.


Sempr. Sweetheart; I pray thee be quiet. My Life, my Love! you know full
well, that he that serves another, is not his own man. He that is bound, must
obey. So that my subjection frees me from blame. I pray thee be not angry.
Come, let us sit down, and fall to our meat.


Elicia. I, it is well, you are ready at all times to sit down, and eat, as
soon as the cloth is laid, with a clean pair of hands, but a shameless face.


Sempro. Come, we will chide and brawle after dinner: Now let us fall to our
vitailes. Mother Celestina, will it please you to sit down first?


Celest. No, first sit you down (my son) for here is room enough for us
all; let every one take their place, as they like, and sit next her whom he
loves best: as for me, who am a sole woman, I will sit me down here by this
Iar of wine, and this good goblet. For I can live no longer, then while I talk
with one of these two. Ever since that I was grown in years, I know no better
office at board, then to fall a skinking, and to furnish the Table with pots
and flagons: For he that handles honey, shall feel it still ^linging to his
fingers. Besides, in a cold winters night, you cannot have a better
warming-panne. For, when I toss off two of these little pots, when I am even
ready to go into my bed, why, I feel not a jot of cold all the night long.
With this, I furre all my clothes at Christmas: This warmes my blood; This
keeps me still in one estate; This makes me merry, where-e're I go; This
makes me look fresh, and ruddy, as a Rose. Let me still have store of this in
my house, and a fig for a dear year, it shall never hurt me: for one crust
of Mouse-eaten bread will serve me three whole days; This drives away all care
and sorrow from the heart, better then either Gold or Coral; This gives force
to a young man, and vigor to an old man; It adds color to the discolored;
courage to the coward; diligence to the slothful; it comfort the brain; it
expels cold from the stomach; it takes away the stinkingnesse of the breath;
it makes cold constitutions, to be potent and active: it makes husbandmen
endure the toil of tillage; it makes your painful and weary mowers to sweat
out all their watrish ill humors; it remedies Rheumes; and cures the
toothache. This may you keep long at Sea without stinking; so can you not
water: I could tell you more properties of this wholesome liquor, than all of
you have hayres on your head. So that I know not the man, whom it does not
delight to hear it but mentioned, the very name of it is so pleasing: only,
it has but this one fault: That that which is good, costs us dear; and that
which is bad, does us hurt; So that what makes the Liver sound, the same
makes the purse light; but for all this, I will be sure to seek after the
best; for that little which I drink, which is only some dozen times a meal.
Which number, I never pass, unless now, when I am feasted, or so.


Parme. It is the common opinion of all: That thrice in a dinner, is good,
honest, competent, and sufficient for any man. And all that do write thereof,
do allow you no more.


Celest. Son, the phrase is corrupted; they have put three time, in stead of
thirteen.


Sempr. Aunt, we all like well of your gloss. Let us eat, and talk, and
talk and eat: For else we shall not afterward have time to discourse of the
love of our lost Master, and of that fair handsome, and courteous Melibea,
lovely gentle Melibea.


Elicia. Get thee out of my sight, thou distastefull companion, thou disturber
of my mirth; the Devil choke thee with that thou have eaten. Thou have given
me my dinner for to day; now as I live, I am ready to rid my stomach, and to
cast up all that I have in my body, to hear that thou should call her fair
and courteous, lovely, and gentle. I pray thee how fair, how lovely, how
courteous, how gentle is she? It angers me to the heart-bloud, to see you have
so little shame with you. How gentle, how fair is she, more then other women?
Believe me, if she be as thou reportest her; nay, if she have any jot in her of
beauty, or any the least gracefulness. But I (...) there are some eyes, that
make ^o difference betwixt ^one, and my Lady, and that it is with every one as
he likes, as the good man said, when he kissed his Cow. Draffe I perceive is
good enough for Swine. I will cross my self in pity of thy great ignorance,
and want of judgment* Who I pray, had any mind to dispute with you, touching
her beauty, and her gentleness? Gentle Melibea? Fair Melibea? And is Melibea
so gentle, is she so fair as you make her to be? Then it must be so; and then
shall both these hit right in her, when two Sundaies come together. All the
beauty she has, may be bought at every Pedlers, or Painters shop for a penny
matter, or the like trifle: and believe me, I my self, upon mine own
knowledge, know, that in that very street where she ^wels, there are four
maidens at the least, if not more, to whom Nature has imparted a greater part
of beauty, and other good graces in greater abundance, then she has on
Melibea; and if she have any jot of handsomeness in her, she may thank her
good clothes; her neat dressings, and costly Jewels, which if they were hung
upon a post, thou would as well say by that too, that it were fair and
gentle; and by my say (be it spoken without os^entation) I think my penny to
be as good silver as hers; and that I am every way as fair as your Melibea.


Areusa. O sister! had thou seen her as I have seen her (I tell thee no
lie) if thou should have met her fasting, thy stomach would have taken such
a loathing, that all that day thou would not have been able to have eaten
any meat. All the year long she is mewed up at home, where she is dawbed over
with a thousand sluttish slibber^slabbers; all which (forsooth) she must
endure, for once perhaps going abroad in a twelue-month to be seen: she
anoynts her face with gall and honey, with parched grapes and figs crushed
and pressed together, with many other things, which for manners sake, and
reverence of the Table, I omit to mention. It is their riches, that make such
creatures as she to be accounted fair; it is their wealth, that causes them
to be thus commended, and not the graces, and goodly features of their bodies.
For, she has such breasts, being a maid, as if she had been the mother of
three children; and are for all the world, like nothing more, then two great
Pompeans, or big bottled-Goords. Her belly I have not seen, but judging it
by the rest, I verily believe it, to be as slack, and as flaggy, as a woman of
fifty year old. I know not what Calisto should see in her, that for her sake,
he should forsake the love of others, whom he may with great ease obtain,
and far more pleasure enjoy: Unless it be, that like the Palate that is
distasted, he thinks sour things the sweetest.


Sempr. Sister, it seems here unto me, that every Peddler prayseth his own
needles; but I assure you, the quite contrary is spoken of her throughout the
whole City.


Areusa. There is nothing farther from truth, then the opinion of the vulgar,
and nothing more false, then the reports of the multitude, nor shall thou ever
live a merry life, if thou govern thy self by the will of the common people:
and these conclusions, are uncontrollable, and infallibly true; that whatsoever
thing the vulgar thinks, is vanity: whatsoever they speak, is false-hood: what
they reprove, that is good: what they approve, that is bad, And since this is a
true rule, and common custom amongst them, do not judge of Melibea's either
goodness or beauty, by that which they affirm.


Sempr. Gentlewomen; let me answer you in a word. Your ill tongued multitude,
and prattling vulgar, never pardon the faults of great persons, no, not of their
Sovereign himself, which makes me to think, that if Melibea had so many
defects, as you tax her withal, they would e're this have been discovered by
those who know her better then we do. And howbeit I should admit all you have
spoken to be true, yet pardon me, if I press you with this particular. Calisto
is a Noble Gentleman; Melibea the Daughter of Honorable parents; So that, it
is usual with those, that are descend^d of such high Lineage, to seek and
inquire each after other; and therefore it is no marvel, if he rather love
her, then another.


Areusa. Let him be base that holds himself base; they are the Noble Actions
of men, that make men Noble. For in conclusion, we are all of one making flesh
and blood all. Let every man strive to be good of himself, and not go
searching for his virtue in the Nobleness of his Ancestors.


Celest. My good children; as you love me, cease this contentious kind of
talk: and you Elicia; I pray you come to the Table again; sit you down, I
say, and do not vex, and grieve your self, as you do.


Elicia. With this condition, that my meat may be may poison; and that my
belly may burst with that I eat. Shall I sit down and eat with this wicked
Villain, that has stoutly maintained it to my face, and no body must say him
nay, That Melibea: That Dishclout of his, is fairer then I?


Sempr. I prithee (Sweetheart) be quiet, it was you that made the comparison;
and comparisons (you know) are odious: and therefore it is you that are in the
fault, and not I.


Areusa. Come, sister, come, and sit with us; I pray, come eat with us. Have
you no more wit, then to be angry with such a cross fool as he? I would not
do him so much pleasure, as to forbear my meat for him; let him go hang, if
he be peevish, will you be peevish too? I pray you sit down, unless you will
have me likewise to rise from the Table.


Elicia. The necessity which I have imposed upon my self, to please thee in
all things, and in all thy requests, makes me against my will, to give
contentment to this enemy of mine; and to carry my self out of my respect to
this good company more fairly toward him, then otherwise I would.


Sempronio. Ha, ha, he.

Elicia. What do thou laugh at? Now the evil Canker eat and consume that
unpleasing and offensive mouth of thine.


Celest. Son, I pray thee no more. Do not answer her; for then we shall never
make an end: This is nothing to the present purpose; Let us follow our
business, and attend that which may tend to our good. Tell me, How does
Calisto? How hap't it you left him thus all alone? How fell it out, that both
of you could slip away from him?


Parme. He flung from us with a vengeance, fretting and fuming like a madman,
his eyes sparkeling forth fire, his mouth venting forth curses, despairefull,
discontented in mind, and like one that is half besides himself: and is now
gone to Saint Mary Magdalens, to desire of God, that thou may well and truly
gnaw the bones of these Chickens; vowing never to come ^ome, till he hear
that thou art come with Melibea in thy lap. Thy gown and kirtle, and my
cassocke are cock-sure. For the rest let the world slide; but when we shall
have it; that I know not, all the craft is in the catching.


Celest. Let it come when it will come, it shall be welcome, when e're it
comes. A cassocke is good wear after winter. And sleeves are good after
Easter: Every thing makes the heart merry that is gotten with ease, and without
any labor, especially coming from thence, where it leaves so small a gap, and
from a man of that wealth and substance, who with the very branne and scraps of
his house, would make me of a begget, to become rich: such is the surplus and
store of his goods; and such as he, it never grieves them what they spend,
considering the cause wherefore they give: For they feel it not; when they are
in the heat and passion of their love, it pains them not; they neither see,
nor hear; which I judge to be true by others, that I have known to be less
passionate, and less scorched in the fiery flames of love, then Calisto is; in
so much, that I have seen them neither eat nor drink; neither laughed nor weep;
neither sleep nor wake; neither speak nor hold their peace; neither live in
pain, nor yet find ease; neither be contented, nor yet complain of
coffeehouse, answerable to the perplexity of that sweet and cruel wound of
their hearts. And if natural necessity forces them to any one of these, they
are so wholly forgetful of themselves, and struck into such sudden
senslesnesse of their present being and condition, that eating, their hands
forget to carry their meat to their mouths: Besides, if you talk with them,
they never answer you directly. Their bodies are there with you, but where they
love, there are their hearts, and their senses. Great is the force of love. His
power does not only reach over the earth, but passes also over the seas. He
holds an equal command over all mankind. He breaks through all kind of
difficulties; and dangers whatsoever. It is a tormentfull thing, full of fear,
and of care. His eye roles every way; nothing can escape him. And if any of you
that be here, ing perhaps 100. stripes upon them, and afterward thrust them
out of doors, with their hair about their cares, and their fardles at their
backs, rating them in most vile manner, crying, Out of my doors, you thief,
you whore, you strumpet: this is no place for such paltry baggages. Thou shall
not spoil my house, I will not be thus dishonored by thee. So that in stead
of expected recompense, they receive nothing but bitter reuilements. Where they
expect to go preferred out of the house, they go prejudiced out of the house.
And where they expect to be well married, they are quite marred in their
reputation. And where they expect jewels and wedding apparel, there are they
sent out naked, and disgraced: these are their rewards, these their benefits,
and these the payments they receive for their service. They are bound to give
them husbands, and in liew thereof, they strip them of their clothes. The
greatest grace and honor which they have in their Ladies house, is to be
employed in walking the streets from one Lady to another, and to deliver
their Ladies message* (As, My Lady has sent to know how you do? how you did
rest to night? how your physic wrought with you; and how many occasions it
gave your Ladyship, etc?) They never hear their own name out of their Ladies
mouth. But the best they can call them by, is, Come hither, you whore, Get you
gone, you drabbe, or I Will set you going: Whither gadde you now, you mangy
harlotry; you pockey slut? what have you done to day, you loytring Queen? why
did you eat this, you ravening thing, you gor-belly, you greedy cormorant? A
you filthy Sow, how clean this frying pan is kept? This pispot (Minion) it
is well scowr'd, is it not? why you lazy bones, did you not brush my clothes,
when I left them off, and make clean my Mantle? Why said you thus and thus,
you Sot, you foolish Ass? Who lost the piece of plate, you scatter-good, you
draggle-tayle? What Is become of my handkercher, you purloyning thief? you have
given it to one of your copes-mates, some sweetheart of yours, that must help
to make you a whore: Come hither, you foul flappes, say* Where is my Hen, my
crammed Hen, that I cannot find her? you were best look her me out, and
that quickly too, unless you mean I shall make you pay for her, when I come
to pay you your wages. And besides all this, her pantofles shall walk about
her ears a thousand times a day; pinchings, cudgellings, and scourgings shall
be as common to her as her meat and drink. There is not any that knows how to
please and content them; not any that can endure their tartness and
curstness: their delight is to speak loud; their glory to chide and to
brawle, and the better one does, and the more one seeks to please them, the
less are they contented. And this (mother) is the reason, why I have rather
desires to live free from controlement, and to be mistress in a poor little
house of mine own, then to live a slave, and at command in the richest palace
of the proudest Lady of them all.


Celestina. Thou art in the right, my girl; I will take no care for you, you
will shift for your self; I perceive you know what you do, you need not to be
told on which side your bread is buttred, you are no baby, I see: and wise men
tell us, that better is a crust of bread, and a cup of cold water with peace
and quietness, then a house full of dainties, with brabbling and wrangling.
But now let us leave this argument, for here comes Lucrecia.


Lucrecia. Much good to you (good Aunt) and to all this fair company and great
meeting.


Celesti. So great, daughter? hold you this so great a meeting? It appears
that you have not known me in my prosperity, which is now some twenty years
since. There be those that have seen me in better case then I am now; and he
that now sees me, I wonder his heart does not burst with sorrow. I tell thee,
(wench) I have seen at this table, where your kinswomen now sit, nine gallant
young wenches, much about your age; for the eldest was not above eighteen, and
not one of them under fourteen. But such is this world, it comes and goes
upon wheels. We are like pots in a water-wheele, or like buckets in a Well;
one up, and another down, one full, and another empty; it is fortunes Law,
that nothing can continue any long time in one, and the selfsame state of
being. Her order is alteration; Her custom, change. I cannot without tears
deliver unto you the great honor I then lived in; though now, (such is my ill
fortune) by little and little, it has gone decaying* And as my days declined;
so diminished and decreased my profit. It is an old saying; That whatsoever is
in this world, it does either increase or decrease. Every thing has it is
limits; Every thing it is degrees of more or less: my honor did mount to that
height, as was fitting for a woman of my quality to rise unto; and now of
force, it must descend and fall as much: By this I know, that I am near to my
end, and that the Lease of my life is now expiring, and all my years are
almost spent and gone: and I also well know, that I did ascend, that I might
descend; that I flourished, for to wither; that I had joy, that I might have
sorrow; that I was borne to live; lived, to grow; grew, to grow old; and grow
old to dye: and though it did always appear unto me, that I ought in this
respect to suffer my misery the more patiently, yet as I am formed of flesh and
blood* and bear this heavy mass of sin about me, I cannot but think on it
now and then with grief, nor can I wholly as I would, blot every thought
thereof out of the woeful role of my wretched remembrance.


Lucrecia. Me thinks (mother) it could not choose but be wondrous troublesome
unto you, to have the charge of so many young wenches. For they are very
dangerous Cattle to keep, and will ask a great deal of pains.


Celest. Pains, Sweetheart? Nay, they were an ease, and pleasure unto me;
they did all of them obey me; they did all of them honor me; they did all of
them reverence me: not one of them that would swerve from my will: what I
said, stood for a Law; it was good and current amongst them; not any one of
them, to whom I gave entertainment, ever made their own choice any further
then it stood with my liking; were he lame, crooked, squint-eyed, or crippled:
all was one, he was the welcom'st and the soundest, that brought me the
soundest gains; mine was the profit, and theirs the pains. Besides, I needed
no servants; for in keeping them, I had servants enough. Why, your Noblemen, your
Knights, your old men, your young men, your learned men, men of all sorts and
dignities, from the highest to the lowest; why, they were all at my service:
and when I came to a feast, my foot was no sooner in, but I had presently as
many Bonnets veiled unto me, as if I had been a Duchess: he that had least
acquaintance, least business with me, was held the most vile, and basest
fellow. They spying me almost a League off; they would forsake their most
earnest occasions, one by one, two by two, and come to me, to see if I would
command them any service; and withal, ask me severally, how his love, how his
mistress did? When they saw me once pass by, you should have such a shuffling
and scraping of feet, and all in such a general gaze, and so out of order,
that they did neither do nor say any thing aright. One would call me
mistress, another Aunt, others their love, others honest old woman. There,
they would consent, when they should come to my house: there they would agree
when I should go unto theirs; there they would offer me money; there they
would make me large promises; there likewise present me with gifts: some
kissing the lappet of my Coat; and some other my cheek, that by these
kindesses, they might give me contentment, and work me to their will. But now
Fortune has brought me to so low a place in her wheel, that you may say unto
me, Mich you good dich you with your old ware, you hindges are now grown
rustie for want of oyling.


Sempr. Mother, you make my hair stand on end, to hear these strange things,
which you recount unto us; would your Nobles, your Knights, and Learned men
fall so low? I am sure, they are not all of them so badde as you make them to
be.


Celest. No (my son) Jove forbid that I should raise any such report, or lay a
general scandal upon any of their rank. For, there were many old good men
amongst them, with whom I had but small dealings, and could scarce endure to
see me: But amongst the greatest, as they grew great in number, so had I a
great number of them: some of one sort, and some of another; some I found very
chaste, and some that took the charge upon them to maintain such Traders as my
self. And I am still of this belief, that of these there is no lack; and
these, forsooth, would send their Squires and young men to wait upon me,
whithersoeuer I went: and I should scarce have set my foot within mine own
doors, but straight at the heels of me, you should have one come in with
chickens, another with Hens, a third with Geese, a fourth with Ducks. This man
sends me in Partriges, that man Turtle Doves, he a gammon of Bacon, such a one
a Tart, or a Custard; and some good fellow or other a good sucking Pigge, or
two: for every one, as soon as he had a convenient present, so they came
presently to register them in my house; that I, and those their pretty souls,
might merrily eat them together: and as for wine, we wanted none; the best that
a man could lay his lips to in the whole City, was sent unto me from diverse
parts and corners of the Town: as that of Monviedro, of Lugne, of Toro, of
Madrigall, of San-Martin, and many other Towns and Villages; And indeed so
many, that albeit I still keep the differences of their taste and relish in my
mouth, yet do I not retain the diversity of their foyles in my remembrance.
For it is enough for such an old woman as I, that when a good cup of wine
comes near my nose, I can be able to say, This is such a wine, or it comes from
such a place, or person; why, your presents from all parts, from all sorts came
upon me as thick as hops, as flies to a pot of honey, or as stones that are
thrown upon a stage: boys came tumbling in at my door, with as much
provision, as they could carry on their backs. But now those good days are
past, I have eaten all my white bread in my youth, and know not how in the
world to live, being fallen from so happy an estate.


Areusa. Since we are come hither to be merry, (good mother) do not weep, I
pray, do not vex your self: be of good cheer, pluck up your heart like a
woman; the world while we are in it, is bound to keep us all, and no doubt
but you shall have enough.


Celest. O daughter! I have cause enough, I think, to weep, when I call to mind
those pleasant days that are past and gone, that merry life which then I led,
and how I had the world at will, being served, honored, and sought to of all.
Why, then there was not any new fruit, or any the like dainty, which I had not
in my hands, before others knew they were scarce blossomed: in those days,
they were sure to be found in my house, if any one with child should long for
such a Toy.


Sempr. Mother, the remembrance of the good time we have had, does profit us
nothing, when it cannot be recovered again, but rather brings grief and
sorrow to our selves, as this interrupting discourse has done: but mother, we
will go off and solace our selves, whilst you stay here: and give this maid
her answer.


Celest. Daughter Lucrecia, passing over our former discourse, I pray you tell
me what is the cause of your happy coming hither?


Lucrecia. Believe me, I had almost forgot my chief errand unto you, with
thinking on that merry time which you talked of. Me thinks, I could continue
fasting almost a whole year in harkening unto thee, and thinking on that
pleasant life, which those young wenches led; me thinks, that with the very
talking thereof, I have a conceit with my self, that at this present, I feel
my self in the same happiness with them. I shall now, mistress, give you to
understand the cause of my coming: I am sent unto you for my Ladies Girdle;
and moreover, my Lady entreats you, that you would come and visit her, and
that out of hand, for she feels her self very ill, and much pained and
troubled with griefs and pangs about the heart; I assure you, she is very
heart-sicke.


Celestina. Of these petty griefs, the report is more then the pain. Is It
about the heart, say you? I marvel (I promise you) that so young a Gentlewoman
as she is, should be pained at the heart.


Lucrecia. Would thou were as well dragged along the streets, (thou old
traitorous Hagge) as thou know well enough what she ails. The subtle old
Bawd comes, and does her witcheries, and her tricks, and then goes her ways,
and afterward when one comes unto her for help, she makes forsooth as if she
knew no such matter, it is news (forsooth) to her.


Celest. What sai'st thou, Daughter?

Lucrecia. Mary, I say (mother) would we were gone once; and that you would
give me the Girdle.


Celest. Come, let us go. I will carry it along with me.

ACTVS X.
THE ARGUMENT.
VVHilest Celestina and Lucrecia go onward on their way, Melibea talks, and
discourses with her self. Being come to the door, first enters Lucrecia, anon
after, causes Celestina to come in. Melibea, after some exchange of words,
opens her mind to Celestina; telling her how fervently she was fallen in love
with Calisto. They spy Alisa, Melibea's mother coming; they take their leave
each of other. Alisa asks her daughter Melibea, what business she had with
Celestina? and what she made there? dissuading her from conuersing with her,
and forbidding her, her company.

INTERLOCVTORS. Melibea, Celestina, Alisa, Lucrecia. MElibea. O wretch that I
am! O unfortunate Damsel! Had I not been better yesterday, to have yielded to
Celestina's petition and request, when in the behalf of that Gentleman, whose
sight has made me his prisoner, I was so earnestly sued unto: and so have
contented him, and cured my self, then to be thus forcibly driven to discover
my heart, when happily he will not accept of it; when as already disaffianced in
his hope, for want of a good and fair answer, he has set both his eyes and
his heart upon the love and person of another? how much more aduantageous unto
me, would an entreated promise have been, then a forced offerture? to grant
being requested, then to yield being constrained? O my faithful servant,
Lucrecia, what will thou say of me, what will thou think of my judgment and
understanding, when thou shall see me to publish that, which I would never
discover unto thee? how will thou stand astonished of my honesty and modesty,
which (like a Recluse, shut up from all company) I have ever hitherto kept
inviolable? I know not whether thou have suspected, or no, whence this my
sorrow proceeds, or whether thou art now coming with that Solicitresse of my
safety? O thou high and supreme Power! thou, unto whom, all that are in misery
and affliction, call, and cry for help; the appassionated beg remedy, the
wounded crave healing; thou, whom the heavens, seas, earth, and the Center of
hell it self does obey; thou who submittedst all things unto men, I humbly
beseech thee, that thou will give sufferance and patience to my wounded heart,
whereby I may be able to dissemble my terrible passion. Let not this Leaf of
my chastity lose it is guylding, which I have laid upon this amorous desire,
publishing my pain to be otherwise then that, which indeed tormenteth me. But
how shall I be able to do it; That poisoned morsel so cruelly tormenting me,
which the sight of that Gentleman's presence gave me? O Sex of woman kind!
feeble and frail in thy being; why was it not granted as well unto women, to
discover their tormentfull and fervent flames, as unto men? For then neither
should Calisto have cause to complain, nor I to live in pain.


Lucrecia. Aunt, stay here a while behind this door, whilst I go in, and
see with whom my Mistress is talking. Come in; she is talking alone to her
self.


Melibea. Lucrecia, make fast the door there, and pull down the hanging over
it. O wise and honest old Dame, you are exceeding welcome; what think you,
that chance should so dispose of things, and fortune so bring about her wheel,
that I should stand in need of this wisdom, and crave so suddenly of you,
that you would ^dy me in the selfsame coin, the courtesy which was by you
demanded of me for that Gentleman, whom you were to cure by the virtue of my
Girdle?


Celest. Say, Lady, what is your disease, that you so lively express the
tokens of your torment, in those your maiden blushes?


Melibea. Truly, mother, I think there be some Serpents within my body, that
are gnawing upon my heart.


Celest. It is well, even as I would have it. I will be even with you (you
fool) for your yesterdaies anger, I will make you pay for it with a witness.


Melibea. What Is that you say? Have you perceived by my looks, any cause from
whence my malady proceeds?


Celest. You have not, Madame, told me the quality of your disease; and would
you have me divine of the cause? That which I say, is this, that I am heartily
sorry to see your Ladyship so sad and so ill.


Melibea. Good old woman; Do thou make me merry then. For I have heard much of
thy wisdom.


Celest. Madame, as far as humane knowledge can discern of inward grief, I
dare presume. And for as much, as for the health and remedy of infirmities, and
diseases, these graces were imparted unto men, for the finding out of fit and
convenient medicines, whereof some were attained to by experience, some by Art,
and some by a natural instinct; some small portion of these good gifts, this
poor old creature my self have gotten, who is here present to do you the
best service she can.


Melibea. O how acceptable and pleasing are thy words to mine ears! it is a
comfortable thing to the sick patient, to see his physician to look cheerfully
upon him. Me thinks I see my heart broken between thy hand in pieces, which
with a little labor, and by power and virtue of thy tongue, thou art able (if
thou will) to join together, and make it whole again; even as easily, as
Alexander that great King of Macedon dreamed of that wholesome root in the
mouth of a Dragon, wherewith he healed his servant Ptolomy, who had been
bitten by a Viper; and therefore, for the love of Jove, disroabe your self,
that you may more easily, and more diligently look into the nature of my
disease, and afford me some remedy for it.


Celest. A great part of health, is the desiring of health. And a good sign of
mending, to be willing to mend. For which reason I reckon your grief the
less, and hold it the less dangerous; But that I may minister a wholesome
medicine unto you, and such a one as may be agreeable to your disease; it is
requisite, that you first satisfy me in these three particulars. The first is,
on which side of your body your pain does lie most? The second, how long you
have had this pain; whether it has taken you but of late, or no? For your
newly growing infirmities are sooner cured in the tenderness of their growth,
then when they have taken deep rooting by ouer-long perseuering in their
office: So beasts are sooner tamed when they are young, and more easily brought
to the yoke, then when their hide is thoroughly hardened: So far better do
those plants grow up, and prosper, which are removed when they are young and
tender, then those that are transplanted, having long borne fruit. The third
is, whether this your evil has proceeded of any cruel thought, which has
taken hold on you? This being made known, you shall see me set my self
roundly to work about your cure; for it is very fit and convenient, that you
should open the whole truth, as well to your Physician, as your Confessor.


Melibea. Friend, Celestina, Thou wise Matrone, and great Mistress in thy Art,
thou have well opened unto me the way, by which I may manifest my malady unto
thee. Believe me, you have questioned me like a wise woman, and like one that
is well experienced in these kind of sickenesses. My pain is about my heart,
it is residence, near unto my left Pappe; but disperseth it self over every
part of my body. Secondly, it has been so but of late; nor did I ever think,
that any pain whatsoever could have so deprived me of my understanding, as
this does; it troubles my sight, changes my countenance, takes away my
stomach, I cannot sleep for it, nor will it suffer me to enjoy any kind of
pleasure: touching the thought, which was the last thing you demanded,
concerning my disease, I am not able to deliver it unto you, and as little the
cause thereof; For neither death of kinsfolk, nor loss of temporal goods,
nor any sudden passion upon any vision, nor any doting dream, nor any other
thing can I conjecture to be the cause of it, save only a kind of alt^ration,
caused by your self upon your request, which I suspected in the behalf of
that Gentleman Calisto, when you entreated me for my Charm.


Celest. What, Madame? Is Calisto so bad a man? Is his name so bad; that only
but to name him, should, upon the very sound thereof, send forth such poison?
Deceive not your self; Do not believe that this is the cause of your grief:
I have another thing in the wind, there is more in it then so; but since you
make it so dainty, if your Ladyship will give me leave, I will tell you the
cause of it.


Melibea. Why, how now, Celestina, what a strange request is this that thou
make unto me? Need thou to crave leave of me, who am to receive help from
thee? What Physician did ever demand such security, for to cure his patient?
Speak, speak what you please; for you shall always have leave of me to say
what you will; always excepted, that you wrong not my honor with your words.


Celestina. I see (Lady) that on the one side you complain of your grief, and
on the other side, I perceive, that you fear your remedy, your fear strikes a
fear into me; which fear causes silence, and silence truce betwixt your
malady and my medicine; so that you self will be the cause that your pain
shall not cease, nor my cunning cure you.


Melibea. By how much the longer you defer my cure, by so much the more do
you increase my pain, and augment my passion. Either thy medicines are of the
powder of infamy, and of the juice of corruption, confectionated with some
other more cruel pain, then that which thy patient already feels; or else
thy skill is nothing worth; For if either the one, or the other did not hinder
thee, thou would tell me of some other remedy boldly, and without fear,
sithence I entreat thee to acquaint me therewith, my honor full preserved.


Celest. Madame, think it not strange, that it is harder for him that is
wounded, to endure the torment of hot-scalding Turpentine, and the sharp
incisions, which gall the heart, and double the pain; then the wound that is
newly inflicted on him that his whole. And therefore, if you be willing to be
cured, and that I should discover unto you the sharp point of my needle,
without any fear at all, frame for your hands and feet a bond of patience and
of quietness; for your eyes, a veil of pity and compassion; for your tongue,
a bridle of silence; for your ears, the bumbast, or stuffing of sufferance and
bearing; and then shall you see, what effects this old Mistress in her Art,
will work upon your wounds.


Melibea. O how thou killest me with delays! For Gods love, speak what thou will, do what thou will, exercice thy skill, put thy experience in practice.
For, there is not any remedy so sharp, as can equal the bitterness of my pain
and torment. No, though it touch upon mine honor, though it wrong my
reputation, though it afflict my body, though it rip and break up my flesh,
for to pull out my grieved heart. I give thee my faith, to do what thou will
securely; and if I may find ease of my pain, I shall liberally reward thee.


Lurcecia. My Mistress has lost her wits: she is exceeding ill: this same
sorceresse has captivated her will.


Celest. One devil or other is still haunting me. One while here, another
while there. I have escaped Parmeno, and have fallen upon Lucrecia.


Melibea. Mother, what is it you say; what said the wench unto you?


Celestina. I cannot tell (Lady) I did not well hear her. But let her say what
she will; yet let me tell you: That there is not any thing more contrary in
great Cures, before strong and stout-hearted Surgeons, then weak and fainting
hearts, who with their great lamentations, their pittyfull words, and their
sorrowful gestures strike a fear into the patient, make him despair of his
recovery, and anger and trouble the Surgeon, which trouble makes him to alter
his hand, and direct his needle without (...) clearly know, that it is very
necessary (...) your (...), that there be no body about you, no, not so much
as (...). And therefore, it is very meet, that you command her absence
daughter Lucrecia, you must pardon me.


Melibea. Get you out quickly, be gone.

Lucrecia. Well, well, we are all undone I go, madame.

Celest. Your great pain and torment does likewise put boldness into me, as
also that I perceive by your suspicion, you have already swallowed some part of
my cure. But notwithstanding it is needful, that we bring a more manifest
remedy, and more wholesome mitigation of your pain, from the house of that
worthy one Calisto.


Melibea. Mother, I pray you, good now hold your peace; fetch not any thing
from his house, that may work my good. If you love me, do not so much as once
name him unto me.


Celest. Madame, I pray be patient. That which is the chief and principal
pille^* must not be broken. For then all our labor is lost: your wound is
great, and has need of a sharp cure. And hard (...) hard, does smooth and
mollify more effectually and more delicately. And wise men say, That the cure
of a launcing (...) behind it the greater skarre: And that without danger, no
danger is overcome. Have patience then with your self. For seldom is that
cured without pain, which in it self is painful. One nail drives out
another. And one sorrow expels another. Do not conceive hatred nor
disaffection, nor give your tongue leave to speak ill of so virtuous a person,
as Calisto, whom, if you did but know him.


Melibea. O you kill me^no more of him, for Gods sake no more. Did not I tell
you, that you should not commend him unto me? and that, you should not speak a
word of him neither good nor bad?


Celest. Madame, this is that other, and maine point in my cure; which if you,
by your impatience will not consent unto, my coming can little profit you. But
if you will (as you promised) be patient, you shall remain found, and out of
doubt, and Calisto be well apaid, and have no cause to complain. I did before
acquaint you with my cures, and with this invisible needle, which before it
come at you to stitch up your wound, you feel it, only but having it in my
mouth, and naming it unto you.


Melibea. So often will thou name this Gentleman unto me, that neither my
promise, nor the faith I plighted thee, will suffice to make me any longer to
endure your words. Wherein should he be well apaid? What do I owe unto him?
Wherein am I bound unto him? What charge have I ^ut him to? What has he ever
done for me? What necessity is there, that we must be driven to use him, as
the instrument of my recovery? More pleasing would it be unto me, that you
would tear my flesh and sinews asunder, and tear ou^ my (...), then (...)
utter such words as these.


Celestina. Without any rupture, or renting of your garments, love did lance
your breast; and therefore will not sunder your flesh, to ^ure your sore.


Melibea. How call you this grief, that has seized on the better part of my
body?


Celestina. Sweet Love.

Melibea. Tell me then, what thing this sweet Love may be? For only in the
very hea^ing of it named, my heart leapes for joy.


Celest. It is a concealed fire; a pleasing wound; a sauoury poison; a sweet
bitterness; a delightful grief; a cheerful torment; a sweet, yet cruel
hurt; and a gentle death.


Melibea. O wretched, that I am! for if thy relation be true, I rest doubtful
of my recovery: For, according to the contrariety which these names do carry,
that which shall be profitable for one, shall to another being more passion.


Celest. Let not your noble youth be diffident of recovery; be of good cheer;
take a good heart to you; and doubt not of your welfare: For where heaven gives
a wound, there it gives a remedy; and as it (...), so it heales; and so much
the sooner, because I know where the flower grows, that will free you from all
this torment.


Melibea. How is it called?

Celest. (...) not tell you.

Melibea. (...) and spare not.

Celestina. Calisto. O Madame; Malibea; ah woe is me, why woman, what mean
you? What a cowardly heart have you? What a fainting is here? O miserable that
I am, hold up your head, I pray lift it up; O accursed old woman! Must my steps
end this? If she go (...) ^way in a swound, they will kill me; if she revive,
she will be much pained: For she will never endure to publish her pain, nor
give me leave to exercise my cure. Why, Melibea, my sweet Lady; my fair
Angel; What Is the matter, Sweetheart? Where is your grief? why speak you not
unto me? What is become of your gracious and pleasing speech? Where is that
cheerful color, that was wont to beautify your cheeks? Open those
brightest Lamps, that ever nature tinded: Open your eyes, I say, those (...)
furnes, that are able to give light to darkness. Lucrecia, Lucrecia, Come
hither quickly; come quickly, I say, you shall see your Lady lie here in a
swound in my arms; run down quickly for a Iar^e of water.


Melibea. Softly, speak softly I pray; I Will see if I can rise; In no case do
not trouble the house.


Celestina. Ay me! Sweet Lady, do not sink any more: speak, speak unto me
as you were wont.


Melibea. I will, and much more then I was wont. But peace, I pray a while, and
do not trouble me.


Celestin. What will you have me to do (my precious pearl?) Whence arose this
sudden qualme? I believe, my points are broken.


Melibea. No; it is my honesty that is broken; it is my modesty that is broken;
my too much bashfulnesse and shamefastness, occasioned my swowning, which
being my natural and familiar friends, and companions, could not slightly
absent themselves from my face, but they would also carry away my color with
them for a while, my strength, my speech, and a great part of my understanding.
But now (my good Mistress, my faithful Secretary) since that which thou so
openly know, it is in vain for me to seek to smother it; many, yea many
days, are now ouerpast, since that noble Gentleman motioned his love unto me;
whose speech and name was then as hateful, as now the reviving thereof is
pleasing unto me: with thy Needles thou have stitcht up my wou^d; I am come to
thy Bent; it is in thy power to do with me what thou will. In my girdle, thou
carriedst away with thee the possession of my liberty: His anguish was my
greater torment; his pain my greater punishment. I highly praise and commend
your singular sufferance, your discreet boldness, your liberal pains, your
sollicitous and faithful steps, your pleasing speech, your good wisdom, your
excessive solicitude, and your profitable importunity: the Gentleman is much
bound unto you, and my self more; for my reproaches and reuilings could never
make thee to slack thy courage, thy strong continuance, and forcible
perseverance in thy suite, relying still on thy great subtilty and strength of
wit; or rather bearing thy self like a most faithful and trusty servant,
being then most diligent, when thou wast most reviled; the more I did disgrace
thee, the more wast thou importunate; the harsher answer I gave thee, the
better did thou seem to take it: when I was most angry, then wast thou most
mild and humble: and now, by laying aside all fear, thou have gotten that out
of my bosom, which I never thought to have discovered unto thee, or to any
other whosoever.


Celest. My most dear both Lady and friend, wonder not so much at this; for
those ends, that have their effect, give me daringnesse to endure those craggy
and dangerous by-waies, by which I come to such Recluses as your self. True it
is, that until I had resolved with my self, as well on my way hitherwards, as
also here in your house, I stood in great doubt, whether were I best discover
my petition unto you or no? When I did think on the great power of your
father, then did I fear; but when withal, I weygh'd the nobleness of
Calisto, then I grew bold again; when I observed your discretion, I waxed
timorous; but when I considered your virtue, and your courtesy, I recovered
new courage: in the one, I found fear; in the other, safety. And since,
Madame, you have been willing to grace me with the discovery of so great a
favor, as now you have made known unto me, declare your will unto me, lay
your secrets in my lap; put into my hands the managing of this matter, and I
will give it such a form, as both you and Calisto shall very shortly
accomplish your desires.


Melibea. O my Calisto! my dear Lord, my sweet and pleasing joy, if thy heart
feel the like torment, as mine, I wonder how thy absence gives thee leave to
live. O thou, both my mother, and mistress, so handle the business, that I
may presently see him, if you desire I should live.


Celest. See him? you shall both see him, and speak with him.

Melibea. Speak with him? it is impossible.

Celest. Nothing is impossible to a willing mind.

Melibea. Tell me how?

Celest. I have it in my head: Mary thus, within the doors of thy house.


Melibea. When?

Celest. This night.

Melibea. Thou shall be glorious in mine eyes, if thou compass this. But soft,
at what hour?


Celest. Just when the clock strikes twelve.

Melibea. Go, be gone, hye you, good Mistress, my faithful friend, and talk
with that Gentleman, and will him that he come very softly at his appointed
hour, and then we will conclude of things, as himself shall think fit to
order them.


Celest. Farewell. Lo, yonder is your mother making hitherward.

Melibea. Friend Lucrecia, my loyal servant, and faithful secretary, you have
here seen, that I have no power over my self; and what I have done, lies not
in my hands to help it. Love has made me prisoner to that Gentleman. I
entreat thee (for pity sake) that you will sign what you have seen, with
the seal of secresy, whereby I may come to the enjoying of so sweet a Love: In
requital whereof, thou shall be held by me, in that high regard, as thy
faithful service deserves.


Lucrecia. Madame, long before this, I perceived your wound, and sounded your
desire: I did much pity your torment; for, the more you sought to hide from me
the fire which did burn you, the more did those flames manifest themselves in
the color of your face, in the little quietness of your heart, in the
restlesnes of your members, in your tossing to and fro, in eating without any
appetite, and in your unableness to sleep: So that I did continually see from
time to time, as plainly as if I had been within you, most manifest, and
apparent signs of your wretched estate; but because in that instant, when as
will reigns in those whom we serve, or a disordinate appetite, it is fitting
for us that are servants, to obey them with bodily diligence, and not to check
and control them with the Artificial counsels of the tongue. And therefore
did I suffer with pain, held my peace with fear, concealed with fidelity;
though I always held it better to use sharp Counsel then smooth flattery.
But since that your Ladyship has no other remedy for your recovery, but
either to die or to live; it is very meet, that you should make choice of that
for the best, which in it self is best.


Alisa. How now neighbor? What Is the matter with you, that you are here thus
day by day?


Celestina. I wanted yesterday a little of my weight in the thread I sold, and
now I am come (according to my promise) for to make it up. And now that I have
delivered it, I am going away. Jove have you in his good keeping.


Alisa. And you too. Daughter Melibea, what would this old woman have?


Melibea. She would have sold me a little sublimated Mercury.


Alisa. I mary, I rather believe this, then that, which the old lewd Hag told
me. She was afraid, I would have been angry with her, and so she pop't me in
the mouth with a Lie. Daughter, take heed of her. For she is an old crafty
Fox; and as false as the devil. A whole Country can not afford you such
another treacherous huswife. Take you heed therefore (I say) of her. For, your
cunning and crafty thieves go always a prolling about your richest houses.
She knows by her treasons and false merchandise, how to change chaste
purposes. She causes an ill report, brings a bad name and fame upon those
tha^ have any thing to do with her. If she be but seen to have entered one
house thrice, it is enough to engender suspicion.


Lucrecia. My old Ladies Counsel comes too late.

Alisa. I charge you (Daughter) upon my blessing, and by that love which I
bear unto you, that if she come hitther any more, when I am out of the way,
that you do not give her any entertainment, no manner of welcome, no, not so
much as to show her any the least countenance of liking, lest it should
encourage her to come again. Let her find, that you stand upon your honesty
and reputation. And be you round and short with her in your answers, and she
will never come at you again. For true virtue is more feared then a sword.


Melibea. Is she a blade of that making? is she such a whipster? Is she one
of those, you know what? She shall never come at me more. And believe me
(Madame) I much joy in your good advice, and that you have so well instructed
me, of whom I ought to beware.


ACTVS XI.
THE ARGUMENT.
CELESTINA having taken her leave of Melibea, goes mumbling and talking along
the streets to her self. She espies Sempronio and Parmeno, who are going to
Saint Marie Magdalens to look out their Master Sempronio, takes with Calisto;
In the mean while comes in Celestina. They go all to Calisto's house.
Celestina delivers her message; and the means for their meeting appointed by
Melibea. In the interim that Celestina and Calisto are discoursing together,
Sempronio and Parmeno fall a talking between themselves; Celestina takes her
^eaue of Calisto, and gets her whom to her own house. She knocks at the
door; Elicia opens it unto her. They sup, and then go to take their rest.

INTERLOCVTORS. Celestina. Sempronio. Calisto. Parmeno. Elicia. CElestina. O
thrice happy day! would I were at home with all my joy, wherewith I go laden.
But I see Parmeno and Sempronio going to the Mi^tle-Groue: I will after them.
And if I meet with Calisto there, we will all along together to his house, to
demand a reward for the great good news that I bring him.


Sempronino. Take heed, Sir, lest by your long stay, you give occasion of
talk to the world. For your honesty have a care, that you make not your self
become a byword to the people. For now-a-dayes, it is commonly spoken amongst
them, He is an Hypocrite, that is too devout. For, what will they say of you,
if they see you thus, but s^^ffe in dirision at you, and say, He is gone to the
Mirtle-Groue to sacrifice some halfescore Hecatombes of sighs and ay-mees to
Venus son, to prosper and preferred him to the favor and fruition of some
Mistress? If you are oppressed with passion, endure it at home in your own
house, that the world may not perceive it. Discover not your grief unto
strangers, since the drum is in their hands, who know best how to beat it:
and your business in her hands, who knows best how to manage it.


Calisto. In whose hands?

Sempronio. In Celestina's?

Celestina. Who is that names Celestina? What say thou of this slave of
Calisto's? I have come trudging all along the Aug^rs street, to see if I could
overtake you, I did put my best leg foremost, but all would not do: the
skirts of my Petticoate were so long, and did so often interfold themselves
between my feet.


Calisto. O thou joy of the world! thou ease of my passions, thou relieueresse
of my pain, my eyes looking-glass, my heart does even exult for joy, in
beholding so honored a presence, an age so innobled with years; tell me, what
is it thou come with, what good news do thou bring? For I see thou lookst
cheerfully: And yet I know not of what terms my life does stand; in what it
consists.


Celest. In my tongue.

Calisto. What say thou then? Speak, thou that art my glory and comfort.
Deliver it more at large unto me.


Celestina. Sir, let us first go more privately; and as we go home to your
house, I will tell you that, which shall make you glad indeed.


Parme. Brother, the old woman looks merrily; Sure, she has sped well to day.


Sempr. Soft, listen what she says.

Celestina. All this day, Sir, have I been laboring in your business, and
have neglected other weighty and serious affairs, which did much concern me:
many do I suffer to live in pain, only that I may yield you comfort.
Besides, I have lost more by it, then you are aware of, but farewell it. All is
well lost, sithence I have brought my business to so good an end: And hear
you me, for I will tell it you in few words (for I love to be short) Melibea
is wholly at your service.


Calisto. O what do I hear?

Celest. Nay, she is more yours then her own: more at your service and
command, then of her father Pleberio.


Calisto. Speak softly (good mother) take heed what you say; let not my men
hear you, lest they should call thee fool. Melibea is my mistress, Melibea
is my desire, Melibea is my life, I am her ser^ant, I am her slave.


Sempr. Good Sir, with this distrustfulnesse of yours, with this vnderva^ewing
of your self, you interse^t such doubts, as cut off Celestina, in the midst of
her discourse; you would tire out a whole world with your disordered, and
confused interruptions. Why do you cross and bless your self? Why do you
keep such a wondering? It were better you would give her some thing for her
pains. For these words are worthy better payment, and expect no less at your
hands.


Calisto. Well have thou spoken, dear mother, I wot full well, that my small
reward can no ways reward your pains; but instead of a gown and a kirtle
(because Tradesmen shall not share with you) take this little chain, put it
about your neck, and go on with your discourse, and my joy.


Parm. Call you that a little chain? Heard you him, Sempronio? This
Spend-thrift makes no reckoning of it; but I assure you, I will not give my
part thereof for half a Mark of gold, let her share it never so ill.


Sempr. Peace, I say, for should my Master have ouer-heard you, you should have
had work enough, to pacify him, and to cure your self; So offended is he
already with your continual murmuring. As you love me (brother) hear, and
hold your peace; for to this end, thou have two ears, and but one tongue.


Parm. He has hanged himself so fast to that old woman's mouth, that he is
both deaf, dumb and blind, like a body without a soul, or a bell without a
clapper; insomuch, that if we should point at him scornefully with our
fingers, he would say, We lifted up our hands to heaven, imploring his happy
success in his love.


Sempr. Peace, hearken, listen well unto Celestina. On my soul, she deserves
it all, and more too, had he given it her. She speaks wonders.


Celest. Noble Calisto, to such a poor weak old woman as my self, you have
showed your self exceeding frank and liberal; but as every gift is esteemed
great, or little, in regard of him that gives it, I will not therefore compare
therewith my small desert, which it surpasses both in quality and quantity;
but rather measure it with your magnificence, before which it is nothing. In
requital whereof, I restore unto thee thy health, which was upon losing; thy
heart, which was upon fainting; and thy wits, which were upon turning. Melibea
is pained more for you, then you for her: Melibea loves you, and desires to see
you: Melibea spends more hours in thinking upon you, then on her self:
Melibea calls her self thine; and this she holds as a Title of liberty, and
with this, she allayes that fire, which burns more in her, then thy self.


Calisto. You my servants; Am I here? Hear I this? Look whether I am awake
or not? Is it day, or is it night? O thou great God of heaven, I beseech thee,
this may not prove a dream; Sure, I do not sleep, me thinks I am fully
awake. Tell me, mother, do thou make sport with me, in paying me with
words? Fear nothing, but tell me the truth; for thy going to and fro
deserves a great deal more then this.


Celest. The heart, that is wounded with desire, never entertaineth good news
for certain; nor bad for doubtful. But whether I jest, or no; your self
shall see, by going this night to her house (her self having agreed with me
about the time) appointing you to be just there as the clock strikes twelve,
that you may talk together through the chinks of the door; from whose own
mouth, you shall fully know my solicitude, and her desire, and the love which
she bears unto you, and who has caused it.


Calisto. It is enough; Is it possible, I should hope for so great a
happiness? Can so great a blessing light upon Calisto? I dye till that hour
come. I am not capable of so great a glory. I do not deserve so great a
favor, nor am I worthy to speak with so fair a Lady, who of her own
free will, should afford me so great a grace.


Celest. I have often heard, that it is harder to suffer prosperous, then
adverse fortune; because the one has never any quietude, and the other still
takes comfort. It is strange, Sir, that you will not consider who you are, nor
the time that you have spent in her service; nor the person, whom you have
made to be your means: And likewise, that hitherto, thou have ever been in
doubt of having her, and yet did still endure all with patience; and now,
that I do certify unto thee the end of thy torment, will thou put an end to
thy life? Consider, consider, I pray, with thy self, that Celestina is on thy
side; and that although all should be wanting unto thee, which in a Lover were
to be required, I would sell thee for the most complete gallant of the world;
for I would make for thee mountains of most craggy rocks, to grow plain, and
smooth. Nay, more, I would make thee go to through the deepest channel, or the
lightest swelling sea, without wetting of thy foot: you know not on whom you
have bestowed your Largess.


Calisto. Remember your self, mother, did you not tell me, that she would
come to me of her own accord?


Celestina. Yes, and that upon her very knees.

Sempr. Pray heaven it be not a false alarm; one thing rumord, another
purposed: It may be a false fire-worke, to blow us all up. I fear me, it is a
false train, a made match, and a trappe purposely set to catch us all.
Bethink your self, mother, that so men use to give crooked pinnes wrapped up in
bread; poysonsome pills rolled up in Sugar, that they may not be seen and
perceived.


Parmeno. I never heard thee speak better in my life: the sudden yielding of
this Lady, and her so speedy consenting to all that Celestina would have her,
ingenders a strong suspicion within me; and makes me to fear, that deceiving
our will with her sweet and ready words, she will rob us on the wrong side, as
your Gypsies use to do, when they look in our hands to tell us our fortunes.
Besides, mother, it is an old saying: that with fair words, many wrongs are
revenged: and the counterfeit stalking horse, which is made but of Canuasse,
with his dissembled gate, and the alluring sound of the tinckling of a bell,
drives the Partridges into the net: the songs of the Sirens deceive the simple
Mariner with the sweetness of their voices: Even so, she with her exceeding
kindness, and sudden concession of her love, will seize hand-smooth on a whole
drove of us at once, and purge her innocence with Calisto's honor, and our
deaths: Being like herein to the teatling Lamb, which suckes both her damm's
teat, and that of another Ewe. She by securing us, will be revenged both of
Calisto, and all of us; so that with the great number of people which they have
in the house, they may catch both the old ones and the young one together in
the nest, whilst she shrugging and rubbing her self by the fire side, may
safely say, He is out of gunshot, that rings the bell to the battle.


Calisto. Peace, you Knaves, you Villains, you suspicious Rascals, will you
make me believe that Angels can do ought that is ill? I tell you, Melibea is
but a dissembled Angel, that lives here amongst us.


Sempro. What? will you still play the Heretic? Harken to him, Parmeno; but
take thou no care at all; let it not trouble thee. For, if there be any double
dealing, or that the play prove foul, he shall pay for all; for our feet be
good, and we will betake us to our heels.


Celestina. Sir, you are in the right, and these in the wrong; ouer-lading
their thoughts with vain suspicions and iealousies; I have done all that I was
enjoined: and so I leave you to your joys. Good Angels defend you and direct
you: as for my self, I am very well satisfied. And if you shall have further
occasion to use me, either in this particular, or any thing else, you shall
find me ever ready to do you the best service I can.


Parmeno. Ha, ha, he.

Sempronio. I pray thee, why do thou laugh?

Parme. To see what haste the old Trot makes to be gone: she thinks every
hour a year, till she be gone clear away with the chain; she cannot
persuade her self, that it is as yet sure enough in her hands; for she
knows, that she is as little worthy of that chain, as Calisto is of his
Melibea.


Sempr. What would you have such an old whorish Bawd as she, to do? who knows
and understands that which we silence and keep secret, and uses to patch up
seven Virginities at a clap for two pieces of Silver: And now, that she sees
her self to be laden with gold, what, I say, would you have her to do, but to
make it safe and sure, by taking possession thereof, for fear lest he should
take it from her again, after that he has had his desire? But let us beware
of the Devil, and take heed that we go not together by the ^ares, when we
come to divide the spoil.


Calisto. Mother, fare you well, I will lay me down to sleep, and rest my
self a while, that I may redeem the nights past, and satisfy the better for
that, which is to come.


Celestina. Tha, ta, ta.

Elicia. Who knockes?

Celestina. Daughter Elicia, open the door.

Elicia. How chance you come so late? It is not well done of you (being an old
woman, as you are) for you may hap to stumble, where you may so fall, that it
may be your death.


Celest. I fear not that (wench:) For I consult with my self in the day,
which way I shall go in the night; for I never go near any bridge, bench,
pit or Causey: for (as it is in the Proverb) He goes not safe, nor never
shall, who goes too close unto the wall: And he goes still most safe and
sound, whose steps are plaste on plainest ground: and I had rather foul my
shoes with dirt, then be-bloody my Kerchiefe at every walls corner. But does
it not grieve thee to be here?


Elicia. Why should it grieve me?

Celest. Because the company I left here with you, is gone, and you are all
alone.


Elicia. It is some four hours ago, since they went hence; and would you
have me to think on that now?


Celest. Indeed the sooner they left you, the more reason you had to think
thereon; but let us leave to talk of their speedy going, and of my long
staying, and let us first provide for our supper, and then for our sleep.


ACTVS XIJ.
THE ARGUMENT.
MIdnight being come, Calisto, Sempronio, and Parmeno, being well armed, go
toward the house of Melibea. Lucrecia and Melibea stand at the door, watching
for Calisto. Calisto comes; Lucrecia first speaks unto him; she calls Melibea.
Lucrecia goes aside; Melibea and Calisto talk together, the door being
betwixt them; Parmeno and Sempronio withdraw themselves a little ways off.
They hear some people coming along the street; they prepare themselves for
flight. Calisto takes his leave of Melibea, leaving order for his return the
next night following; Pleberio awakened with the noise which he heard in the
street, calls to his wife Alisa; they ask of Melibea who that was, that walked
up and down in her chamber? Melibea answers her father, by faining she was
athirst. Calisto with his servants, go talking home to his house. Being come
home, he lays him down to sleep; Parmeno and Sempronio go to Celestina's
house, they demand their share of her pains; Celestina dissembles the matter,
they fall a wrangling; they lay hands on Celestina, they murder her. Elicia
cries out; the Justice comes, and apprehends them both.

INTERLOCVTORS. Calisto, Lucrecia, Melibea, Parmeno, Sempronio, Pleberio,
Alisa, Celestina, Elicia. CAlisto. Sirs, what is a clock?

Sempr. It struck now ten.

Calisto. O how it discontents me, to see servants so wretchlesse! Of my much
mindfulnesse for this nights meeting, and your much vnmindfulnesse, and extreme
carelessness, there might have been had some indifferent both remembrance, and
care; how inconsiderately (knowing how much it imports me, to be either
ten or eleven) do thou answer me at hap-hazard, with that which comes
first to mouth? O unhappy I, if by chance I had ouerslept my self! and my
demand had depended on the answer of Sempronio, to make of eleven, ten, and of
twelve, but eleven? Melibea might have come forth; I had not gone out; and she
returned back: so that, neither my misery should have had an end, nor my
desire have taken effect. And therefore it is not said in vain, That another
man's harm hangs but by one hair, no man caring whether he sink or swim.


Sempr. Me thinks it is as great an error in a man, to ask what he knows,
as to answer to what he knows not. It were better (Sir) that we should spend
this hour that remains, in preparing weapons, then in propounding questions.


Calisto. The fool says well, I would not at such a time receive a
displeasure. I will not think ont that which may be, but on that which has
been; not on the harm which may arise by his negligence, but on the good
which may come by my carfulness. I will give leisure to my anger, and will
either quite dismiss it, or force it to be more remiss. Parmeno, Take down
my Corslets, and arm your selves, so shall we go the safer: For it is in the
Proverb, Half the battle is then waged, when a man is well prepared.


Parm. Lo, Sir, here they be.

Calisto. Come help me here to put them on. Do you look on, Sempronio, and
see if any body be stirring in the street.


Sempr. Sir, I see not any, and though there were, yet the darkness of the
night is such, and so great, that it is impossible for any that shall meet us,
either to see or know us.


Calisto. Let us along then. Here, my masters, this way; for though it be
somewhat about, yet is it the more private way, and the lesser frequented. Now
it strikes twelve, a good hour.


Parme. We are near unto the place.

Calisto. We are come in very good time. Go thou, Parmeno, and peep in at
the door, to see if that Lady be come or no?


Parmeno. Who, I, Sir? God forbid, that I should mar that which I never made.
Much better were it (Sir) that your presence should be her first encounter,
lest in seeing me, she should be moved to anger, in seeing so many acquainted
with that, which she so secretly desires to be done, and undergoes with so
great fear: as also, because she may happily imagine that you mock her.


Calisto. O how well have thou spoken! thou have given me my life, by giving
me this sound advice; for there needs nothing more to bear me home dead to
my house, then that she through my improuidence, should have gone her ways
back: I will go thither my self, and do you stay here.


Parmeno. What do thou think ( Sempronio) of the fool our Master, who
thought to have made me to be his Target, for to receive the encounter of this
first danger? What do I know, who stands between or behind the doors? What
know I if there be any treason intended, or no? What can I tell, whether
Melibea have plotted this, to cry quittance with our Master, for this his great
presumption? Besides, we are not sure, whether the old Trot told him truth or
no. Thou know not, Parmeno, how to speak. Thy life shall be taken from thee,
and thou never the wiser for it: thy soul shall be let forth, and thou not know
who was he that did it. Do not thou turn flatterer, nor sooth up thy Master in
every thing, that he would have thee, and then thou shall never have cause to
weep for other men's woes, or to mourn for others miseries. Do thou not
follow Celestina's counsel in that which is fit and convenient for thee, and
thou were as good go break thy neck blindfold. Go on with thy good
persuasions, and faithful admonitions, and thou shall be well cudgelled for
thy labor. Turn the leaf now no more, lest thou be forced to bid the world
good night, before thou be willing to leave it. I will solemnize this as my
birthday, since I have escaped so great a danger.


Sempr. Hush, I say, softly ( Parmeno) softly. Do not you keep such a leaping
and skipping, not for joy make such a noise, lest you may hap to be heard.


Parmeno. Content your self (brother) hold your peace, I pray, for I cannot
contain my self for very joy, to think, that I should make him believe, that
it was most fit for him to go to the door; when as indeed, I did only put
him on, because I held it fittest for mine own safety. Who could ever have
brought a business more handsomely about for his own good, then I my self
have done? Thou shall see me do many such things, if thou shall hereafter but
observe me, which every man shall not know of, as well toward Calisto
himself, as all those who shall any way inter-meddle, or interpose themselves
in this business. For, I am assured that this Damsel is but the bait to this
hook, whereat he must hang himself: or that flesh which is thrown out to
Vultures, whereof he that eats, is sure to pay soundly for it.


Semp. Let this pass, never trouble thy head with these iealousies, and
suspicions of thine; no, though they should happen to be true. But prepare thy
self, and like a tall soldier, be in readiness upon the first Alarm, or
word given, to betake thee to thy heels. Do like the men of Villa-Diego, who
being besieged, ran away by night, with their Breeches in their hands.


Parmeno. We have read both in one book, and are both of the same mind; I
have not only their Breeches, but their light easy Buskins, that I may run
away the nimbler, and outstrip my fellows. And I am glad (good brother) that
thou have advised me to that, which otherwise, even for very shame, and fear
of thee, I should never have done: as for our Master, if he chance to be heard,
or otherwise discovered, he will never escape, I fear me, the hands of
Pleberio's people; whereby he may hereafter demand of us, how we behau'd our
selves in his defense, or that he shall ever be able to accuse us, that we
cowardly forsook him.


Semp. O my friend ( Parmeno) how good and joyful a thing is it, for fellows
and companions to live together in love and unity! And though Celestina should
prove good to us in no other thing, save only this; yet in this alone has
she done us service enough, and deserved very well at our hands.


Parmeno. No man can deny that, which in it self is manifest. It is apparent,
that we for modesties sake, and because we would not be branded with the
hateful name of cowardice, we stayed here, expecting together with our
Master, no less then death, though we did not so much deserve it as he did.


Sempr. Melibea should be come. Hark, me thinks I hear them whispering each
to other.


Parm. I fear rather that it is not she, but some one that counterfaytes her
voice.


Sempr. Heavens defend us from the hands of Traitors; I pray God, they have
not betaken themselves to that street through which we were resolved to fly.
For I fear nothing else but that.


Calisto. This stirring and murmur which I fear, is not of one single person
alone. Yet will I speak, come, what will come, or be who as will be there.
Madame; Mistress, be you there?


Lucrecia. If I be not deceived, this is Calisto's voice. But for the more
surety, I will go a little nearer. Who is that that speaks? Who is there
without?


Calisto. He that is come addressed to your command.

Lucrecia. Madame, why come you not? Come hither, I say, be not afraid, for
here is the Gentleman you wot of.


Melibea. Speak softly (you fool.) Mark him well, that you may be sure it is
he.


Lucrecia. Come hither I tell you, it is he, I know him by his voice.


Calisto. I fear me, I am deluded, it was not Melibea that spoke unto me, I
hear some whispering; I am undone. But live or dye, I have not the power to be
gone.


Melibea. Lucrecia, go a little aside; and give me leave to call unto him.
Sir, what is your name? Who willed you to come hither.


Calisto. She that is worthy to command all the world, she whom I may not merit
to serve. Let not your Ladyship fear to discover her self to this Captive of
your gentle disposition; for the sweet sound of those your words, which shall
never fall from my ears, give me assurance that you are that Lady Melibea,
whom my heart adoreth; I am your servant Calisto.


Melibea. The strange and excessine boldness of thy messages, has enforced me
( Calisto) to speak with thee: who having already received my answer to your
reasons, I know not what you may imagine to get more out of my love, then what
I then made known unto you. Banish therefore from thee, those vain and
foolish thoughts, that both my honor and my person may be secured from any
hurt they may receive by an ill suspicion. For which purpose, I am come hither
to take order for your dispatch, and my quietness. Do not, I beseech you, put
my good name and reputation upon the balance of backbiting and detracting
tongues.


Calisto. To hearts prepared with a strong and dauntlesse resolution against
all adversities whatsoever, nothing can happen unto them, that shall easily be
able to shake the strength of their wall. But that unhappy man, who
weaponlesse, and disarmed, not thinking upon any deceit or Ambuscado, puts
himself within the doors of your safe conduct and protection, whatsoever in
such a case falls out contrary to my expectation, it cannot in all reason but
torment me, and pierce through the very soul of me, breaking all those
Magazines and storehouses, wherein this sweet news was laid up. O miserable
and unfortunate Calisto! O, how have thou been mocked and deluded by thy
servants! O thou coozening and deceitful Celestina; thou might at least have
let me alone, and given me leave to dye, and not gone about to revive my hope,
to add thereto more fuel to the fire, which already does sufficiently waste
and consume me. Why did thou falsify this my Ladies message? Why have thou
thus with thy tongue given cause to my despair, and utter undoing? Why did
thou command me to come hither? Was it that I might receive disgrace,
interdiction, diffidence, and hatred, from no other mouth, but that which
keeps the keys of my perdition, or happiness? O thou enemy to my good! Did
not thou tell me, that this my Lady would be favorable, and gracious unto
me; Did not thou tell me, that of her own accord, she had commanded this
her captive to come to this very place, where now I am? Not to banish me
afresh from her presence, but to repeal that banishment, whereunto she had
sentenced me by her former command? Miserable that I am, whom shall I trust,
or in whom may I hope to find any faith? Where is truth to be had? Who is void
of deceit? Where does not falsehood dwell? Who is he that shows himself an
open enemy? or who is he that shows himself a faithful friend? Where is that
place, wherein treason is not wrought? Who, I say, durst trespass so much upon
my patience, as to give me such cruel hope of destruction?


Melibea. Cease (good Sir) your true and just complaints. For neither my heart
is able to endure it, nor mine eyes any longer to dissemble it; thou weepest
out of grief, judging me cruel; and I weep out of joy, seeing thee so
faithful. O my dearest Lord, and my life's whole happiness; how much more
pleasing would it be unto me, to see thy face, then to hear thy voice! But
sithence that at this present we cannot enjoy each others as we would, take
thou the assignement, and seal of those words, which I sent unto thee,
written, and engrossed in the tongue of that thy diligent and careful
messenger. All that which I then said, I do here anew confirm. I acknowledge
it as my Deed, and hold the Assurance I have made thee, to be good and
perfect. Good Sir, do not you weep; dry up your tears, and dispose of me as
you please,


Calisto. O my dear Lady! Hope of my glory; Easeresse of my pain, and my
hearts joy: What tongue can be sufficient to give thee thanks, that may equal
his so extraordinary and incomparable a kindness; which in this instant of so
great and extreme a sorrow, thou have bin willing to confer upon me; in being
willing (I say) that one so mean, and unworthy as my self, should be by thee
enabled to the inioying of thy sweetest love; whereof, although I was ever more
most desirous, yet did I always deem my self unworthy thereof, weighing thy
greatness, considering thy estate, beholding thy perfection, contemplating thy
beauty, and looking into my small merit, and thy great worth; besides, other
thy singular graces, thy commendable, and well-knowne virtues? Again; O thou
great God, how can I be ungrateful unto thee, who so miraculously have wrought
for me so great and strange wonders? O, how long ago did I entertain this
thought in my heart, and as a thing impossible, repeld it from my memory,
until now, that the bright beams of thy most clear shining countenance, gave
light unto my eyes, inflamed my heart, awakened my tongue, enlarged my desert,
abridged my cowardice, vnwreathed my shrunke-vp spirits, reinforced my
strength, put life and metal into my hands and feet; and in a word, infused
such a spirit of boldness into me, that they have borne me up by their power,
unto this high estate, wherein (with happiness) I now behold my self, in
hearing this thy sweet-pleasing voice; which if I had not heertofore known,
and sented out the sweet and wholesome savor of thy words, I should hardly have
believed they would have been without deceit. But now, that I am well assured
of thy pure and noble, both blood and actions, I stand amazed at the gaze of my
good, and with a stricter eye, begin to view and look upon my self, to see
whether I am that same Calisto, whom so great a blessing has befalne?


Melibea. Calisto; Thy great worth, thy singular graces, and thy nobleness of
birth, have (ever since I had true notice of thee) wrought so effectually with
me, that my heart has not so much as one moment bin absent from thee. And
although (now these many days) I have strove, and strove again to dissemble
it, yet could I not so smother my thoughts, but that as soon as that Woman
returned thy sweet name unto my remembrance, I discovered my desire, and
appointed our meeting, at this very place and time: Where, I beseech thee to
take order for the disposing of my person, according to thine own good will
and pleasure. These doors debar us of our joy, whose strong locks and bars
I curse, as also mine own weak strength. For were I stronger, and they
weaker, neither should thou be displeased, nor I discontented.


Calisto. What (Madame) is it your pleasure, that I should suffer a paltry
piece of wood to hinder our joy? Never did I conceive, that any thing, save
thine own will, could possibly hinder us. O troublesome and sport-hindring
doors, I earnestly desire, that you may be burned with as great a fire, as the
torment is great, which you give me; for then the third part thereof would be
sufficient to consume you to ashes in a moment. Give me leave (sweet Lady) that
I may call my servants, and command them to break them open.


Parme. Hark, hark ( Sempronio) Hear thou not what he says? He is coming
to seek after us; we shall make a badde year of it, we shall run into a
pecke of troubles. I tell you truly, I like not of his coming. This love of
theirs, I verily persuade my self, was begun in an unlucky hour; if you
will go, go; for I Will stay here no longer.


Sempr. Peace, hark; she will not consent we come.

Melibea. What means my Love? Will you undo me? Will you wound my reputation?
Give not your will the reins: your hope is certain, and the time short: even
as soon as your self shall appoint it. Besides, your pain is single, mine
double; yours for your self, mine for us both: you only feel your own
grief, I both your own and mine. Content your self therefore, and come you to
morrow at this very hour, and let your way be by the wall of my garden; for if
you should now break down these cruel doors, though happily we should not be
presently heard, yet to morrow morning there would arise in my fathers house a
terrible suspicion of my error: and you know, besides, that by so much the
greater is the error, by how much the greater is the party that erreth: And in
the turning of a hand, will be noysed through the whole City.


Sempr. In an unfortunate hour came we hither this night; we shall stay here,
till the day has overtaken us, if our master go on thus leysurely, and make
no more haste. And albeit fortune has hitherto well befriended us in this
business; yet I fear me, if we stay ouerlong, we shall be ouerheard, either
by some of Pleberio's household, or of his neighbors.


Par. I would have had thee bin gone 2. hours ago; for he will never give over,
but still find some occasion to continue his discourse.


Calisto. My dear Lady, my joy and happiness; why do thou style this an
error, which was granted unto me by the Destinies; and seconded by Cupid
himself, to my petitions in the Mirtle-Groue?


Parme. Calisto talks* idly, surely, he is not well in his wits. I am of the
belief (brother) that he is not so devout. That which that old traitorous
Trot, with her pestiferous Sorceries has compassed and brought about, he
sticks not to say, that the Destinies have granted, and wrought for him: and
with this confidence, he would adventure to break open these doors; who shall
no sooner have given the first stroke, but that presently he will be heard, and
taken by her fathers servants, who lodge hard by.


Sempr. Fear nothing ( Parmeno) for we are far enough off. And upon the very
first noise that we hear, we will betake us straight to our heels, and make
our flight our best defense. Let him alone, let him take his course, for if he
do ill, he shall pay for it.


Parm. Well have thou spoken; thou know my mind, as well as if thou had bin
within me* Be it as thou have said; let us ^^un death; for we are both young;
and not to desire to dye, nor to kill, is not cowardice, but a natural
goodness. Pleberio's followers, they are but fools and madmen, they have not
that mind to their meat and their sleep, as they have to be brabbling and
quarrelling. What fools then should we be, to fall together by the ears with
such enemies, who do not so much affect Victory and Conquest, as continual
War, and endless contention? O, if thou did but see (brother) in what
posture I stand, thou would be ready to burst with laughing. I stand
sideling, my legs abroad, my left foot foremost, ready to take the start; the
skirts of my Cassocke tuckt under my girdle, my Buckler clapped close to my arm,
that it may not hinder me; and I verily believe, that I should out-runne the
swiftest Buck; so monstrously am I afraid of staying here.


Sempronio. I stand better; for I have bound my Sword and Buckler both
together, that they may not fall from me when I run; and have clapped my Caske in
the cape of my cloak.


Parme. But the stones you had in it, What have thou done with them?


Sempro. I have turned them all out, that I might go the lighter; for I have
enough to do to carry this Corslet, which your importunity made me put on; for
I could have been very well content to have left it off, because I thought it
would be too heavy for me, when I should run away. Hark, hark, hear thou
Parmeno? the business goes ill with us; we are but dead men. Put on, away, be
gone, make toward Celestina's house, that we may not be cut off, by betaking
us to our own house.


Parmeno. Fly, fly, you run too slowly. Passion of me, if they should
chance to overtake us. Throw away thy Buckler and all.


Sempr. Have they killed our Master? Can you tell?

Parmeno. I know not. Say nothing to me, I pray; Run, and hold your peace;
as for him, he is the least of my care.


Sempronio. Zit, zit, Parmeno, not a word; turn, and be still; for it is
nothing, but the Alguazills men, who make a noise as they pass through this
other street.


Parme. Take your eyes in your hand, and see you be sure. Trust not I say, too
much to those eyes of yours; they may mistake, taking one thing for another;
they have not left me one drop of blood in my body. Death had e'n almost
swallowed me up; for me thought still as I ran, they were cutting and
ca^bonading my shoulders. I never in my life remember, that I was in the like
fear, or ever saw my self in the like danger of an affront, though I have
gone many a time through other men's houses, and through places of much peril,
and hard to pass. Nine years was I servant to Guadaluppe, and a thousand
times my self and others were at buffets, cutting one another for life, yet
was I never in that fear of death, as now.


Sempronio. And did not (I pray) serve at Saint Michaels? and mine Host in the
Marketplace? and Molleias the gardener; I also (I tro) was at fisty-cuffes
with those which threw stones at the Sparrowes, and other the like birds, which
sat upon a green Popler that we had, because with their stones, they did
spoil the herbs in the garden; But God keep thee, and enery good man from
the sight of such weapons as these: these are shrewd tools; this is true fear
indeed: and therefore it is not said in vain; Laden with Iron, laden with
fear. Turn, turn back; for it is the Alguazill, that is certain.


Melibea. What noise is that ( Calisto) which I hear in the street? It seems
to be the noise of some that fly and are pursued; for your own sake and mine,
have a care of your self; I fear me, you stand in danger.


Calisto. I warrant you, Madame, fear you nothing; for I stand on a safeguard.
They should be my men, who are madcaps, and disarme as many as pass by them;
and belike, some one has escapt them, after whom they hasten.


Melibea. Are they many, that you brought?

Calisto. No (Madame) no more but two; but should half a dozen set upon them,
they would not be long in disarming them, and make them fly; they are such a
couple of tall lusty fellows; they are men of true, and well approved metal;
choice lads for the nonste; for I come not hither with a fire of straw, which
is no sooner in, but out. And were it not in regard of your honor, they should
have broken these doors in pieces; and in case we had been heard, they should
have freed both your self and me from all your fathers servants.


Melibea. O! of all loves, let not any such thing be attempted; yet it glads me
much that you are so faithfully attended; that bread is well bestowed which
such valiant servants eat. For that love (Sir) which you bear unto me, since
Nature has inricht them with so good a gift, I pray make much of them, and
reward them well; to the end that in all things, they may be trusty and secret,
that concern thy service; and when for their boldness and presumption, thou
shall either check, or correct them; intermixe some favors with thy
punishments, that their (...) and courage may not be daunted, and abated, but
be stirred and provoked to out dare dangers, when thou shall have occasion to
use them.


Parme. Sist, Sist; Hear you Sir? make haste and be gone, for here is a great
company coming along with To^ches; and unless you make haste, you will be
seen, and known; for here is not any place, where you may hide your self
from their view.


Calisto. O unfortunate that I am! How am (enforced (Lads) against my will to
take my leave! Believe me, the fear of death would not work so much upon me,
as the fear of your honor does; but since it is so, that we must part; Angels
be the guardians of thy fair person. My coming (as you have ordered it) shall
be by the garden.


Melibea. Be it so, and all happiness be with you.

Pleberio. Wife, are you asleep?

Alisa. No, Sir.

Pleberio. Do not you hear some noise, or stirring in your daughters
withdrawing chamber?


Alisa. Yes mary do I. Melibea, Melibea?

Pleberio. She does not hear you; I will call a little louder. Daughter
Melibea?


Melibea. Sir.

Pleberio. Who is that, that tramples up and down there, and makes that
stirring to and fro in your chamber?


Melibea. It is Lucrecia (Sir) who went forth to fetch some water for me to
drink, for I was very thirsty.


Pleberio. Sleep again (daughter) I thought it had been something else.


Lucre. A little noise (I perceive) can wake them; me thought they spoke
somewhat fearfully, as if all had not been well.


Melibea. There is not any so gentle a creature, who with the love or fear of
it is young, is not somewhat moved. What would they have done, had they had
certain, and assured knowledge of my going down?


Calisto. My Son, shut the door; and you Parmeno, bring up a light.


Parm. You were better (Sir) to take your rest; and that little that it is till
day, to take it out in sleep.


Calisto. I will follow thy counsel; for it is no more then needs. I want
sleep exceedingly; but tell me, Parmeno, what do thou think of that old
woman, whom thou did dispraise so much unto me? what a piece of work has
she brought to pass? what could we have done without her?


Parme. Neither had I any feeling of your great pain; nor knew I the
gentleness, and well-deseruingnesse of Melibea; and therefore am not to be
blamed. But well did I know both Celestina, and all her cunning tricks and
devices; and did thereupon advise you, as became a servant to advise his
Master, and as I thought, for the best; but now I see, she is become another
woman, she is quite changed from what she was, when I first knew her.


Calisto. How? changed? How do thou mean?

Parmeno. So much, that had I not seen it, I should never have believed it:
but now, heaven grant you may live as happy, as this is true.


Calisto. But tell me; did thou hear what past betwixt me and my Mistress?
what did you do all that while? were you not afraid?


Sempr. Afraid, Sir? of what? all the world could not make us afraid; did you
ever find us to be fearful? did you ever see any such thing in us? we stood
waiting for you well provided, and with our weapons in our hands.


Calisto. Slept you not a whit? took you not a little nappe?

Sempronio. Sleep, Sir? It is for boys and children to sleep* I did not so
much as once sit down, nor put one leg over another, watching still as
diligently as a Cat for a Mouse; that if I had heard but the least noise in the
world, I might presently have leapt forth, and have done as much as my strength
should have been able to perform. And Parmeno, though till now, he did not
seem to serve you in this business with any great willingness, he was as
glad, when hespy'd the Torches coming, as the Wolf, when he spies the dust
of a drove of cattle, or flock of sheep; hoping still that he might make his
prey, till he saw how many they were.


Calisto. This is no such wonder ( Sempronio) never marvel at it; for it is
natural in him to be valiant; and though he would not have bestirred himself
for my sake, yet would he have laid about him because such as he cannot go
against that which they be used unto. for though the Fox change his hair, yet
he never changes his nature; he will keep himself to his custom, though
he cannot keep himself to his color. I told my Mistress Melibea, what was
in you, and how safe I held my self, having you at my back for my guard. My
sons; I am much bound unto you both, pray to heaven for our welfare and good
success; and doubt not, but I will more fully guerdon your good service. Good
night, and heaven send you good rest.


Parm. Whither shall we go ( Sempronio?) To our chamber and go sleep, or to
the Kitchen and break our fast?


Sempr. Go thou whither thou will, as for me, ever it be day, I will get me to
Celestina's house, and see if I can recover my part in the chain: she is a
crafty Hileding, and I will not give her time to invent some one villainous
trick or other whereby to shift us off, and coozen us of our shares.


Parme. It is well remembered, I had quite forgot it; let us go both together,
and if she stand upon points with us, let us put her into such a fear, that
she may be ready to bewray her self; for money goes beyond all friendship.


Sempr. Cist, cist, not a word; for her bed is hard by this little window
here; let me knock her up: Tha, tha, tha; Mistress Celestina, Open the
door.


Celest. Who calls?

Sempronio. Open door, your Sons be here.

Celest. I have no sons that be abroad at this time of night.

Sempronio. It is Parmeno, and Sempronio; open the door; we are come hither to
break our fast with you.


Celest. O ye mad lads, you wanton wags, Enter, enter, how chance you come so
early? It is but now break of day, what have you done? what has past? Tell me,
how goes the world? Calisto's hopes, are they alive or dead? Has he her, or has
he her not? how stands it with him?


Sempronio. How, mother? Had it not been for us, his soul ever this had gone
seeking her eternal rest; and if it were possible to prize the debt wherein
he stands bound unto us, all the wealth he has, were not sufficient to make
us satisfaction. So true, is that triuiall saying; that the life of man, is of
more worth, then all the gold in the world.


Celest. Have you been in such danger, since I saw you? Tell me, how was it?
How was it I pray?


Sempronio. Mary in such danger, that as I am an honest man, my blood still
boyles in my body, to think upon it.


Celest. Sit down, I beseech you, and tell me how it was.

Parmeno. It will require a long discourse; besides, we have fretted out our
hearts, and are quite tired with the trouble and toil, we have had, you may
do better to provide something for his and my breakefast: it may be, when we
have eaten, our choler will be somewhat allayd; for I swear unto thee, I
desire not now to meet that man that desires peace. I should now glory to light
upon some one, on whom I might revenge my wrath, and stanch my anger; for I
could not do it on those that caused it: so fast did they fly from my fury.


Celestina. The pockes canker out my carcass to death, if thou make me not
afraid to look on thee, thou look so fierce and so ghastly. But for all
this, I do believe you do but jest. Tell me, I pray thee Sempronio, as thou
love me what has befalne you?


Sempronio. By heavens, I am not my self, I come hither I know not ^ow,
without wit, or reason. But as for you (fellow Parmeno) I cannot but find
fault with you, for not tempring of your choler, and using more moderation in
your angry mood; I would have thee look otherwise now, and not carry that
sour countenance here, as thou did there, when we incountred so many; for
mine own part, before those, that I knew could do but little, I never made
show that I could do much. Mother, I have brought hither my arms all broken
and battred in pieces, my Buckler without it is ring of Iron, the plates being
cut asunder, my Sword like a Saw, all to behack't and hewd, my Caske strangely
bruised, beaten as flat as a Cake, and dented in with the blows that came
hammering on my head: so that I have not any thing in the world to go further
with my Master, when he shall have occasion to use me. For it is agreed on,
that my Master shall this night have access unto his Mistress, by the way of
her garden. Now for to furnish my self anew, if my life lay on it, I know not
where to have one penny or farthing.


Celest. Since it is spoiled and broken in your Masters service, go to your
Master for more, let him (a Gods name) pay for it. Besides, you know it is with
him, but ask and have; he will presently furnish you, I warrant you. For he
is none of those who say to their servants: Live with me, and look out some
other to maintain thee; he is so frank, and of so liberal a disposition,
that he will not give thee money for this only, but much more, if need be.


Sempr. Tush, what is this to the purpose? Parmeno's be also spoiled and marred.
After this reckoning, we may spend our Master all that he has in arms. How
can you in conscience think, or with what face imagine, that I should be so
importunate, as to demand more of him, then what he has already done of his
own accord? He for his part has done enough, I would not it should be said of
me, that he has given me an inch, and that I should take an ell. There is a
reason in all things; he has given us a hundred crowns in gold; he has given
us, besides, a chain; three such picks more, will pick out all the wax in
his ear; he has, and will have a hard market of it. Let us content our
selves with that which is reason; Let us not lose all, by seeking to gain more
then is meet; for he that imbraceth much, holds little.


Celest. How wittily this Ass thinks he has spoken! I swear to thee, by the
reverence of this my old age, had these words been spoken after dinner, I
should have said, that we had all of us taken a cup too much; that we had
been all drunk. Art thou well in thy wits, Sempronio? What has thy
remuneration to do with my reward? Thy payment with my merit? Am I bound to
buy you weapons? Must I repair your losses, and supply your wants? Now I
think upon it; let me be hanged, or dye any other death, if thou have not
took hold of a little word, that carelessly slipped out of my mouth the other
day, as we came along the street; for as (I remember) I then told you, that
what I had was yours; and that I would never be wanting unto you in any thing,
to the utmost of my poor ability; and that if Fortune did prosper my business
with your Master, that you should lose nothing by it; But you know ( Sempronio)
that words of compliment and kindness, are not obligatory, nor bind me to
do, as you would have me; all is not gold that glisters, for then it would be
a great deal cheaper then it is. Tell me ( Sempronio) if I have not hit the
right nail on the head? Thou may see by this, that though I am old, that I
can divine as much as thou can imagine. In good faith (Son) I am as full of
grief, as ever my heart can hold, I am even ready to burst with sorrow and
anguish. As soon as ever I came from your house, and was come home; I gave the
chain I brought hither with me, to this fool Elicia, that she might look
upon it, and cheer her self with the sight thereof; and she, for her life,
cannot as yet call to mind what she has done with it: and all this liue-long
night, neither she nor I have slept one wink, for very thought and grief
thereof: Not so much for the value of the chain (for it was not much worth)
but to see, that she should be so careless in the laying of it up; and to see
the ill luck of it; at the very same time that we mist it, came in some
friends of mine, that had been of my old and familiar acquaintance; and I am
sorely afraid, lest they have lighted upon it, and taken it away with them;
meaning to make use of that vulgar saying, Si spy it, tum sport fac; Si non
spy it, pack and away Jack. But now (my Sons) that I may come a little
nearer unto you both, and speak home to the point: If your Master gave me any
thing, what he gave me, that (you must think) is mine: As for your cloth of
gold doublet, I never ask't you any share out of it, nor ever will. We all of
us serve him, that he may give unto us all, as he sees we shall deserve: And
as for that which he has given me, I have twice endangered my life for it;
more blades have I blunted in his service then you both; more material and
substantial stuff have I wasted, and have worn out more hose and shoes; And
you must not think (my Sons) but all this costs me good money. Besides, my
skill, which I got not playing or sitting still, or warming my tail over the
fire, as most of your idle huswiues do, but with hard labor and
paines-taking: as Parmeno's mother could well witness for me, if she were
living. This I have gained by mine own industry and labor; as for you, what
have you done? If you have done any thing for Calisto, Calisto is to requite
you. I get my living by my Trade and my travel; you, yours, with recreation
and delight; and therefore you are not to expect equal recompense, inioying
your service with pleasure, as I, who go performing it with pains: but
whatsoever I have hitherto said unto you, because you shall see, I will deal
kindly with you: if my chain be found again, I will give each of you a pair
of Scarlet Breeches, which is the comeliest habit that young men can wear. But
if it be not found, you must accept of my good will, and my self be content to
sit down with my loss; and all this I do out of pure love, because you were
willing that I should have the benefit of managing this business before
another: and if this will not content you, I cannot do withal. To your own
harm be it.


Sempr. This is not the first time I have heard it spoken; how much in old
folks, the sin of avarice reigns: as also that other, When I was poor,
then was I liberal; when I was rich, then was I covetous: So that
covetousness increases with getting, and poverty with coveting: and nothing
makes the covetous man poor but his riches. O heavens! How does penury
increase with abundance, and plenty? How often did this old woman say, that I
should have all the profit that should grow from this business? thinking then
perhaps, that it would be but little: but now she sees how great it grows, she
will not part with any thing, no, not so much as the patings of her nails;
that she may comply with that common saying of your little children: Of a
little, a little; of much, nothing.


Parme. Let her give thee that which she promised; let her make that good, or
let us take it all from her. I told you before (would you have believed me)
what an old coozening companion you should find her.


Celestina. If you are angry either with your selves, your Master, or your
arms, wreck not your wrath upon me; for I wot well enough whence all this
grows, I wind you where you are: I now perceive on which foot you halt, not
out of want of that which you demand; nor out of any covetousness that is in
you: but because you think I will tie you to Rack and Manger, and make you
capt^ues all your lifetime to Elicia, and Areusa, and provide you no other
fresh ware, you make all this ado, quarrel thus with me for money, and seek
by fearing me, to force me to a parting and sharing of stakes. But be still
(my boys) and content your selves; for she who could help you with these,
will not stick to furnish you with half a score of handsome wenches apiece,
fairer then these by far, now that I see, that you are grown to greater
knowledge and more reason, and a better deseruingnesse in your selves. And
whether or no, in such a case as this, I am able to be as good as my word, let
Parmeno speak for me. Speak, speak, Parmeno, be not ashamed, man, to tell
what did betide us, with what wench you wot of, that was sick of the Mother?


Sempr. I go not for that which you think. You talk of Chalk, and we of
Cheese. Do not think to put us off with a jest; our demands desire a more,
serious answer. And assure your self (if I can help it) you shall take no
more Hares with this Grayhound; and therefore lay aside these tricks, and do
not stand arguing any longer on the matter; I know your fetches too well: To an
old dog, a man need not cry, Now, now. Come off therefore quickly, and give
us two parts of that which you have received of Calisto. Dispatch, I say, and
do not drive us to discover what you are; come, come, exercise your wits upon
some other. Flap those in the mouth, you old Filth, with your coggings and
foistings, that know you not; for we know you too well.


Celest. Why, what am I, Sempronio? What do you know me to be? Did thou take
me out of the Puteria? Broughtst thou me, as a whore, out of the Stews? Bridle
your tongue for shame, and do not dishonor my hoary hayres. I am an old woman
of Gods making, no worse then all other women are: I live by my occupation as
other women do, very well, and handsomely; I seek not after those who seek
not after me; they that will have me, come home to my house to fetch me; they
come home, I say, and entreat me to do this or that for them. And for the
life that I lead, whether it be good or bad, heaven knows my heart: and do
not think out of your choler to mis-vse me, for there is Law and Justice for
all, and equal to all; and my tale, I doubt not, shall be as soon heard
(though I am an old woman) as yours, for all you be so smoothly kemb'd. Let me
alone, I pray, in mine own house, and with mine own fortune. And you,
Parmeno, do not you think that I am thy slave, because thou know my
secrets, and my life past, and all those matters that happened betwixt me, and
that unfortunate mother of thine; for she also was wont to use me on this
fashion, when she was disposed to play her prankes with me.


Parm. Do not tit me in the teeth with these thy idle memorialls of my
mother, unless thou meanst I should send thee with these thy tidings, unto
her, where thou may better make thy complaint.


Celestina. Elicia, Elicia, arise and come down quickly, and bring me my
mantle; for by heaven, I will hye me to the Justice, and there cry out and
rail at you, like a made woman. What is it you would have? What do you mean,
to menace me thus in mine own house? Shall your valor and your brauings be
exercised on a poor silly innocent sheep? On a Hen, that is tied by the leg,
and cannot fly from you? On an old woman of sixty years of age? Get you, get
you, for shame, amongst men, such as your selves; go and reake your anger upon
such as are girt with the Sword, and not against me and my poor weak
Distaffe; it is an infallible note of great cowardice, to assail the weak and
such as have but small, or very little poor to resist: your filthy Flies bite
none but lean and feeble Oxen: and your barking Curres fly with greater
eagerness, and more open^ mouth upon your poorest passengers. If she that
lies above there in the bed, would have hearkened unto me, this house should not
have been (as now it is) without a man in the night; nor we have slept (as
we do) by the naked shadow of a candle. But to pleasure you, and to be
faithful unto you, we suffer this solitude; and because you see we are
women, and have no body here to oppose you, you prate, and talk, and ask, I
know not what, without any reason in the world, which you would as soon have
been hanged, as once dared to have proffered it, if you had heard but a man
stirring in the house; for, as it is in the Proverb, A hard adversary
appeaseth anger.


Sempr. O thou old covetous Cribbe, that art ready to dye with the thirst of
gold! cannot a third part of the gain content thee?


Celest. What third part? A pocks on you both; out of my house in a devils
name, you and your companion with you; do not you make such a stir here as
you do. Cause not our neighbors to come about us, and make them think we be
mad. Put me not out of my wits; make me not mad: you would not, I trow,
would you, that Calisto's matters and yours should be proclaimed openly at the
Cross? Here Is a stir indeed.


Sempr. Cry, bawle, and make a noise; all is one, we care not: either look to
perform your promise, or to end your days. Dye you must, or else do as we
will have you.


Elicia. Ah woe is me! put up your Sword; hold him, hold him, Parmeno; for
fear lest the fool should kill her in his madness.


Celestina. Justice, Justice; help neighbors, Justice, Justice; for here be
Ruffians, that will murder me in my house. Murder, murder, murder.


Sempr. Ruffians, you Whore? Ruffians, you old Bawd? have you no better
terms? Thou old Sorceresse; thou witch, thou; look for no other favor at my
hands, but that I send thee poast unto hell; you shall have letters thither,
you shall (you old Inchantresse) and that speedily too; you shall have a quick
dispatch.


Celest. Ay me, I am slain. Ay, ay. Confession, Confession.

Parmeno. So, so: kill her, kill her; make an end of her, since thou have
begun; be brief, be brief with her; lest the neighbors may chance to hear
us. Let her dye, let her dye; let us draw as few enemies upon us as we can.


Celestina. Oh, oh, oh!

Elicia. O cruell-hearted as you are! Enemies in the highest nature; shame and
confusion light upon you; the extremity of Justice fall upon you, with it is
greatest vigor, and all those that have had a hand in it. My mother is dead,
and with her, all my happiness.


Sempr^nio. Fly, fly, Parmeno, the people begin to flock hitherward. See,
see, yonder comes the Alguazil.


Parm. Ay me, wretch that I am! there is no means of escape for us in the
world; for they have made good the door, and are entering the house.


Sempronio. Let us leap out at these windows; And let us dye rather so, then
fall into the hands of Justice.


Parm. Leap then, and I will follow thee.


ACTVS XIIJ.
THE ARGUMENT.
CALISTO awakened from sleep, talks a while with himself; anon after he
calls unto Tristan, and some other of his servants. By and by Calisto falls
asleep again; Tristan goes down, and stands at the door. Sosia comes
weeping unto him; Tristan, demanding the cause, Sosia delivers unto him the
death of Sempronio and Parmen^; they go^ and acquaint Calisto with it, who
knowing the truth thereof, makes great lamentation.

INTERLOCVTORS. Calisto, Tristan, Sosia. CAlisto. O how daintily have I slept!
Ever since that sweet short space of time, since that harmonious discourse I
inioyed; I have had exceeding ease, taken very good rest; this contentment and
quietude has proceeded from my joy. Either the travail of my body caused so
sound a sleep; or else the glory and pleasure of my mind: Nor do I much
wonder, that both the one and the other should link hands, and join together
to cloze the lids of mine eyes, since I trauail'd the last night with my body
and person, and took pleasure with my spirit and senses. True it is, that
sorrow causes much thought; and overmuch thought, much hinders sleep: as it
was mine own case within these few days, when I was much discomfited and
quite out of heart, of ever hoping to enjoy that surpassing happiness, which I
now possess. O my sweet Lady, and dearest Love, Melibea, what do thou
think on now? Art thou asleep, or awake? Think thou on me, or some body
else? Art thou up and ready, or art thou not yet stirring? O most happy, and
most fortunate Calisto, if it be true, and that it be no dream, which has
already passed! Dreamed I, or dreamed I not? was it a mere fantasy, or was
it a real truth? But now I remember my self, I was not alone, my servants
waited on me, there were two of them with me; if they shall affirm it to be no
dream, but that all that past was true; I am bound to believe it: I will
command them to be called, for the further confirmation of my joy. Tristanico,
Why ^ho? Where are my men? Tristanico, Hye you and come up: arise, I say, get
you up quickly and come hither.


Tristan. Sir, I am up, and here already.


Calisto. Go, run, and call me hither Sempronio and Parmeno.


Tristan. I shall, Sir.


Calisto. Now sleep, and take thy rest,
Once grieved, and pained Wight;
Since she now loves thee best,
Who is thy hearts delight.
Let joy be thy souls guest;
And care be banished quite;
Since she has thee expressed
To be her Favorite.

Tristan. There is not so much as a boy in the house.


Calisto. Open the windows, and see whether it be day or no?


Tristan. Sir, it is broad day.


Calisto. Go again, and see if you can find them; and see you wake me not,
till it be almost dinnertime.


Tristan. I will go down and stand at the door, that my Master may take out
his full sleep; and to as many as shall ask for him; I shall answer that he
is not within. O what an outcry do I hear in the Marketplace! what is the
matter a Gods name? There is some execution of Justice to be done, or else they
are up so early to see some Bull-baiting. I do not know what to make of this
noise, it is some great matter, the noise is so great; but ^o, yonder comes
Sosia, my Masters footboy; he will tell me what the business is. Look how
the Rogue comes pulling and tearing of his hair; he has tumbled into one
Tavern or other, where he has been scuffling. But if my Master chance to
sent him, he will cause his coat to be well cudgelled; for though he be
somewhat foolish, punishment will make him wise; but me thinks he comes
weeping. What Is the matter, Sosia? Why do thou weep? Whence come thou now?
Why speak thou not?


Sosia. O miserable that I am! what misfortune could be (...) ore? O what great
dishonor to my Masters house! O what an unfortunate morning is this? O unhappy
young men!


Tristan. What Is the matter, man? Why do thou keep such ado? Why grieu'st
thou thus? What mischief has befalne us?


Sosia. Sempronio, and Parmeno!


Tristan. What of Sempronio and Parmeno? What means this fool? Speak a
little plainer, thou torment'st me with delays.


Sosia. Our old companions, our fellows, our brethren.


Tristan. Thou art either drunk or mad; or thou bring some ill news along
with thee. Why do thou not tell me what thou have to say, concerning these
young men?


Sosia. That they lie slain in the street.


Tristan. O unfortunate mischance! Is it true? Did thou see them? Did they
speak unto thee?


Sosia. No. They were e'n almost past all sense; but one of them with much
ado, when he saw I beheld him with tears, began to look a little toward
me, fixing his eyes upon me, and lifting up his hands to heaven, as one that is
making his prayers unto God; and looking on me, as if he had ask't me, if I
were not sorry for his death? And straight after, as one, that perceived
whither he was presently to go, he let fall his head, with tears in his eyes,
giving thereby to understand, that he should never see me again, till we did
meet at that day of the great Judgment.


Tristan. You did not observe in him, that he would have asked you whether
Calisto were there or no? But since thou have such manifest proofs of this
cruel sorrow, let us haste with these doleful tidings to our Master.


Sosia. Master, Master, do you hear, Sir?


Calisto. What, are you mad? Did not I will you, I should not be wakened?


Sosia. Rowze up your self, and rise: for if you do not stick unto us, we
are all undone. Sempronio and Parmeno lie beheaded in the Marketplace, as
public malefactors; and their fault proclaimed by the common Crier.


Calisto. Now heaven help me! What it is thou tell me? I know not whether
I may believe thee, in this thy so sudden and sorrowful news. Did thou see
them?


Sosia. I saw them, Sir.


Calisto. Take heed what thou say; for this night they were with me.


Sosia. But rose too early to their deaths.


Calisto. O my loyal servants! O my chiefest followers! O my faithful
Secretaries and Counselors in all my affairs. Can it be, that this should be
true? O unfortunate Calisto! thou art dishonored as long as thou have a day to
live; what shall become of thee, having lost such a pair of trusty servants?
Tell me, for pitty's sake) Sosia, what was the cause of their deaths? What
spoke the Prolamation? Where were they slain? by what Justice were they
beheaded?


Sosia. The cause, Sir, of their deaths, was published by the cruel
executioner, or common hangman, who delivered with a loud voice; Justice has
commanded, that these violent murderers be put to death.


Calisto. Who was it they so suddenly slew? who might it be? it is not four
hours ago since they left me. How call you the party whom they murdered?
What was he for a man?


Sosia. It was a woman, Sir, one whom they call Celestina.


Calisto. What Is that thou say?


Sosia. That which you heard me tell you, Sir.


Calisto. If this be true, kill thou me too, and I will forgive thee. For sure,
there is more ill behind; more then was either seen, or thought upon, if that
Celestina be slain, that has the slash over her face.


Sosia. It is the very same, Sir: for I saw her stretched out in her own house,
and her maid weeping by her, having received in her body above thirty several
wounds.


Calisto. O unfortunate young men! How went they? Did they see thee? Spoke they
unto thee?


Sosia. O Sir, had you seen them, your heart would have burst with grief: One
of them had all his brains beaten out in most pitiful manner, and lay
without any sense, or motion in the world: The other had both his arms broken,
and his face so sorely bruised, that it was all black, and blue, and all of a
goare-bloud. For, that they might not fall into the Alguazils hands, they leapt
down out of a high window; and so being in a manner quite dead, they chopped off
their heads, when, I think, they scarce felt, what harm was done them.


Calisto. Now I begin to have a taste of shame; and to feel how much I am
touched in mine honor: would I had excused them and had lost my life, so I had
not lost my honor, and my hope of atchieuing my commenced purpose, which is,
the greatest grief and distaste that in this case I feel. O my name and
reputation, how unfortunately do thou goefrom Table to Table, from mouth to
mouth! O ye my secret, my secret actions, how openly will you now walk through
every public street, and open Marketplace? What shall become of me? Whither
shall I go? If I go forth to the dead, I am unable to recover them, and if I
stay here, it will be deemed cowardice. What counsel shall I take? Tell me,
Sosia, what was the cause they killed her?


Sosia. That maid (Sir) of hers, which sat weeping and crying over her, made
known the cause of her death to as many as would hear it; saying, that they
slew her, because she would not let them share with her in that chain of gold,
which you had lately given her.


Call. O wretched and unfortunate day! O sorrow, able to break even a heart of
Adamant! How go my goods from hand to hand, and my name from tongue to tongue?
All will be published and come to light, whatsoever I have spoken, either to
her, or them; whatsoever they knew of my doings; and whatsoever was done in
this business. I dare not go forth of doors; I am ashamed to look any man in
the face. O miserable young men! that ye should suffer death by so sudden a
disaster. O my joys, how do you go declining, and waining from me! But it is
an ancient Proverb; That the higher a man climbes, the greater is his fall.
Last night I gained much; today I have lost much. Your Sea-calmes are rare, and
seldom. I might have been listed in the roll of the happy, if my fortune
would but have allayd these tempestuous winds of my perdition. O Fortune* how
much, and through how many parts have thou beaten me! But howsoever thou do
shake my house, and how opposite soever thou art unto my person, yet are
adversities to be endured with an equal courage: and by them, the heart is
proved, whether it be of Oak, or Elder, strong, or weak; there is no, better
Say, or Touchstone in the world, to know what finenesse, or what Characts of
Virtue or of Fortitude remain in man. And therefore come what will come, fall
back, fall edge, I will not desist to accomplish her desire, for whose sake
all this has happened. For it is better for me to pursue the benefit of that
glory, which I expect, then the loss of those that are dead. They were proud,
and stout, and would have been slain at some other time, if not now. The old
woman was wicked and false, as it seems, in her dealings, not complying with
that contract which she had made with them: so that they fell out about the
true man's cloak; taking it from the true owner, to share it amongst
themselves. But this was a just judgment of God upon her, that she should
receive this payment, for the many adulteries, which by her intercession and
means have been committed. Sosia and Tristianico shall provide themselves;
they shall accompany me, in this my desired walk; they shall carry the
Scaling-ladders, for the walls are very high. To morrow I will abroad, and see
if I can revenge their deaths; if not, I will purge my innocence with a fained
absence; or else feign my self mad, that I may the better enjoy this so
tastefull a delight of my sweet Love; as did that great Captain Ulysses, to
shun the Troiane war, that he might lie dulcing at home with his wife
Penelope.


ACTVS XIIIJ.
THE ARGUMENT.
MELIBEA is much afflicted; she talks with Lucrecia, concerning Calisto's
slacknesse in coming, who had vowed that night to come and visit her. The which
he performed. And with him came Sosia, and Tristan; and after that he had
accomplished his desire, they all of them betook them to their rest. Calisto
gets him home to his Palace; and there begins to complain and lament, that he
had stayed so little a while with Melibea; and begs of Phoebus, that he would
shut his beams, that he might the sooner go to renew his desire.

INTERLOCVTORS. Melibea, Lucrecia, Sosia, Tristan, Calisto. MElibea. Me thinks,
the Gentleman, whom we look for, stays very long. Tell me ( Lucrecia) what
think thou? will he come, or no?


Lucrecia. I conceive (Madame) he has some just cause of stay, and it is not
in his power to come so soon as you expect.


Melibea. Good spirits be his guard, and preserve his person from peril. For,
his long stay does not so much grieve me: but I am afraid, lest some
misfortune or other may befall him, as he is on his way unto us. For, who
knows, whether he coming so willingly to the place appointed, and in that
kind of fashion, as such Gentlemen as he, on the like occasion, and the like
hour use to go; whether, or no, I say, he may chance to light upon the
night-watch, or be met by the Alguazils, and they not knowing him, have set
upon him, and he to defend himself, has either hurt them, or they him? Or
whether some roguish Curre or other with his cruel teeth (for such dogs, as
they make no difference of persons,) haue^ perhaps unfortunately bit him? Or
whether, he has fallen upon the Causey, or into some dangerous pit, whereby he
may receive some harm? But (Ay me) these are but inconveniences which my
conceived love brings forth, and my troubled thoughts present unto me. Goodness
forbid, that any of these misfortunes should befall him! Rather let him stay as
long as it shall please himself from coming to visit me. But hark, hark,
what steps are those that* I hear in the street? And to my thinking likewise,
I hear somebody talking on this side of the garden.


Sosia. Tristan, set the ladder here; for, though it be the higher, yet I take
it to be the better place.


Tristan. Get up, Sir: And I will along with you. For, we know not who is there
within, they are talking (I am sure) who-ere they be.


Calist. Stay here (you fool) I will in alone, for I hear my Lady and Mistress.


Melibea. Your servant, your slave, Calisto, who prizes more yours then her
own life. O my dear Lord, take heed how you leap, leap not down so high;
you kill me, if you do: I shall swound in seeing it. Come down, come down
gently, I pray. Take more leisure in coming down the ladder; as you love me,
come not so fast.


Calisto. O divine Image; O precious pearl; before whom, the whole world
appears foul! O my Lady and my glory; I embrace and hug thee in mine arms,
and yet I not believe it: such a turbation of pleasure seazeth on my person,
that it makes me not feel the fulness of that joy I possess.


Melibea My Lord, ^ithence I have entrusted my self in your hands, since I
have been willing to cumply with your will, let me not be worse thought of for
being pitiful, then if I had been coy and merciless. Nor do not work my
undoing, for a delight so momentary and performed in so short a space. For,
Actions that are ill, after they are committed, may easier be reprehended then
amended. Rejoice thou in that, wherein I rejoice; which is, to see and draw
near unto thy person, to view and touch thee. But do not offer either to ask
or take that, which being taken away, is not in thy power to restore. Take heed
(Sir) that you go not about to overthrow that, which with all the wealth in
the world, you are not able to repair.


Calisto. Dear Lady, since for to obtain this favor, I have spent my whole
life, what folly were it in me, to refuse that which you have so kindly
conferred upon me? Nor (Madame) do I hope, that you will ^ay so hard a command
upon me, or if you should, yet have I not power to contain my self within the
limits of your command. Do not impose such a point of cowardice upon me: For I
tell you, it is not in any man that is a man, to forbear in such a case, and
to condition so hard with himself; much less in me, loving as I do, and
having swumme, as I have done all my life long, through this sea of thy desire
and mine own love. Will you then after my so many travels, deny me entrance
into that sweet haven, where I may find some ease of all my former sorrows?


Melibea. As you love me ( Calisto) though my tongue take liberty to talk what
it will; yet, I prithee, let not thy hands do all what they can. Be quiet
(good Sir) since I am yours, suffice it you content your self in the inioying
of this outwardnes, which is the proper fruit of Lovers, and not to rob me of
the greatest ewell, which Nature has inrich't me with; Consider besides, That
it is the property of a good shepherd, to fleece, but not to flay his sheep;
to sheare them, but not to uncase them.


Calisto. Madame, What mean you by this? That my passions should not be at
peace? That I shall run over my torments anew? That I shall return to my old
yoke again? Pardon (Sweet Lady) these my impudent hands, if too presumptuously
they press upon you, which once did never think (so all together were they
unworthy) not to touch, no not so much as any part of thy garments, that they
now have leave to lay themselves with a gentle palm on this ^ainty body of
thine, this most white, soft, and delicate flesh.


Melibea. Lucrecia, go aside a little.

Calisto. And why Madame? I should be proud to have such witnesses as she of my
glory.


Melibea. So would not I, when I do amiss. And had I but thought that you
would have used me thus, or been but half so violent, as I now see you are;
I would not have trusted my person with such a rough and cruel conversation.


Sosia. Tristan, you hear what has past, and how the gear goes.

Tristan. I hear so much, that I hold my Master the happiest man that lives.
And I assure thee (though I am but a boy to speak of) me thinks, I could give
as good account of such a business as my Master.


Sosia. To such a jewel as this, who would not reach out his hand? But allow
him this flesh to his bread, and much good may it do him. For, he has paid
well for it: for a couple of his servants served to make sauce for this his
Love.


Tristan. I had quite forgot that. But let them die, as instruments of their
own destruction. And let others as many as will, play the fools upon affiance
to be defended. But for mine own part, I well remember when I served the
Count, that my father gave me this Council: that I should take heed how I
killed a man. Of all other things, that I should beware of that. For (quoth
he) you shall see the Master merry and kindly embraced, when his man (poor
soul) shall be hanged and disgraced.


Melibea. O my life and my dear Lord, how could you find in your heart, that
I should lose the name and crown of a Virgin, for so momentary and so short a
pleasure? O my poor Mother, If thou did but know what we have done, with
what willingness would thou take thine own death? and with what violence and
inforcement give me mine? How cruel a butcher would thou become of thine
own blood? And how doleful an end should I be of thy days? O my most
honored father, how have I wronged thy reputation? And given both opportunity
and place to the utter overthrowing and undoing of thy house? O Traitor that I
am! Why did I not first look into that great error, which would ensue by thy
entrance, as also that great danger; which I could not but expect?


Sosia. You should have sung this song before. Now, it comes too late: you
know, it is an old saying; when a thing is done, it cannot be undone. There is
no fence for it, but what, if the fool Calisto should hap to hear me?


Calisto. Is it possible? Look and it be not day already: Me thinks, we have
not been here above an hour, and the Clock now stricks three.


Melibea. My Lord, for Jove's love, now that all that I have, is yours; now,
that I am your Mistress; now, that you cannot deny my love; deny me not your
sight. And on such nights as you shall resolve to come, let your coming be by
this secret place, and at the self same hour: for then, shall I still look
for you prepared with the same joy, wherewith I now comfort my self in the
hopeful expectation of those sweet nights that are to come. And so for this
present, I will take my leave. Farewell (my Lord) my hope is, that you will not
be discovered, for it is very dark; Nor I heard in the house, for it is not
yet day.


Calisto. Do you hear there? bring hither the ladder:


Sosia. Sir, it is here ready for you to come down.


Melibea. Lucrecia, come hither, I am now all alone. My Love is gone, who has
left his heart with me, and has taken mine with him. Did thou not hear us,
Lucrecia?


Lucrecia. No Madame, I was fast asleep.

Sosia. Tristan, we must go very softely, and not speak a word. For, just
about this time, rise your rich men, your covetous money-mongers, your
penny-fathers, your Venereans and Loue-sicke souls, such as our Master; your
day-labourers, your plough-men and your sheepheards; who about this time
vnpinne their sheep, and bring them to their sheepcotts to be milk't. And it
may be, they may hear some word escape us, which may wrong either Calisto's or
Melibea's honor.


Tristan. Now you silly Ass, you whoresonne Horse-currier, you would have us
make no noise, not a word, but Mumme* and yet thy self do name her. Thou
art an excellent fellow* to make a Guide or Leader to conduct an Army in the
Moors Country: so that prohibiting, thou permittest; covering, thou
discouerest; defending, offendest; bidding others hold their peace, thou thy
self speak alowd, nay, proclaims it; and proclaiming, makes answer
thereunto. But though you are so subtle witted and of so discreet a temper,
you shall not tell me in what month our Lady day in harvest falls. For we
know that we have more straw in the house this year, then thou art able to eat.


Calisto. My Masters, what a noise make you there? My cares and yours are not
alike. Enter softely, I pray, and leave your prattling, that they in the house
may not hear us; Shut this door, and let us go take our rest. For, I will up
alone to my chamber, and there disarme me. Go get you to bed; O wretch that I
am, how su^able and natural unto me is solitariness, silence, and darkness.
I know not whether the cause of it be, that there comes now to mind, the
treason that I have committed in taking my leave of that Lady, whom I so
dearly love, before it was further day? Or whether it be the grief, which I
conceive of my dishonor, by the death of my servants? I, I; this is it that
greiues me, this is that wound whereof I bleed. Now, that I am grown a little
cooler; now, that that blood waxes cold, which yesterday did (...) in me; now
that I see the decaying of my house, my want of service, the wasting of my
patrimony, and the infamy which lights upon me by the death of my servants?
what have I done? How can I possibly contain my self? How can I forbear any
longer, but that I should presently express my self, as a man much wronged?
and show my self a proud and speedy revenger of that open iniurie^ which has
been offered me? O the miserable sweetness of this most short and transitory
life! who is he so covetous of thy countenance, who will not rather choose to
die presently, then to enjoy a whole year of a shamfull life? and to prorogue
it with dishonor, loosing the good report and honorable memory of his noble
Ancestors? Especially, sithence that in this world, we have not any certain
or limited time: no not so much as a moment or a minute. We are debtours
without time: we stand continually bound to present payment. Why have I not
gone abroad, and made all the inquiry I can, after the secret cause of my open
perdition? O thou short delight of the world, how little do thy pleasure last?
and how much do they cost? Repentance should not be bought so dear. O
miserable that I am, when shall I recover so great a loss? what shall I do?
what counsel shall I take? To whom shall I discover my disgrace? why do I
conceal it from the rest of my servants and kinsefolke? They clip and note my
good name in their Councell-house and public Assembly, and make me infamous
throughout the whole Kingdom: and they of mine own house and kindred must not
know of it; I will out amongst them. But if I go out and tell them that I was
present, it is too late; if absent, it is too soon. And to provide me of
friends, ancient servants, and near allies, it will ask some time, as
likewise that we be furnished with Arms, and other preparations of vengeance.
O thou cruel Judge, what ill payment have thou made me of that my fathers
bread, which so often thou have eaten? I thought, that by thy favor I might
have killed a thousand men without controlment. O thou falsifier of faith, thou
persecutor of the truth, thou man molded of the baser sort of earth! Truly is
the proverb verified in thee; that for want of good men thou wast made a
Judge. Thou should have considered, that thy self, and those thou did put
to death, were servants to my Ancestors and me, and thy fellows and
companions. But when the base to riches does ascend, he regards neither
kindred nor friend. Who would have thought, that thou would have wrought my
undoing? But there is nothing more hurtful, then an unexpected enemy. Why
would thou that it should be verified of thee, That that which came out of
Aetna, should consume Aetna? And that I hatched the Crow, which picked out mine
eyes? Thou thy se^fe art a public delinquent, and yet punishest those that
were private offenders. But I would have thee to know; that a private fault is
less then a public, and less the inconvenience and danger: At least,
according to the Laws of Athens, which were not written in blood, but do show
that it is a less error, not to condemn a delinquent, then to punish the
innocent. O how hard a matter is it, to follow a just cause before an unjust
Judge! How much more this excess of my servants, which was not free from
offense! But consider with all spite of all Stoicall Paradoxe, their guilt was
not equal, though their sufferings alike. What deserved the one, for that
which the other did? That only because he was his companion, thou should
doom them both to death? But why do I talk thus? With whom do I discourse?
Am I in my right wits? What Is the matter with thee, Calisto? Dream'st thou,
sleep'st thou, or wak'st thou? Stand'st thou on thy feet? Or lie thou all
along? Consider with thy self that thou art in thy chamber. Do thou not see
that the offender is not present? With whom do thou contend? Come again to
thy self; weigh with thy self, that the absent were never fo^nd just. But if
thou will be upright in thy judgment, thou must keep an ear for either
party. Do thou not see, that the Law is supposed to be equal unto all?
Remember that Romulus, the first founder of Rome, killed his own brother,
because he transgressed the Law. Consider that Torquatus the Roman slew his
own son, because he exceeded his Commission. And many other like unto these
did this man do. Think likewise with thy self, that if the Judge were here
present, he would make thee this Answer; that the Principal and the
Accessory, the Actor and Consenter, do merit equal punishment. Howbeit, they
were both notwithstanding executed, for that which was committed but by one.
And if that other had not his pardon, but received a speedy judgment, it was,
because the fault was notorious, and needed no further proofs: as also that
they were taken in the very Act of murder, and that one of them was found dead
of his fall from the window. And it is likewise to be imagined, That that
weeping wench which Celestina kept in her house, made them to hasten the more
by her woeful and lamentable noise: And that the Judge, that he might not make
a hurly burly of it, that he might not defame me, and that he might not stay
till the people should press together, and hear the proclaiming of that great
infamy, which could not choose but follow me, he did sentence them so early
as he did; and the common Hangman, which was the Crier, could do no otherwise,
that he might cumply with their execution and his own discharge. All which, if
it were done as I conceive it to be, I ought rather to rest his debtor, and
think my self bound unto him the longest day of my life, not as to my fathers
sometimes servant, but as to my true and natural brother. But put case it were
not so; or suppose I should not co^ster it in the better sense, yet call,
Calisto, to mind the great joy and solace thou have had, bethink thy self of
thy sweet Lady and Mistrisse, and thy whole and sole happiness: and since for
her sake thou esteemest thy life as nothing for to do her service, thou art
not to make any reckoning of the death of others: and the rather, because no
sorrow can equal thy received pleasure. O my Lady and my life, that I should
ever think to offend thee in thy absence! And yet in doing as I do, me
thinks, it argues against me, that I hold in small esteem that great and
singular favor, which I have received at thy hands. I will now no longer
think on grief; I will no longer entertain friendship with sorrow. O
incomparable good! O insatiable contentment! And what could I have asked more
of heaven, in requital of all my merits in this life (if they be any) then
that which I have already received? Why should I not concent my self with so
great a blessing? which being so, it stands not with reason that I should be
ungrateful unto him, who has conferred upon me so great a good: I will
therefore acknowledge it, I will not with care craze my understanding, lest
that being lost, I should fall from so high and so glorious a possession. I
desire no other honor, no other glory, no other riches, no other father nor
mother, no other friends nor kinsfolks. In the day, I will abide in my
chamber: In the night, in that sweet Paradise, in that pleasant grove, that
green plot of ground amidst those sweet trees and fresh and delightsome
walks. O night of sweet rest and quiet! O that thou had made thy return! O
bright shining Phoebus, drive on thy Chariot apace, make haste to thy iourneys
end. O comfortable and delightful stars, break your wont, and appear
before your time, and out of your wonted and continued course! O dull and slow
clock, I wish to see thee burned in the quickest and loueliest fire that Love
can make. For did thou but expect that which I do, when thou strikest
twelve, thou would never endure to be tied to the will of the master that
made thee! O ye hyematicall and winterly months, which now hide your heads,
and live in darkness and obscurity! Why haste ye not to cut off these tedious
days with your longer nights? Me thinks, it is almost a year, since I saw
that sweet comfort and most delightful refreshing of my travels. But what do
I ask? Why like a fool do I, out of impatiencie desire that which never
either was or shall be? For your natural courses did never learn to wheel
away. For to all of them there is an equal course, to all of them one and the
selfsame space and time. Not so much as to life and death, but there is a
settled and limited end. The secret motions of the high firmament of heaven, of
the Planets and the North-starre, and of the increase and wane of the Moon,
all of these are ruled with an equal reyne, all of these are moved with an
equal spur. Heaven, Earth, Sea, Fire, Wind, Heat and Cold. What will it
benefit me, that this clock of iron should strike twelve, if that of heaven
do not hammer with it? And therefore though I rise never so soon, it will
never the sooner be day. But thou my sweet Imagination, thou, who can only
help me in this case, bring thou unto my Fantasy the unparalleled presence of
that glorious Image. Cause thou to come unto my ears that sweet Music of
her words, those her unwilling hangings off without profit, that her pretty, I
prithee leave off; Forbear, good Sir, if you love me; Touch me not; Do not
deal so discourteously with me. Out of whose ruddy lips, me thinks, I hear
these words still sound, Do not seek my undoing: which she would evermore be
out withal. Besides, those her amorous imbracements betwixt every word; that
her loosing of her self from me; and clypping me again; that her flying from
me and her coming to me; those her sweet sugared Kisses; and that her last
salutation wherewith she took her leave of me. O with what pain did it
issue from her mouth! with what resuscitation of her spirits! with how many
tears, which did seem to be so many round pearls, which did fall without any
noise from her clear and resplendent eyes!


Sosia. What think thou of Calisto? How has he slept? It is now upon four
of the clock in the afternoon, and he has neither as yet called us, nor
eaten any thing.


Tristan. Hold your peace, for sleep requires no haste. Besides, on the one
side, he is oppressed with sadness and melancholy for his servants: and on the
other side transported with that gladsome delight and singular great pleasure,
which he has inioyed with his Melibea. And thou know, that where two such
strong and contrary passions meet, in whomsoever they shall house themselves,
with what forcible violence they will work upon a weak and feeble subject.


Sosia. Do thou think that he takes any great grief and care for those that
are dead? If she did not grieve more, whom I see here out of the window go
along the street, she would not wear a veil that color as she does.


Tristan. Who is that, brother?

Sosia. Come hither and see her, before she be past. See thou that mournful
maid, which wipes the tears from her eyes? That is Elicia, Celestina's
servant, and Sempronio's friend: she is a good, pretty, handsome, wel-fauoured
wench, though now (poor soul) ^hee be left to the wide world, and forsaken of
all. For she accounted Celestina her mother, and Sempronio her chiefest and
best friend. And in that house, where you see her now enter, there dwells a very
fair woman, she is exceeding wel-fauoured, very fresh and lovely, she is half
Courtezane; yet happy is he, and counts himself so to be, that can purchase
her favor at an easy rate, and win her to be his friend. Her name is
Areusa, for whose sake, I know, that unfortunate and poor Parmeno endured many
a miserable night. And I know, that she (poor soul) is nothing pleased with
his death.


ACTVS XV.
THE ARGUMENT.
AREVSA vtters injurious speeches to a Ruffian, called Centurio, who takes his
leave of her, occasioned by the coming in of Elicia, which Elicia recounts
unto Areusa the deaths, which had insued upon the love of Calisto and Melibea.
And Areusa and Elicia agree, and conclude together, that Centurio should
revenge the death of all those three, upon the two young Lovers. This done,
Elicia takes her leave of Areusa, and would not be entreated to stay, because
she would not lose her market at home in her accustomed Lodging.

INTERLOCVTORS. Elicia, Centurio, Areusa. ELicia. What ails my Cousin, that
she cries, and takes on as she does? It may be she has already heard of
that ill news, which I came to bring her: if she have, I shall have no reward
of her for my heavy tidings. So, weep, weep on, weep thy belly-full; let
thine eyes break their banks, and ouerflow thy bosom with an eternal deluge;
for two such men were not every where to be had; it is some ease yet unto me,
that she so risents the matter, and has so true a feeling of their deaths.
Do, tear, and rent thy hair, as (I poor soul) have done before thee: and
think, and consider with thy self, that to fall from a happy life, is more
miserable then death it self. O how I hug her in my heart! How much more,
then ever heretofore, do I now love her; that she can express her passion in
such lively colors, and paint forth sorrow to it is perfect and true life!


Areusa. Get thee out of my house, thou ruffianly Rascal; thou lying
companion; thou cheating Scoundrell; thou have deluded me, thou Villain; thou
have played bob-foole with me, by thy vain and idle offers; and with thy
fair words and flattering speeches (A pocks on that smooth tongue of thine!)
thou have robbed me of all that I have. I gave thee (you Rogue) a Ierkin and a
Cloak, a Sword and a Buckler, and a couple of Shirts, wrought with a thousand
devices, all of needle-worke; I furnished* thee with arms and a Horse, and
placed thee with such a Master, as thou wast not worthy to wipe his shoes. And
now that I entreat thee to do a business for me, thou make a thousand
frivolous excuses.


Centurio. Command me to kill ten men, to do you service, rather then to
put me to walk a League on foot for you.


Areusa. Why then did you play away your horse? You must be a Dicer with a
murraine; had it not been for me, thou had been hanged long since. Thrice
have I freed thee from the gallows; four times have I disimpawnd thee, first
from this, and then from that Ordinary, when as thou might have rotted in
prison, had not I redeemed thee, and paid thy debts. O that I should have any
thing to do with such a Villain? that I should be such a fool? that I should
have any affiance in such a false-hearted, white-liuer'd slave? that I should
believe him and his lies? that I should once suffer him to come within my
doors? What a devil is there good in him? his hair is cu^led, and shagg'd
like a water Spaniell; his face scotcht, and notcht; he has been twice whipped
up and down the Town; he is lame on his sword-arme, and has some thirty
whores in the common Stews. Get thee out of my house, and that presently too;
look me no more in the face; speak not to me; no not a word; neither say
thou, that thou did ever know me; lest, by the bones of my father, who
begot me, and of my mother, who brought me forth; I cause 2000. Bastinadoes to
be laid upon that Millers back of thine. For, I would thou should know, I
have a friend in a corner, that will not stick to do a greater matter then
that for me, and come off handsomely with it, when he has done.


Centurio. The fool is mad, I think. But do you hear, Dame? if I be
nettled, I shall sting some body; if my choler be moved, I shall draw tears
from some; I shall make some body put finger in the eye; I shall, in faith. But
for once, I will go my ways and say nothing; I will suffer all this at your
hands, lest some body may come in, or the neighbors chance to hear us.


Elicia. I will in, for that is no true sound of sorrow, which sends forth
threatenings and reuilings.


Areusa. O wretch that I am; Is It you, my Elicia? I can hardly believe it. But
what means this? Who has clothed thee thus in sorrow? What mourning weed is
this? Believe me (Cousin) you much afright me. Tell me quickly, what is the
matter? For I long to know it. O, what a qualme comes over my stomach! Thou
have not left me one drop of blood in my body.


Elicia. Great sorrow, great loss; that which I show, is but little to that
which I feel and conceal. My heart is blacker then my mantle; my bowels, then
my veyle. Ah, Cousin, Cousin; I am not able to speak through hoarsenesse; I
cannot for sobbing, send my words from out my breast.


Areusa. Ay miserable me; why do thou hold me in suspense? Tell me, tell
me, I say, do not you tear your hair, do not you scratch and martyr your
face; deal not so ill with your self. Is this evil common to us both?
Appertains it also unto me?


Elicia. Ay, my Cousin! my dear Love, Sempronio and Parmeno are now no more;
they live not; they are no longer of this world; dead, alas they are dead.


Areusa. What do thou tell me? No more I entreat thee; for pity hold thy
peace, lest I fall down dead at thy feet.


Elicia. There is yet more ill news to come unto thine ears. Listen well to
this woeful wight, and she shall tell thee a longer Tale of woe; thy sorrows
have not yet their end; Celestina, she whom thou knewst well; she whom I
esteemed as my Mother; she who did cocker me as her child, she who did
cover all my infirmities; she, who made me to be honored amongst my equals;
she by whose means I was known through all the City and suburbs of the same,
stands now rendering up an account of all her works. I saw her with these eyes
stabbed in a thousand places. They slew her in my lap, I folding her in mine
arms.


Areusa. O strong tribulation! O heavy news worthy our bewayling! O
swift-footed misfortunes! O incurable destruction* O inrreparable loss! O how
quickly has fortune turned about her wheel! Who slew them? How did they dye?
Thou have made me almost besides my self with this thy news, and to stand,
amazed as one, who hears a thing that seems to be impossible. It is not eight
days ago since I saw them all alive. Tell me (good friend) How did this
cruel and unlucky chance happen?


Elicia. You shall know. I am sure (Cousin) you have already heard tell of the
love betwixt Calisto and that fool Melibea. And you likewise saw how
Celestina, at the intercession of Sempronio, so as she might be paid for her
pains, undertook the charge of that business, and to be the means to effect
it for him; wherein she used such diligence, and was so careful in the
following of it, that she drew water at the second spitting. Now when Calisto
saw so good and so quick a dispatch, which he never hoped to have effected,
amongst diverse other things, he gave this my unfortunate Aunt a chain of
gold. And as it is the nature of that metal, that the more we drink thereof,
the more we thirst; she, when she saw her self so rich, appropriated the
whole gain to her self, and would not let Sempronio and Parmeno have their
parts, it being before agreed upon between them, that whatsoever Calisto gave
her, they should share it alike. Now, they being come home weary one morning
from accompaning their Master, with whom they had been abroad all night, being
in great choler and heat, upon I know not what quarrels and brawles, (as
they themselves said) that had betyded them, they demanded part of the chain
of Celestina, for to relieve themselves therewith. She stood upon denial of
any such covenant or promise made between them; affirming the whole gain to
be due to her; and discovering withal other petty matters of some secrecy.
For, (as it in the Proverb) when Gossips brawle, then out goes all. So that
they being mightily enraged, on the one side necessity did urge them, which
rents and breaks all the love in the world; on the other side, the great anger
and weariness they brought thither with them, which many times works an
alteration in us. And besides, they saw that they were forsaken in their
fairest hopes, she breaking her faith and promise with them: So that they knew
not in the world what to do; and so continued a great while upon terms with
her, some hard words passing to and fro between them. But in the end
perceiving her covetous disposition, and finding that she still perseuered in
her denial, they laid hands upon their swords, and hackt and hewed her in a
thousand pieces.


Areusa. O unfortunate woman! Wast thou ordained to end thy days in so
miserable a manner as this? But for them, I pray what became of them? How came
they to their end?


Elicia. They, as soon as ever they had committed this foul murder; that they
might avoid the Justice, the Alcalde passing by by chance at that very
instant, made me no more ado, but leapt presently out at the windows; and
being in a manner dead with the fall, they presently apprehended them, and
without any further delay, chopped off their heads.


Areusa. O my Parmeno, my love; what sorrow do I feel for thy sake? How much
does thy death torment me? It grieves me, for that my great love, which in so
short a space, I had settled upon him, sithence it was not my fortune to enjoy
him longer. But being that this ill success has insued, being that this
mischance has happened, and being that their lives now lost, cannot be bought,
or restored by tears, do not thou vex thy self so much in grieuing and
weeping out thine eyes: I grieve as much, and believe, thou have but little
advantage of me in thy sorrowing; and yet thou see with what patience I
bear it, and pass it over.


Elicia. O! I grow mad. O wretch that I am, I am ready to run out of my wits!
Ay me, there is not any bodies grief, that is like to mine; there is not any
body, that has lost that which I have lost! O how much better, and more honest
had my tears been in another persons passion, then mine own! whither shall I
go? for I have lost both money, meat, drink, and clothes; I have lost my
friend, and such a one, that had he been my husband, he could not have been
more kind unto me. O thou wise Celestina, thou much honored Matrone, and of
great authority; how often did thou cover my faults by thy singular wisdom?
Thou took'st pains, whilst I took pleasure; thou went abroad, whilst I
staid at home; thou went in tatters and rags, whilst I did ruffle in
Silks and Satens; thou still came home like a Be, continually laden,
whilst I did nothing but spend, and play the unthrift: for I knew not else
what to do. O thou worldly happiness, and joy, which whilst thou art
possessed, art the less esteemed! Nor'dost thou ever let us know what thou
art, till we know that thou art not; finding our loss, greater by wanting,
then in inioying thee; never knowing what we have, till we have thee not. O
Calisto and Melibea, occasioners of so many deaths! let some ill attend upon
your love; let your sweet meat have some sour sauce; your pleasure, pain;
let your joy be turned into mourning; the pleasant flowers whereon you took
your stolen solace, let them be turned into Serpents and Snakes; your songs,
let them be turned into howlings; the shady trees of the garden, let them be
blasted and withered with your looking on them; your sweet senting blossoms
and buddes, let them be black and dismal to behold.


Areusa. Good Cousin, content your self, I pray, be quiet; inioyne silence to
your complaints; stop the Couduit-pipes to your tears; wipe your eyes; take
heart again unto you. For when fortune shuts one gate, she usually sets open
another; and this estate of yours, though it be never so much broken, it will
be soldred, and made whole again: And many things may be revenged, which are
impossible to be remedied; whereas this has a doubtful remedy, and a ready
revenge.


Elicia. But by whom shall we mend our selves? Of whom shall we be revenged,
when as her death, and those that slew her, have brought all this affliction
and anguish upon me? Nor does the punishment of the delinquent less grieve
me, then the error they committed. What would you have me to do, when as all
the burden lies upon my shoulders? I would with all my heart that I were now
with them, that I might not lie here, to lament and bewail them all as I do.
And that which grieves me most, is, to see that for all this, that Villain
Calisto, who has no sense, nor feeling of his servants deaths, goes every
night to see and visit his filth Melibea, feasting and solacing himself in her
company, whilst she grows proud, glorying to see so much blood to be
sacrificed to her service.


Areusa. If this be true, of whom can we revenge our selves better? And
therefore, he that has eaten the meat, let him pay the shot; leave the
matter to me, let me alone to deal with them: For, if I can but tracke them,
or but once find the sent of their footing, or but have the least inkling in
the world, when, how, where, and at what hour they visit one another, never
hold me true daughter to that old pasty-wench whom you knew full well, if I do
not give them sour sauce to their sweet meat; and make that their love
distastefull, which now they swallow down with delight; and if I employ in
this business that Ruffian, whom you found me railing against, when you came
into the house, if he prove not a worse Executioner for Calisto, then Sempronio
was for Celestina, never trust me more. O! how quickly the Villain would fat
himself with joy, and how happy would he hold himself, if I would but impose
any service upon him! for he went away from me very sad and heavy, to see how
coursely I used him: and should I but now send for him again, and speak
kindly unto him, he would think himself taken up in some strange sweet
rapture; so much will he be ravished with joy. And therefore tell me (Cousin)
how I may learn, how this business goes, for I will set such a trap for them,
as, if they be taken in it, shall make Melibea weep as much, as now she
laugheth.


Elicia. Mary, I know (sweet Cousin) another companion of Parmeno's, Calisto's
groom of the stable, whose name is Sosia, who accompanies him every night that
he goes; I will see, what I can suck from him; and this (I suppose) will be a
very good course for the matter you talk of.


Areusa. But hear you me, Cousin, I pray do me the kindness, to send Sosia
hither unto me, I will take him in hand a little, I will entertain talk with
him; and one while I will so flatter him, another while make him such fair
offers, that in the end, I will diue into him, and reach the very depth of his
heart, and learn from him, as well what has been already, as what is to be
done hereafter: At least learn so much as we desire to know, or may serve our
turn; and when I shall have effected this, I will make him and his Master to
vomit up all the pleasure they have eaten. And thou ( Elicia) that art as dear
to me, as mine own soul, do not you vex your self any more, but bring your
apparel, and such implements as you have, and come and live with me; for
there where you are, you shall remain all alone: and sadness (you know) is a
friend to solitariness. What wench? anew Love will make thee forget the old:
one Son that is borne, will repair the love of three that be dead. With a
new successor, we receive a new the joyful memory, and lost delights of
forepassed times. If I have a loaf of bread, or a penny in my purse, thou
shall have half of it. And I have more compassion of thy sorrow, then of those
that did cause it. True it is, that the loss of that does grieve a man more,
which he already possesses, then the hope of the like good can glad him, be
it never so certain. You see, the matter is past all remedy; and dead men
cannot be recald: you know the old saying: Fie upon this weeping, let them dye,
and we live. As for the rest that remain behind, leave that to me; I will
take order for Calisto and M^libea; and I shall give them as bitter a potion to
drink, as they have given thee. O Cousin, Cousin, how witty am I when I am
angry, to turn all these their plots vpside down! and though I am but young,
and a Girl to speak of, to break the neck of these their devises, I shall
overthrow them horse and foot.


Elicia. Bethink your self well, what you mean to do. For, I promise you,
though I should do as you would have me, and should send Sosia unto you, yet
can I not be persuaded that your desire will take effect. For the punishment of
those who lately suffered for disclosing their secrets, will make him seal up
his lips, and look a little better to his life. Now for my coming to your
house, and to dwell with you; as the offer is very kind, so I yield you the
best kind of thanks I can render you; and Jove bless you for it, and help
you in your necessity; for therein do thou well show, that kindred and
Alliance serve not for shadows, but ought rather to be profitable and helpful
in adversity; and therefore, though I should be willing to do, as you would
have me, in regard of that desire, which I have to enjoy your sweet company;
yet can it not conveniently be done, in regard of that loss which would light
upon me; for I know, it cannot but be greatly to my hindrance; the reason
thereof I need not to tell you, because I speak to one that is intelligent,
and understands my meaning; for there, Cousin, where I am, I am well known;
there am I well customed; that house will never lose the name of old Celestina;
thither continually resort your young wenches bordring thereabouts, loving
creatures, willing worms, and such as are best known abroad, being of half
blood to those, whom Celestina bred up; there they drive all their bargains,
and there they make their matches, and do many other things besides, (as you
know well enough) whereby now and then I reap some profit. Besides, those few
friends that I have, know not elsewhere to seek after me. Moreover, you are
not ignorant, how hard a matter it is, to forgo that which we have been used
unto; and to alter custo^e, is as distastefull as death: A rolling stone never
gathers moss, and therefore I will abide where I am: And if for no other
reason, yet will I stay there, because my house-rent is free, having a full
year yet to come, and will not let it be lost, by lying idle and empty; so
that though every particular reason may not take place, yet when I weigh them
altogether, I hope I shall ^est excused, and you contented. It is now high time
for me to be gone; what we have talked of, I will take that charge upon me;
and so farewell.


ACTVS XVI.
THE ARGUMENT.
PLEBERIO, and Alisa, thinking that their daughter Melibea had kept her
virginity unspotted and untouched, which was (as it seemed) quite contray; they
fall in talk about marrying of Melibea, which discourse of theirs, she so
impatiently endured, and was so grieved in hearing her father treat of it,
that she sent in Lucrecia to interrupt them, that by her coming in, she might
occasion them to break off both their discourse and purpose.

INTERLOCVTORS. Melibea, Lucrecia, Pleberio, Alisa. PLeberio. My wife, and
friend Alisa; time (me thinks) slips (as they say) from between our hands; and
our days do glyde away like water down a River There is not any thing that
flies so swift, as the life of man: Death still follows us, and hedges us in
on every side; whereunto we our selves now draw nigh. We are now (according to
the course of nature) to be shortly under his banner; this we may plainly
perceive, if we will but he hold our equals, our brethren and our kinsfolk
round about us; the grave has devoured them all; they are all brought to their
last home. And sithence we are uncertain when we shall be called hence, seeing
such certain and infallible signs of our short abode, it behooves us (as i^
is in the Proverb) to lay our beard a soaking, when we see our neighbors
shauing off, and to fear, left that which befell them yesterday, may befall us
to morrow. Let us therefore prepare our selves, and pack up our fardles, for
to go this enforced ^ourney which cannot be avoided. Let not that cruel and
doleful sounding trumpet of death, summon us away on the sudden and
unprovided. Let us prepare our selves, and set them in order whilst we have
time, for it is better to prevent, then to be prevented; let us conf^rre our
substance on our sweet successor; let us couple our only daughter to a
husband, such a one as may suit with our e^ta^e, that we may go quietly and
contentedly out of this world. The which with much diligence and carfulness,
we ought from henceforth to endeavor and put in execution: and what we have at
other times commenced in this matter, we ought now to consummate it. I would
not by our negligence have our daughter in Guardians hands; I like not she
should be a Ward; she is not fit for marriage, and therefore much better for
her to be in a house of her own, then in ours: by which means we shall free
her from the toungs of the vulgar; for there is no virtue so absolute and so
perfect, which has not her detracting and foule-mouthed slanderers; neither is
there any thing, whereby a Virgins good name is kept more pure and vnsported,
then by a mature and timely marriage. Who in all this City will refuse our
Alliance? who will not be glad to enjoy such a Jewel, in whom those four
principal things concur, which are demanded and desired in marriage? The
first, Discretion, Honesty and Virginity. The second, Beauty. The third, Noble
birth and Parentage. The last, Riches. With all these nature has endowed her.
Whatsoever they shall require of us, they shall find it to be ^ull and perfect.


Alisa. My Lord Pleberio, heaven bless her, and send her so to do, that we
may see our desires accomplished in our life time. And I am rather of opinion
that we shall want one that is equal with our daughter, considering her
virtue and nobleness of blood, then that there are ouer-many that are (...) to
wear her; but because this office more properly appertains to the father
then the mother, as you shall dispose of her, so shall I rest contented, and
she remain obedient, as shall best beseem her chaste carriage, her honest
life, and meek disposition.


Lucrecia. But if you knew as much as I do, your hearts would burst in sunder.
I, I, you mistake your mark, she is not the woman you wot of; the best is
lost; an ill year is like to attend upon your old age. Calisto has plucked
that flower wherein you so much glory. There is not any that can now new filme
her, or repair her lost Virginity, for Celestina is dead, the only curer of a
cracked maidenhead, you have awaked somewhat of the latest; you should have
risen a little earlier. Hark, hark; good Mistress Melibea, hark, I say.


Melibea. What does the fool there sneaking in the corner?


Lucrecia. Come hither, Madame, and you shall hear how forward your father and
mother are for to provide you a husband, you shall be married out of hand, out
of hand, Madame.


Melibea. For all loves sake speak softly; they will hear you by and by; let
them talk on, they begin to dote; for this month they have had no other
talk; their mind has run on nothing else; it may be their heart tells them
of the great love which I bear^ to Calisto, as also of that which for this
months space has passed between us. I know not whether they have had any
inkling of our meeting? or whether they have ouer-heard us? nor can I de^ise in
the world, what should be the reason, why they should be so hot upon the
matter, and more eager for the marrying of me now, then ever heretofore: but
they shall miss of their purpose; they shall labor it in vain: for to what
use serves the clapper in the Mil, if the Miller be deaf? Who is he that can
remove me from my glory? Who can withdraw me from my pleasure? Calisto is my
Soul, my Life, my Lord; on whom I have set up my rest, and in whom I have
placed all my hopes; I know that in him I cannot be deceived. And since that
he loves me, with what other thing but love can I requite him? All the debts
in the world receive their payment in a diverse kind; but love admits no other
payment, but love. I glad my self in thinking on him; I delight my self in
seeing him; and rejoice my self in hearing him. Let him do with me what he
will, and dispose of me at his pleasure; if he will go to Sea, I will go with
him; if he will round the world, I will along with him; if he will sell me
for a slave in the enemies Country, I will not resist his desire. Let my
Parents let me enjoy him, if they mean to enjoy me; let them not settle their
thoughts upon these vanities, nor think no more upon those their marriages.
For, it is better to be well beloved, then ill married; and a good friend is
better then a bad husband. Let them suffer me to enjoy the pleasure of my
youth, if they mind to iniov any quietness in their age; if not, they will
but prepare destruction for me, and for themselves a Sepulcher. I grieve for
nothing more, then for the time that I have lost in not inioying him any
sooner, and that he did not know me, as soon as he was known unto me. I will
no husband; I will not fully the knots of matrimony, nor tread against the
matrimonial steps of another man; nor walk in the way of wedlock with a
stranger, as I find many have done, in those ancient books which I have read,
which were far more discreet, and wiser then my self; and more noble in
their estate and Lineage, whereof some were held among the heathens for
goddesses: as was Venus, the mother of Eneas and of Cupid, the god of love, who
being married, broke her plighted troth of wedlock: as likewise diverse others,
who were inflamed with a greater fire, and did commit most nefarious and
incestuous errors: as Myrrha, with her father; Semyramis with her son; Canace
with her brother; others also in a more cruel and beastly fashion, did
transgress the Law of Nature: as Pasiphae, the wife of King Minos, with a
Bull: and these were Queens and great Ladies, under whose faults (considering
the foulness of them) mine may pass as reasonable, without note of shame, or
dishonesty. My love was grounded upon a good and just cause, and a far more
lawful ground. I was wooed and sued unto, and captiuated by Calisto's good
deserts; being thereunto solicited by that subtle and cunning Mistress in her
Art, Dame Celestina, who adventured her self in many a dangerous Visit, before
that ever I would yield my self true prisoner to his love. And now for this
month, and more (as you your self have seen) he has not failed, no, not so
much as one night, but has still scaled our garden walls, as if he had come
to the scaling of a fort; and many times has been repulsed, and assaulted it
in vain, being driven to withdraw his siege. And yet for all this, he
continued more constant and resolute still, and never would give over, as one
that thought his labor to be well bestowed. For my sake, his servants have
been slain; for my sake, he has wasted and consumed his substance; for my
sake he has feigned absence with all his friends in the City; and all day long
he has had the patience to remain close prisoner in his own house, and
only upon hope (wherein he counted ^^mselfe happy) to see me in the night:
Far, far therefore from me ^e all ingratitude; far be all flattery and
dissimulation toward so true and faithful a Lover; for I regard (in my regard
to him) neither husband, father, nor kindred; for in losing my Calisto, I lose
my life, which life of mine does therefore please me, because it pleases him;
which I desire no longer to enjoy, then he shall joy in it.


Lucrecia. Peace, Madame, hark, hark, they continue in their discourse.


Pleberio. Since (wife) me thinks you seem to like well of this motion, it
is not amiss, that we make it known to our daughter; we may do well to
tell her how many do desire her, and what store of suitors would be willing to
come unto her, to the end that she may the more willingly entertai^e our
desire, and make choice of him whom she likes best. For in this particular,
the Laws allow both men and women, though they be under paternall power, for
to make their own choice.


Alisa. What do you mean, husband? Why do you talk, and spend time in this?
Who shall be the messenger to acquaint our daughter Melibea with this strange
news, and shall not affright her therewith? Alas, do you think that she
can tell what a man means, or what it is to marry, or be married? or whether
by the conjunction of man and woman, children are begot or no? Do you think,
that her simple, and unspotted Virginity, can suggest unto her any filthy
desire, of that which as yet she neither knows, nor understands; nor cannot
so much as conceive what it means? It is the least part of her thought.
Believe it, (my Lord Pleberio' she does not so much as dream on any such
matter; and assure your self, be he what he will be, either noble or base,
fair or soul, we will make her to take whom it pleases us: whom we like, him
shall she like: she shall confirm her will to ours, and shall think that
fit, which we think fit, and no further; for I know, I trow, how I have bred
and brought up my daughter.


Melibea. Lucrecia, Lucrecia; run, hye thee quickly, and go in by the back
door in the hall, and break off their discourse with some fained errand or
other, unless thou would have me cry out, and take on like a Bedlam; so much
am I out of patience with their misconceit of my ignorance.


Lucrecia. I go, Madame.


ACTVS XVII.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELICIA wanting the chastity of Penelope, determines to cast off the care and
sorrow which she had conceived upon the deaths of those for whom she mourned,
highly to this purpose commending Areusa's counsel; she gets her to Areusa's
house, whither likewise comes Sosia, out of whom, Areusa, by fair and
flattring words, drew those matters of secrecy which past betwixt Calisto and
Melibea.

INTERLOCVTORS. Elicia, Areusa, Sosia. ELicia. I do my self wrong, to mourn
thus. Few do visit my house; few do pass this way. I can hear no music
nor stirring betimes in the morning; I have no amorous ditties sung by my
Lovers at my window; there are no frayes, nor quarrels before my door; they
do not cut and slash one another anights for my sake, as they were wont to do:
and that which most of all grieves me, is, that I see neither penny nor
farthing, nor any other present to come within my doors. But for this, can I
blame no body but my self; my self only is in fault; for had I followed the
counsel of her, who is my true and faithful Sister, when as I brought her the
other day the news of this sad and heavy Accident, which has brought all this
penury upon me, I had not lived alone mur'd up between two walls; nor others
loathed to have come, and seen me. The devil (I think) makes me to mourn
thus for him, who, had I been dead, would scarce, perhaps, have shed one tear
for me. Now I dare boldly say, that Areusa told me truth. Sister (quoth she)
never conceive, nor show more sorrow for the misfortune, or death of another,
then he would have done for thee. Sempronio, had I been dead, would have been
never a whit the less merry, he would not have wronged-his delights, nor
abridged his pleasures. And why then like a fool should I grieve and vex my
self, for one that is dead and gone, and has lost his head by order of Law?
And what can I tell, whether being a choleric and hastly-hayrebraind fellow
as he was, he might have killed me too, as well as he did that old woman, whom
I reckoned of as of mine own mother? I will therefore by all means follow
Arcusa's counsel, who knows more of the world then I do; and go new and
then to visit her, that I may learn something from her, how I may live another
day. O what a sweet participation will this be? what a delightful
conversation? I see it is not said in vain; That of more worth is one day of a
wise man, then the whole life of a fool; I will therefore put off my mourning
weeds, lay aside my sorrow, dismiss my tears, which have hitherto bin so
ready to offer their service to my eyes. But sithence that it is the very first
office that we do, as soon as we are borne, to come crying into the world; I
nothing wonder that it is so easy to begin to cry; and so hard to leave off.
But this may teach one wit, by seeing the hurt it does to the eyes; by seeing
that good clothes and neat dressings, make a woman seem ^^ire and handsome,
though she be nothing so, nor so; making her of old, young; and of young,
younger. Your colored paintings, and your Cerusses which give women such a
pure white and red, what are they, but a slimy clinging thing, a kind of
bird-lime, wherewith men are taken and ensnared? Come then thou my glass, come
hither again unto me; and thou to my Antimonium; for I have too much already
wronged my eyes, and almost marred my face, with my blubbring and weeping. I
will on with my white Vailes, my wrought Gorgets, my gay Garments, my more
pleasing Attire, and such other apparel, as shall speak pleasure. I will
presently provide some Lie for my hair, which now through neglect, has lost
it is bright burnisht hiew. And this being done, I will count my Hens, I will
make up my bed: for it glads a woman's heart, to see things neat and handsome
about her. I will have all well swept and made clean before my door, and the
street that buts upon it, sprinkled with water, as well to keep it cool, as
to lay the dust; to the end, that they who pass by, may plainly thereby
perceive, that I have banished all grief, and shaken hands with sorrow. But
first of all, I will go and visit my Cousin, to know whether Sosia have been
with her or no? And what good she has done upon him? For I have not seen
him; since I told him that Areusa would feign speak with him. I pray Jove, I
may find her all alone; for she is seldom any more without Gallants, then a
good Tavern is without drunkards; the door is shut, there should be no body
within; I will knock, and see. Tha, tha, tha.


Areusa. Who Is at door?


Elicia. I pray open it; it is Elicia.


Areusa. Come in, good Cousin, heaven reward you for this kindness; believe
me, I think my self much beholding unto you, that you would take the pains
to come and visit me. I mary, wench, now it is as it should be; now thou
please me, thou can not imagine what contentment my eye takes, to see
that habit of mourning and of sorrow, to be changed into garments of joy, and
of gladness; now we will enjoy one another; we will laugh and be merry; now
I shall have some heart to come and visit thee; thou shall come to my house,
and I will come to thine; it may be that Celestina's death will turn to both
our goods; for I find, that it is better now with me, then it was before; and
therefore it is said, that the dead do open the eyes to the living; to some by
wealth; to other some by liberty, as it is with thee.


Elicia. I hear some body at the door; we are too soon cut off from our
discourse, for I was about to ask you, whether Sosia had been here or no?


Areusa. No, not yet; stay, we will talk more anon. How loud he knocks! I
will go down and see who it is. Sure; either he is a madman, or our familiar
friend. Who is it that knocks there?


Sosia. Open the door, Mistress: its Sosia, servant to Calisto.


Areusa. Now in good time: The Wolf is in the fable. Hide your self, sister,
behind these hangings, and you shall see how I will work him; and how I will
puff him up with the wind of my fair and flattring words. And assure your
self, that before we two part, I will make him wholly ours; he shall not go
hence the same Sosia that he came; but with my smooth and enticing terms, my
so^t and gentle handling of him, I will quite vnmaw him, and draw from him all
that he either knows concerning his Master or any body else, as he draws
dust from his horses with his curry-combe. What? My Sosia? My inward friend?
Him whom I wish so well unto, though perhaps he knows not of it? Him, whom I
have longed to know, led only by the fame and good report, which I hear of
him? What? He that is so faithful to his Master? So good a friend to his
acquaintance? I will embrace thee (my Love) I will hug thee in mine arms;
for now that I see thee, I see report comes short; and verily persuade my
self, that there are more virtues in thee, then I have been told of. Fame has
been too sparing of thy praise; come (sweet heart) let us go in, and sit down
in my chamber; for it does me good to look upon thee. O! how thou do
resemble my unfortunate Parmeno! How lively does thy person represent him unto
me? This is it that makes this day to shine so clear, that thou art come to
visit me. Tell me (gentle Sir) did you ever know me before?


Sosia. The fame (gentlewoman) of your gentle and sweet disposition of your
good graces, discretion and wisdom, flies with so swift a wing, and in so high
a pitch, through all this City, that you need not much to marvel, if you be of
more known, then knowing. For there is not any man, that speaks any thing in
praise of the fairest and beautifullest in this City, but that you are ranked
in the first place, and remembered, as the prime and chiefest amongst them all.


Elicia. This poor silly fellow, this wretched son of a whore, to see how
he exceedes himself, and speaks beyond the compass of his common wit! he
does not use to talk thus wisely. He that should see him go to water his
horses, riding on their bare ridge without a Saddle, and his naked legs
hanging down beneath his Canuasse frocke, cut out into four quarters; and
should now see him thus handsome, and well suited, both in his cloak, and
other his clothes, it would give a man wings, and tongue; and make him crow,
as this Cockrell does.


Areusa. Your talk would make me blush, and run away for shame, were there
any body here, to hear how you play upon me. But (as it is the fashion of all
you men) you never go unprovided of such kind of phrases as these: these
false and deceitful praises are too common amongst you; you have words molded
of purpose, to serve your turn withal, and to suite your selves as you see
cause, to any woman whatsoever: yet for all this, am I not afraid of you,
neither will I start, or budge from you. But I must tell you ( Sosia) by the
way; this praising of me thus, is more then needs, for though thou should
commend me, yet should I love thee. And that thereby thou should think to
gain my love, is as needless; for thou have gained it already. There are two
things, which caused me ( Sosia) for to send for thee, entreating thee to take
the pains to come and see me; wherein if I find you to double, or dissemble
with me, I have done with you. What they are, I will leave them to your self
to relate, though I know it is for your own good, which makes me to do as I
do.


Sosia. Heaven forbid that I should use any cogging with you, or seek by
subtilty to deceive you. I came hither upon the assurance that I had of the
great favors which you intend, and now do me; holding my self not worthy to
pull off your shoes. Do thou therefore direct my tongue; answer thou for me
to thine own questions: for I shall ratify and confirm whatsoever thou shall
propound.


Areusa. My Love, thou know how dearly I loved Parmeno. And as it is in the
Proverb, He that loves Beltram, loves any thing that is his; all his friends
were always welcome unto me; his good service to his Master did as much
please me, as it pleased himself. When he saw any harm toward Calisto, he
did study to prevent it. Now as all this is true, so thought I it good to
accquaint thee with it. First then did I send for thee, that I might give thee
to understand how much I love thee; and how much I joy and ever shall, in this
thy visiting me; nor shall thou lose any thing by it, if I can help it, but
rather turn to thy profit and benefit. Secondly, since that I have settled my
eyes, my love and affection on thee, that I may advise thee to take heed how
thou come in danger; and besides, to admonish thee, that thou do not
discover thy secrers to any: For you see what ill befell Parmeno and Sempronio,
by imparting things of secrecy unto Celestina; for I would not willingly see
thee dye in such an ill fashion, as your fellow and companion did; it is enough
for me that I have bewailed one of you already, and therefore I would have you
to know, that there came one unto me, and told me that you had discovered unto
him the love, that is betwixt Calisto and Melibea; and how he wanne her; and
how you your self night by night went along with him; and many other things
which now I cannot call to mind. Take heed (friend) for not to keep a
secret, is proper only unto women, yet not unto all, but such as are fools
and children. Take heed (I say) for heere-hence great hurt may come unto you:
and to this end did Nature give you two ears, and two eyes, and but one
tongue; to the end that what you see and hear, should be double to that you
speak. Take heed, and do not think your friend will keep your secret, when
you your self cannot keep it; when therefore thou art to go with thy Master,
Calisto, to that Ladies house, make no noise, lest you be heard; for some have
told me, that every night you keep a coil, and cannot contain your selves,
as men transported and ouer-ioyed.


Sosia. O what busybodies, and what idle-headed persons be they who abuse
your ears with such frivolous tales! whosoever told you that he heard any
such matter out of my mouth, he told you an untruth; and some others, perhaps,
because they see me go anights when the Moon shines, to water my horses,
whisling, and singing, and such like kind of mirth, to drive away care, and to
make me forget my toyling and my moyling, and all this before ten a clock at
night, conceive an evil suspicion; and of this suspicion, make certaineties,
and affirm that to be true, which themselves do falsely surmize. And Calisto
is not so mad, or foolish, that at such an hour as that, he should go about
a business of so great a consequence, but that he will first be sure that all
abroad is quiet, and that every man reposes himself in the sweetness of his
first sleep: and less are you to suppose, that he should go every night
unto her; for such a duty will not endure a daily visitation. And that you may
(Mistress) more manifestly see their falsehood; for (as the Proverb is) A
liar is sooner taken, then he that is lame; we have not gone eight times
a-month; and yet these lying babblers stick not to avouch, we go night after
night.


Areusa. If you love me then (my dear Love) that I may accuse them to their
faces, and take them in the nooze of their falsehood, acquaint me with those
days you determine to go thither; and if then they shall err in their
report, I shall thereby be assured of your secrecy, and their roguery; for that
being not true, which they tell me, your person shall be secured from danger,
and I freed from any sudden fear of your life, hoping long to enjoy you.


Sosia. Mistress, let us not stand any longer upon examination of witnesses.
This very night, when the clock shall strike twelve, they have appointed to
meet by the way of the garden; to morrow, you may ask them what they know;
whereof, if any man shall give you true notice, I will be content that he
shall scotch and notch me for a fool.


Areusa. And on which side of the garden (my sweetheart?) because I may
contradict them the better, if I find them varying.


Sosia. By the street where the fat Hostess dwells, just on the backeside of
her house.


Elicia. No more (good man Ragge-tayle) it is enough, we need no more. Cursed
is he who makes such Muleters acquainted with his secrets. The Blockhead has
swallowed the bayte; he has let her vnhinge him.


Areusa. Brother Sosia; this that thou have said, shall suffice to make known
thy innocence, and their wickedness; and so a good speed with thee: for I have
some other business to dispatch, and I fear me I have spent too much time
with you.


Elicia. O wise wench! O what a proper dismission, well befitting such an Ass,
who has so easily revealed his secrets.


Sosia. Courteous sweet Mistress, pardon me, if my long stay has been
troublesome unto you. And if it shall please you to accept of my service, you
shall never light upon any that shall more willingly therein adventure his
life. And so your own best wishes attend you.


Areusa. And you too. So: Are you gone, Muleter? How proudly the Villain goes
his way! I have put a trick upon you (you Rogue) I have bored you I wisse,
through the nose; pardon me, if I turn my back to thee, and withdraw my favor
from thee. I will have your coat soundly cudgelled for this gear. But to whom
do I speak? Sister, come forth, tell me what do thou think of him, whom I
sent away? Have I not handsomely played my part with him? Thus know I how to
handle such fellows; thus do such Asses go out of my hands, beaten and laden
with blows; thus your bashful fools, and no better do I use your discreeter
men that are timorous; and your devout persons that are passionate; and your
chaste men, when they are once set on fire. Learn of me therefore, Cousin: for
this is another kind of Art then that of Celestina; it is a trick beyond any
that she had in her budget; though she took me for a fool, because I was
content to be so accounted at her hands. And sithence now that we have
squeezed the Orange, and wrung out of this fool as much as we desire to know;
I think it not amiss, that we go to seek out that dogs-face, at his house,
whom on Thursday last I rated so bitterly out of mine. You shall make show, as
though you were desirous to make us friends, and that you had earnestly
entreated me to come and see him.


ACTVS XVIII.
THE ARGUMENT.
ELICIA, being resolved tomake Areusa and Centurio friends, as Areusa had
before instructed her, they go to Centurio's house; where they entreat him to
revenge their friends deaths upon Calisto and Melibea, which he promises them
to do. And as it is the nature of such Ruffians as he, not to perform what
they promise, he seeks to excuse himself, as you shall see in the sequel.

INTERLOCVTORS. Elicia, Centurio, Areusa. ELicia. Who Is at home here?


Centurio. Boy, run and see: Who dares presume to enter my house, and not
first have the manners to knock at the door? Come, come back again, Sirrah;
I now see who it is. Do not cover your face (Mistress) with your mantle, you
cannot hide your self from me. For, when I saw Elicia come in before you, I
knew she could not bring with her any bad company, nor any news that could
offend me, but rather that should please and delight me.


Areusa. If you love me (Sister) let us not in any further; for the Villain
stands upon his pantofles, and begins to look big; thinking, perhaps, that I
am come to cry him mercy. He had rather have such company as himself then
ours; come, let us go, for I am the worse to look upon him; I am ready to
swound with the very sight of such an ill-fauour'd face. Think you (Sister)
that you have used me well, to train me thus along to such a walk as this? Is
it a fit thing, that we should come from good company, and enter in here to
see this villainous fellow, that flayeth off the skins from dead men's faces,
that he may go disguysed and unknown?


Elicia. If you love me, come back again; I pray you do not you go, unless
you mean to leave half your mantle behind you. I will hold you fast, indeed
I will not let you go.


Centurio. Hold her, as you love me, hold her. Do not let her go.


Elicia. I wonder, Cousin, what you mean by this? you seem to be wiser then I
am. Tell me, what man is so foolish, or so void, of reason, that is not glad
to be visited, especially by women? Come hither, Centurio; now trust me, I
swear, she shall embrace thee, whether she will or no; if she will be
angry, let her, I will bear the blame of it.


Areusa. Embrace him? Mary gup with a murraine! I had rather see him under the
power and rigor of the Law; and had rather see him dye by the hands of his
enemies, then that I should do the slave such a kindness. No, no, I have done
with him; I have nothing to say to him; as long as I live, he and I shall be
two. And wherein (I pray) am I so beholding unto him, that I should embrace
him? nay, so much as once vouchsafe to look upon such a professed enemy as
he? I did but entreat him the other day, to have gone but a little way for me
about a business that did as much concern me as my life; and do you think
that I could get him to go? Speak him fair, entreat him, do what I could
for my life, he still answered me, No. And shall I embrace a Villain, that
regards me no more then so?


Centurio. Command me, Mistress, in such things as I know: exercise me in my
Art, and employ me in such offices as appertain to my profession: as, to
fight for you with three men at once; or say they should be more, for your
sake, I would not refuse them, but challenge them the field. Command me to kill
this or that man; to cut off a leg or an arm; to slash any woman over the
face, that shall stand in competition with thee, and deface her beauty; such
trifles as these, shall be no sooner said, then done. But do not (I prithee)
entreat me to walk afoote; nor to give thee any money; for thou know! have
it not. Gold and Silver will not tarry with me; they are flinchers, they will
not abide with me. I may cut three Capers, and yet not shake one poor blarke
out of my breeches: no man gives that which he has not; you can have no more
of a Cat, then his skin. Heart and good will, but not a ragge of money. I
live here in a house as you see, wherein you may throw a bowl and meet with
never a rub; all the moueables that I have, are not worth a button; my
implements are such as you see here before me; an old Jar, with a broken
brimme; a rusty Spit without a point; the bed wherein I lie, is bound about
with hoopes of Bucklers, which I broke in fight; my feather-bed, a bundle of
broken pykes; my sheets, shirts of torn mayle; for my pillow, I have a pouch
filled with pibble-stones. And should I bestow a collation on you, I have
nothing in the world that I can pawn, save this poor ragged and threadbare
cloak, which I have on my back.


Elicia. So let me prosper, as his words do exceedingly please me; why, he
is as obedient to you, as a servant; he speaks to you like a Suppliant, and
he has said nothing, but what is reason. What would you more of a man? I
prithee, as thou love me, speak unto him, and lay aside your displeasure;
suffer him not to live thus sad and melancholy, but speak kindly unto him,
and put him out of his dumps, since he offers his person so willingly to your
disposal.


Centurio. Offer my self, Elicia? I swear unto thee, by the Chriscrosse Row,
by the whole Alphabet, and sillabication of the letters, that my arm trembles,
to think what I would execute for her sake; for it is, and ever shall be my
continual meditation, to study how I may please her, but it is my
unhappiness, that it never hits right. The last night I was adream'd, that in
her quarrel I challenged four men into the field, all of them well known
unto her, if I should name them; and me thought I slew one of them; and for
the rest which fled, he that escaped best, left his left arm at my foot. Much
better should I have bestirred my self, had it been day, and that I had been
awake, if the proudest of them should have once presumed but to have touched her
shoo.


Areusa. I take thee at thy word; now we be friends; and in good time have we
met. I here pardon what is past, but upon condition that you revenge me upon
a Gentleman, called Calisto, who has wronged both me, and my Cousin.


Centurio. O! how I turn Renegado? How feign would I renew the condition? But
tell me; has he made even with the world?


Areusa. All Is one for that, take you no care.


Centurio. Well, seeing you will have it so, let us send him to dine in hell,
without company.


Areusa. But do you hear? Interrupt me not; Fail me not, I advise you; this
night (if you will) you may take him napping.


Centurio. No more, I apprehend your meaning; I know the whole course of his
love; how he carries himself in it; how such and such suffered in the
business: as also where you two are galled; I know whither he goes, at what
hour, and with whom. But tell me, how many accompany him?


Areusa. Only two; and those young fellows.


Centurio. This is too small a prey, too poor a pittance; my sword will have
but a short supper; it would fare far better at some other time, then that
which now you have concluded on.


Areusa. No, no; this is but to shift us off, and to excuse your not doing it.
It will not serve your turn, you must give this bone to some other dog to
pick; I must not be fed with delays; I will see whether sayings and doings
eat together at your Table; whether deeds and words sit both at one board
with you?


Centurio. If my sword should but tell you the deeds it has done, it would
want time to utter them. What does impeople Churchyards but it? Who makes
Surgeons rich but it? Who sets Armourers aworke but it? Who hewes, and
vnriuiteth the finest maile but it? Who drives before him, and shiuers in
pieces the bucklers of Barcelona, but it? Who slices the helmets of Colatay^d,
but it? Who shreds the Casks of Almazen, as short as if they were made of
Pumpions, but it? These twenty years has it found me food; by means of it
am I feared of men, and beloved of women, only your self excepted; for it,
the name of Centurio was given to my Grandfather; for it, my father likewise
was called Centurio, and so am I.


Elicia. But I pray, tell me, what did your sword, that your Grandfather should
gain his name by it? Was he by it made Captain of a hundred men?


Centurio. No, he was made by it Champion to an hundred women.


Areusa. We will have nothing to do with your Pedigree, nor famous Acts of
old; if you will do that I spoke to you of, resolve suddenly, for we must be
gone.


Centurio. I long more for this night, wherein I may give you content, then you
long to be revenged. And that every thing may be done to your good liking; make
your own choice, what death you will have him dye. For I can show you a
Bead-roll (if you will see it) wherein there are set down some seven hundred
and seventy several sorts of deaths; which when you have seen, you may choose
that which likes you best.


Elicia. If you love me ( Areusa) let not this matter be put into such a
mad-mans hands; he is too bloody for the business: and it were better to let
all alone, then that the City should receive such a scandal; so that our
second harm shall be worse then the first.


Areusa. I pray content your self, Sister, hold your peace. Name that City
unto us (if you can) which is not full of hurly-burlies, and where some
scandals do not arise.


Centurio. The affronts and disgraces which are now in request, and wherein I am
most conversant, are banging a man over the shoulders with a sword, having it is
scabbard on; dry-beatings, without drawing of blood; thumping him on the breast,
or making his head ring noone with the po^mell of my sword, or by falsifying of
a thrust or blow, to give him his payment where he least looks for it. Others
I use like Siues, pricking them full of holes with my poniard; some I cut in a
large size, giving them a fearful stocada, or mortal wound: and now and then
I use my cudgel, or bastonado, that my sword may keep holy day, and rest it
self from it is labor.


Elicia. For loves sake ha done, tell us of no more. Bastonado him, I pray
thee: for I would have him beaten, but not slain.


Centurio. I swear by the whole generation of Turk and Termagaunt, that it is
as possible for this right arm of mine to bastonado a man, and not kill him,
as it is for the Sun to stand still in the Firmament, and never move.


Areusa. Sister, let not you and I sorrow for the matter; why should we seem
to pity him? Let him do with him what he will; let him kill him, as he
finds himself humored, when he comes to do the business: let Melibea
weep as well as you have done before her: and so let us leave him. Centurio;
see you give a good account of that which is committed to your charge. Take
your own course; any way, so as you revenge us on him, shall content us; but
in any case take heed, that he do not escape without paying for his error.


Cent. O Heavens! he is going to Pluto I warrant you already; I will give him
his passe-port, I warrant you, unless he betake him to his heels, and run
away from me. Dearest in my affection, it glads me to the heart, that I have
this occasion offered unto me (though it be but in a trifle) and a matter
scarce worth thanks; that you may know by this, how far I would (if occasion
served) enforce my self for your sake.


Areusa. Mars direct thy hand aright. And so farewell, for it is time for us to
be gone.


Centurio. Well, adieu. Go your ways, like a couple of headstrong and
pertinacious whores as you be. Now will I bethink my self, how I may excuse
my self of my promise; and in such sort too, that they may be persuaded, that
I used all possible diligence for to execute their desire, and that it was not
of negligence, for the freeing of my self from danger. I will feign my self
sick: But what will that profit me? for then they will be at me again when I
am well. Again, if I shall tell them that I have been there, and that I
forced them to fly, they will ask me who they were? how many in number, and
in what place I buckled with them? and what apparel they wore? and by what
marks I knew them to be such and such? and the devil awhit shall I be able to
tell them: And then all the fat is in the fire. What counsel then shall I
take, that may cumply with mine own safety, and their desire? I will send for
lame Thraso, and his companions, and tell them, that because this night I shall
be otherwise employed, they would go and make a clattering with their Swords
and Bucklers in manner of a fray, for to fear, and affright certain young
men, whom they shall find in such a place, which service was faithfully
recommended unto me to execute. This I know is a sure course, and no other
hurt can follow thereupon, save to make them fly, and so get them home to bed.


ACTVS XIX.
THE ARGUMENT.
CALISTO, going with Sosia and Tristan to Pleberic's garden to visit his
Melibea, who staid looking for him, attended by Lucrecia; Sosia recounts unto
Tristan all that which had passed betwixt him and Areusa. Calisto remaining in
the garden with Melibea: Thraso and his companions come, sent thither by the
appointment of Centurio, for the fulfilling of that which he had promised to
Areusa, and Elicia. Upon whom Sosia sallies forth. Now Calisto hearing from the
garden where he remained with Melibea, the clashing and clattering which they
made, would needs goefoorth amongst them. Which issuing forth was the cause
that his days were finished; for this is the recompense which such Lovers
receive. Whence they may learn, that it is better for them not to love at
all, then so to love.

INTERLOCVTORS. Sosia, Tristan, Calisto, Melibea, Lucrecia. SOsia. Softly, that
we may not be heard. As we go from hence to Pleberio's garden, I will tell
thee all (brother Tristan) that passed this day, betwixt Areusa, and my self,
taking my self now to be the happiest man in the world. Thou shall understand
then, that upon the good report which she heard of me, she fell extremely in
love with me, and sent me word by Elicia, that I would do her the kindness,
as to come and speak with her. But omitting many other speeches of good
counsel, which then past between us, she made present show unto me, that
she was now as much mine, as ever she was Parmeno's. She requested me, that
I would continually come and visit her; and that she did not doubt, but that
she should long enjoy my love. And I swear to thee (brother) by that
dangerous way wherein we walk, and as ever any good may hereafter befall
me, that twice or thrice it was as much as ever I could do for my life, to
forbear from boording her; but that very shame did hinder me, seeing her so
fair, and so well clad, and my self in an old Mouse-eaten cloak: still as
she moved and advanced her self, she did breathe forth a most sweet and
redolent odor of Musk; and I never stirred, or heau'd my body, but I sent
forth a most rank sent of that horse-dung, which had got within my shoes:
She had a hand as white as snow, and ever and anon, as she pulled off her
glove, thou would have thought, that she had scattered flowers of Orenges
about the room; so that as well in regard of this, as also because at that
time she was somewhat busy, I was content to defer my boldness till
another day: as likewise because all things at the first sight are not so
tractable; for the more they are communicated, the better are they understood
in their participation.


Tristan. Friend Sosia, another more ripe and mature brain, and better
experimented in matters of the world then mine is, were very necessary to be
your aduiser in this business; yet as farreforth as my tender age, and the
means of my natural parts and wit shall be able to reach unto; I will tell
you what I think. This woman, (as you told me your self) is a known and a
noted whore; and therefore whatsoever has past between you, flatter not your
self, but rather believe, that her words do not want deceit. Her offers, I
persuade me were false, though I know not to what end she made them. If she
love thee, because thou art a Gentleman; how many better then thy self has
she rejected? If because thou art rich; she knows well enough that thou have
no other dust, then that which clings to the Curry-combe. If because thou art
nobly descended, and of high Lineage; she knows thy name is Sosia, and so was
thy fathers; and that he was borne and bred in a poor little Hamlet, getting
his living by following the Plough-tayle, and breaking Clods of earth, for
which thy self art more fit then to make a Lover. Be wi^e, Sosia, and consider
with thy self, if she do not go a bir^ing, to see if she could get out of
thee, the secrecy of this walk, whereby to work some heart-burning, and breed
no good blood betwixt Calisto and Pleberio, out of that envy which she bears
to Melibea's pleasure. Beware (I say:) for Envy (I tell you) is an incurable
infirmity, when it is once settled: she is a guest that is always more
troublesome, then thankful for her lodging, and is never merry, but at other
folks miseries; nor ever laughes, but at a shrewd turn. Now then, if this be
so: O! how this wicked woman will deceive thee with her smooth and subtle
words, whereof, such as she are never to seek, but have them still ready in
the deck, and more perfect then their Pater noster? With this venomous vice,
she will not stick to damn her soul, so as she may please her appetite;
she would feign turn all things topsituruy, and set men together by the
ears, and only for to content her damnable desire. O Ruffianly Strumpet! O
mankind Queen! With what white bread has she given thee crooked pinnes, to
choke thee? She cares not now she sells and barters her body, so as she may
truck and exchange it for strife and contention. Hear me, Sosia, and if thou
do as thou may presume upon it, that it is as I tell thee, deal (if thou will be advised by me) as doubly with her; for he that deceiues the deceiuer,
you know what I mean: and if the Fox be crafty, more crafty is he that
catches him. I would have thee make a counter-mine against these her wicked,
and devilish imaginations. Set up scaling ladders to meet with her lewdness;
and then cry quittance with her, when she thinks her self most safe and
secure; and laugh at her afterward, when thou art by thy self all alone in
thy stable: the bay horse thinks one thing, and he that saddles him, another.


Sosia. O Tristan! thou discreet young man; more have thou spoken then could
be expected from one of thy years. A shrewd suspicion have thou raised in me,
and I fear me too true; but because we are hard by the garden, and our
Master is close at our heels, let us break off this discourse, which is too
large for the present, and defer it to some fitter opportunity.


Calisto. Do you hear there? Set up the ladder, and see you make no noise;
for me thinks I hear my Mistress tongue. Sure it is she, she is talking to
some body, who ever it be. I will get me up to the top of the wall, and there
will I stand harkning awhile, to see if I can hear from her any good token of
her love to me, in this my absence.


Melibea. Sing on ( Lucrecia) if thou love me; I prithee sing on; for it
does my heart good to hear thee; sing on, I say, till my Lord come. Be not too
loud, and let us go aside into this green walk, that they that pass by may
not hear us.


Lucrecia. O that I kept the Key,
Which opes to these fair flowers,
To pluck them day by day,
When you do leave these bowers.
The Lillies and the Roses,
Put on their newest colors,
And when thy Love reposes,
They breathe their freshest odours.

Melibea. O how sweet is thy music to mine ears! it makes my heart even to
melt and dissolve for joy. I prithee give not over.


Lucrecia. Sweet is the fount, the place,
I drank at, being dry;
More sweet Calisto's face,
In Melibea's eye.
And though that it be night,
His sight my heart will cheer,
And when he down shall light,
O how I Will clippe my Dear!
The Wolf for joy does leap,
To see the Lambkinnes move,
The Kidde joys in the teate,
And thou ioy'st in thy Love.
Never was loving wight,
Of's friend desired so;
Never Walks of more delight,
Nor nights more free from woe.

Melibea. Friend Lucrecia, me thinks, I see that which thou singest,
represented most lively unto me; me thinks, I see him as perfectly with these
mine eyes, as if he stood just before me. Go on; for thou do exceeding
well, and with an excellent Air: I will bear a part with thee, and help thee
as well as I can.


Melibea and Lucrecia. Sweet trees who shade this mold
Of earth, your heads down bend,
When you those eyes behold
Of my best-loued friend.
Fair stars whose bright appear,
Does beautify the sky,
Why wake ye not my Dear,
If he asleeping lie?

Melibea. Hear me now, I prithee; I will sing alone.


Melibea. You birds, whose warblings prove
Aurora draws near,
Go fly, and tell my Love,
That I expect him here.
The night does poasting move,
Yet comes he not again;
God grant some other Love
Do not my Love detain.

Calisto. The sweetness of thy voice has rauish't me; I cannot endure to let
thee live any longer in a pained expectation. O my sweet Mistress, and my
life's happiness; what woman could ever be borne into the world, that should be
able to deprive thee of thy great deseruingnesse? O interrupted melody! O
music suddenly broke often! O short-timed pleasure! O my dear heart, why did
thou not continue thy harmony, without interrupting thy joy, and cumplying with
both our desires?


Melibea. O pleasing treason; O sweete-sudden passion! What? my Lord? my soul;
Is it he? I cannot believe it; where have thou been, thou bright shining
Sun? In what place have thou hid thy brightness from me? Is it not a pretty
while since that thou heard'st me? Why did thou suffer me to send forth my
words into the Air, senseless and foolish as they were, and in this hoarse
Swannish voice of mine? look on the Moon, and see how bright she shines upon
us: look on the Clouds, and see how speedily they rack away: harken to the
gurgling waters of this fountain: how sweet a murmr, and what a pretty kind
of purling they make, rushing along these fresh herbs, and pleasant flowers:
harken to these high Cypresses, how one bough makes peace with another by the
intercession of a mild, gentle, and temperate wind, which moves them to and
fro. Behold these silent and quiet shades, how dark they are, and how
excellently well prepared for the covering and concealing of our sports.
Lucrecia? why, how now friend? what are you doing? art thou turned mad with
pleasure? Let me alone with my Love; touch him not, I charge you; do not you
pluck and hale him from me; do not burden his body with your heavy arms.
Let me enjoy what is mine, you shall not possess any part of my pleasure.


Calisto. Dear Lady, and glory of my life; if you love me, give not over your
singing; let not my presence, which glads thee, be of a worse, and more
unfortunate condition, then my absence which did grieve thee.


Melibea. Why (my Love) would you have me sing? or how can I sing? for my
desire of thee, was that which ruled my voice, and made me to air my notes.
But now that thou art come, that desire disappeares, it is vanished, and the
Tone of my voice distempred, and out of tune. And because you, Sir, are the
pattern of courtesy and good behavior, how can you in reason require my
tongue to speak, when as you cannot rule your own hands, and keep them
quiet? Why do not you forget these tricks, and learn to leave them? Lay your
command upon them to be quiet, and will them to lay aside this offensive
custom, and consider (my dearest) that as to see thee, whilst thou carriest
thy self quietly and ciuilly, is the greatest happiness that either my heart
or my eye can enjoy; so is it as displeasing unto me, to see thee handle me so
roughly. Thy honest sporting pleases me, but thy dishonest hands offend me,
especially when they are too far out of reason. And, though love ofttimes
forget reason, yet amongst your well-educated, and noble and generous spirits,
kindness keeps a decorum, and revels not but with decency; let such
(Sweetheart) be our embraces, such and so modest be our dalliance (my dearest
Calisto, my Love, my Lord.) And since I wholly subject my self to your
pleasure; be it your pleasure, to take and make such worthy benefit of my
affection, presence and service, as best beseemes true Lovers, and is agreeable
to both our high births and breeding. But alas silly woman, why should I direct
you? No, I will not, Do, Calisto, do what you will, and say what you will, I
am yours to use; please your self, and you shall please me.


Calisto. Madame, ferueney of love loves not to be idle; pardon then, I pray
you, if I have been too busy.


Lucrecia. Now never trust me again, if I harken to them any longer. Here Is a
life indeed! O how I feel my self melt within, like snow against the Sun;
and how squeamish my Mistress seems, because, forsooth, she would feign be
entreated! Assuredly, had I been in her case, and have lost so much time, I
should think the worse of my self the longest day of my life.


Melibea. Sir, shall I send Lucrecia to fetch you some sweetmeats?


Calisto. No, Lady; no other sweetmeats for me, save only to embrace this
thy body, to fold it within mine arms, and to have the possession of thy
beauty. Every where a man may eat and drink for his money; that a man may
have at any time; it is every where to be bought: but that which is not
vendible, that which in all the world is not to be matched; and save only in
this garden, not to be found again from one Pole to the other. Why wish you me
not rather that I should not let slip the least moment, in inioying so sweet
a treasure?


Lucrecia. My head aches with hearing; and yet their tongues ache not with
talking, nor their arms with colling, nor their lips with kissing. Sure, they
will make me gnaw the finger of my glove all to pieces.


Calisto. O my dear Mistress! I could wish it would never be day, that I
might still enjoy that sweet happiness, and fullness of content, which my
senses receive in the noble conuersing with this thy delicate, and dainty
sweet Self.


Melibea. Sir, it is I that enjoy this happiness, this fullness of content. If
any body gain by it, it is I; and I must acknowledge my self most infinitely
beholding unto you, that you would vouchsafe to visit me in so kind and
loving a manner, as no thanks are able to requite so great a favor.


Sosia. Out, you Ruffianly Rascals; come ye to fright those that fear you
not? Had I bin ware of your coming, or had you staid any longer, I would have
sent some of you packing, and have given you somewhat that should have stuck by
you^ Out, you Rogues.


Calisto. Madame, this is Sosia's voice; suffer me to go and see, that they
do not kill him, for there is no body with him but a little Page that came
with me. Give me my cloak quickly, it lies under you.


Melibea. O unfortunate that I am! I pray do not go without your Curaces. If
you love me, come back; I will help to arm you my self.


Calisto. That (Mistress) which a sword, a cloak, and a good heart cannot do,
can never be effected by Curace, Caske or Cowardice.


Sosia. Yea? are you come again? I shall be with you to bring by and by; you
come for wool, do you? But if you stay a little longer, I shall send you home
without a fleece, I shall plume you, I shall, you Rascals.


Calisto. Lady, if you love me, let me go. The ladder stands ready for me.


Melibea. O miserable me! Why do thou go so furiously, and so fast? and all
disarmed as thou art, to hazard thy life among'st thou know not whom?
Lucrecia, come hither quickly; for Calisto is gone to thrust himself into a
quarrel. Let us take his Curaces, and throw them over the wall; for he has
left them here behind him.


Tristan. Stay, Sir, do not come down. They are gone; it is no body but lame
Thraso, and a company of other Rogues with him, that made a noise as they past
by: And Sosia is come back again. Take heed, Sir, hold fast by the ladder,
for fear lest you fall.


Calisto. Oh, oh. Look upon me. Ay me! I am a dead man: oh.


Tristan. Come hither quickly, Sosia; for our unfortunate Master is fallen from
the ladder, and neither speaks nor wagges.


Sosia. Master, Master, do you hear, Sir? Let us call a little at this other
door. He hears on neither ear; he is as dead as a doore-nayle; there is no
more life in him, then in my great grandfather, who died some hundred years
since. O foul mishappe! What will become of us?


Lucrecia. Hark, hark, Madame! what a great mischance is this?


Melibea. O wretch that I am! what do I hear?


Tristan. O, my Master, my master is dead! and with him all my happiness, all
my good; he is fallen headlong down; he is dead; he is dead: and (which is a
fearful thing) suddenly dead. O pitiful, pitiful, O horrible sight. Help
Sosia, help to gather up these brains, that lie scattered here amongst the
stones, and let us put them again into his head. O unfortunate Master! O
unlucky day! O sudden and unexpected end!


Melibea. O disconsolate woman that I am! What a thing is this? What vile
mishap, that has thus disturbed our quiet? What mischance can possibly prove
so cruel, as that which I now hear? Help me ( Lucrecia) to get up this wall,
that I may see my sorrow, unless you will have me fill my fathers house with
cries and skrikes. What? Is all my joy turned into smoke? Is all my pleasure
lost? All my glory come to an end?


Lucrecia. Tristan, wha'ts the matter (my Love) why do thou weep so
bitterly? why take you on so, beyond all measure and reason?


Tristan. I bewail my great misery; I bewail my many sorrows. My Master
Calisto has fallen from the ladder, and is dead; his head is in three pieces;
he dyed suddenly, and lamentably torn and dashed to pieces; bear this sad
message to his new friend, that she must never more expect her pained Lover.
Sosia, do thou take up his feet, and let us carry his body hence, that he
may not in this place suffer dishonor, though he have suffered death. Let
mourning go along with us; let solitariness accompany us; let discomfort
wait upon us; let sorrow apparel us; let mourning weeds cover us; and let us
put on sad habits.


Melibea. Ay me, of all other the most miserable! So short a time, to possess
my pleasure? so soon, to see my sorrows come upon me?


Lucrecia. Madame, tear not your face; rent not your hair: What? but even now
all pleasure? and now all sorrow? Out alas! that one, and the selfsame Planet
should so suddenly afford an effect so contrary? where is your courage? Fie,
what a faint heart have you? pray you arise from the ground; let not your
father find you in so suspicious a place: for if you continue thus, you cannot
choose but be heard. Why, Madame, Madame, I say hear you me? Do you hear,
Lady? Of all loves, do not fall any more into these swounds. Be as valiant and
courageous in enduring your sorrow, as you were hot and hardy in committing
your error.


Melibea. Hear you what moan his poor servants make? hear you how woefully
they lament his loss? wailing, and weeping, praying, and answering each to
other, they carry away from me all my good, all my happiness; my dead joy, my
dearest Love, they carry away from me; my time is come; I am but a dead woman;
I can live no longer, since I may no more enjoy the joy of my heart. O that I
should let thee go! that I should hold that Jewel no faster which I so lately
held in my hands. O ungrateful mortals! O unthankful as we be, who never
know our happiness, until we want it!


Lucrecia. Up, up, Madame; for it will be a greater dishonor unto you, to be
found thus here in the garden, then either the pleasure you received by his
coming, or the sorrow which you take for his death. Come, let us into your
chamber. And go lay you down on your bed; and I will call your father. We
will faigne some other ill, since to hide this, it is impossible.


ACTVS XX.
THE ARGUMENT.
LVCRECIA comes to Pleberio's chamber, and knockes at the door. Pleberic asks
her what is the matter? Lucrecia intreates him to come presently to see his
daughter Melibea. Pleberio rises, and goes straight to Melibea's chamber. He
comforts her; demanding what she ayleth? and where was her grief? Melibea
faignes her pain to be about her heart. Melibea sends her father forth for
some musical Instruments. She and Lucrecia get them, when he was gone, to
the top of a Tower. She sends away Lucrecia, and shuts the door after her.
Her father comes to the foot of the Tower, Melibea discouers unto him all the
whole business of what had passed. That done, she throws her self down from
the top of the Tower.

INTERLOCVTORS. Pleberio, Lucrecia, Melibea. PLeberio. What would you,
Lucrecia. What means this exceeding haste, and with so great importunity, and
troublednesse of mind? What ails my daughter? What sudden sickness has
seized on her, that I cannot have the leisure to put on my clothes? nay,
scarce so much time as to rise?


Lucrecia. Sir, if you will see her alive, come quickly. What her grief is, I
know not; Nay, scarce know I her, so disfigured is her face.


Pleberio. Come, let us go quickly; lead the way; in before; lift up the
hangings; open this same window; set it wide open, that I may have light enough
to take a full view of her. Why, how now daughter? What Is the matter? What is
your pain? Where lies it? What a strange thing is this? What faintness do I
see? What weakness and feebleness? Look upon me, daughter! I am thy father:
Speak unto me, for pitties sake speak; and tell me the cause of your grief,
that we may the sooner provide a remedy. Send not my gray hayres with sorrow
to the grave; thou know I have no other good but thee; no other worldly
happiness. Open thy gladsome eyes; look cheerfully upon me.


Melibea. Ay me! What shall I do?


Pleberio. What woe can equal mine, to see thee in such woeful plight? Your
mother, as soon as ever she but heard you were ill, fell presently into a
swound, and lies in that extremity, and in a manner senseless, that she is not
able to come and see thee. Be of good cheer, pluck up thy heart; and so raise
up thy spirits, that thou may rise and go along with me to visit her. Tell
me (sweet soul) the cause of thy sorrow.


Melibea. My cure is remediless.


Pleberio. My dear daughter, the best beloved of thy aged father; for pitties
sake, let not this thy cruel torment, cause thee to despair of recovery,
being carried away with the violence and infirmity of thy passion: for sorrow
still assaulteth the weakest hearts, and conquers them most, that are most
cowardly: if thou will but tell me thy grief, it shall presently be remedied;
for neither physic nor Physicians, nor servants shall be wanting, for the
recovery of thy health, whether it consist in herbs, in stones, or in words,
or remain more secret in the bodies, and bowels of beasts. Do not then vex
me any more; torment me no longer; force me not out of my wits; make me not
mad, but tell me, good daughter, what, and where is your pain?


Mel. I feel a mortal wound, even in the very midst of my heart, the anguish
whereof is so grievous unto me, that it will scarce suffer me to fetch my
breath, much less to speak: there is no malady like unto mine; it is of a
different nature from all other diseases. And before you can come to cure it in
my heart, you must first take out my heart; for it lies even in the hidden and
most secret place thereof.


Pleberio. Too too soon have thou received this feeling and sense of elder
years; youth should be a friend to pleasure and mirth, and an enemy unto care
and sorrow. Rise then from hence, and let us go and take some fresher air
along by the River side; come, and make merry with your mother; you shall see,
that will ease and rid away your pain. Take heed what you do; do not
wilfully cast away your self; for if you fly and shun mirth, there is not
any thing in the world more contrary to your disease.


Melibea. Let us go whither you please: and if it stand with your liking, Sir,
let us go up to the top of the Leads; for from thence I may enjoy the
pleasing sight of those Ships that pass to and fro, and perhaps it may give
some ease to my grief.


Pleberio. Come, let us go and take Lucrecia with us.


Melibea. With a very good will. I pray (father) will you cause some musical
instrument to be sent unto me, that by playing thereon, or singing thereunto, I
may see if I can drive away this grief; for though on the one side, the force
and violence thereof does much torment me; yet on the other side, I doubt not
but those sweet sounding Instruments and delightful harmony, will much lossen
and mitigate my sorrow.


Pleberio. This (daughter) shall presently be done: I will go my self, and
will it to be provided.


Melibea. Friend Lucrecia, this place (me thinks) is too high; I am very loath
to leave my fathers company. I prithee make a step down unto him, and entreat
him to come to the foot of this Tower; for I have a word or two, which I forgot
to tell him, that he should deliver from me to my mother.


Lucrecia. I go, Madame.


Melibea. They have all of them left me. I am now alone by my self, and no
body with me. The manner of my death falls fit and pat to my mind; it is some
ease unto me, that I and my beloved Calisto shall so soon meet again. I will
shut and make fast the door, that no body may come up to hinder my death, nor
disturb my departure, nor to stop me in my journey, wherein I purpose to poast
unto him; not doubting, but to visit him as well this very day, as he did me
this last night. All things fadge aright, and have fallen out as luckily, as I
could wish it; I shall now have time and leisure enough, to recount to my
father Pleberio, the cause of this my short and sudden end. I confess, I shall
much wrong his silver hayres, and offer much injury to his elder years; I shall
work great woe unto him by this my error; I shall leave him in great heaviness
and desolation all the days of his life: But admit my death will be the death
of my dearest parents, and put case, that the shortning of my days, will be
the shortning of theirs; who does not know, but that others have been more
cruel to their parents then I am? Prusias, King of Bythinia, without any
cause, not enduring that pain, which I do, slew his own father Ptolomy, King
of Egypt, slew both father and mother, and brother and wife, and all for the
love of his Mistress. Orestes killed his mother, Clytemnestar, and that cruel
Emperor Nero, only for the fulfilling of his pleasure, murdered his own
mother. These, and such as they, are worthy of blame. These are true
Parricides; not I; who with mine own punishment, and with mine own death,
purge away the guilt, which otherwise, they might more justly lay upon me for
their deaths. There have been others, far more cruel, who have slain their
own children, and their own brothers, in comparison of whose errors, mine is
as nothing; at least nothing so great. Philip, King of Macedon; Herod, King of
Iuryne; Constantine, Emperor of Rome; Laodice, Queen of Cappadocea; and Medea
the Sorceresse; all these slew their own sons and dearest children, and that
without any reason or just cause, preserving their own persons still in
safety. To conclude, that great cruelty of Phr^ates, King of the Parthians,
occurres to my remembrance, who, because he would have no successor behind
him, murdered Orodes, his aged father, as also his only son, besides some
thirty more of his brethren. These were delicts worthy blame indeed; because
they keeping their own persons free from peril, butchered their Ancestors,
their successors, and their brethren. True it is, that though all this be so,
yet are we not to imitate them in those things wherein they did amiss; but it
is not in my power to do otherwise. And thou great Governor of the heavens,
who art witness to my words, thou see the small power that I have over my
passion; thou see how my liberty is captiuated, and how my senses are taken
with that powerful love of that late deceased Gentleman, who has deprived me
of that love, which I bear to my living parents.


Pleberio. Daughter Melibea, what make you there alone? what is it you would
you have with me? shall I come up to you?


Melibea. No (good father) content you where you are, trouble not your self*
nor strive to come to me; you shall but disturb and interrupt that short
speech which I am now to make unto you. Now, by and by shall thou be suddenly
wounded; thy heart shall presently be pricked with grief, and shall bleed
abundantly, to see the death of thy only daughter. My end draws near; at
hand is my, rest, and thy passion* my ease, and thy pain; my hour of keeping
company and thy time of solitariness. You shall not need (my most honored
father) to seek out any instruments of music to assuage my sorrow; nor use
any other sound, save the sound of bells, for to ring my knell, and bring my
body to the grave. And, if thou can harken unto me for tears, if thine eyes
will give thine cares leave to hear, thou shall hear the desperate cause of
this my forced, yet joyful departure; see thou neither speak nor weep;
interrupt me^^ot, either with tears or words, unless thou mean more
hereafter to be tormented, in not knowing why I do kill my self, then thou
art now sorrowful to see my death. Neither ask, nor answer me any thing; nor
question me any further, then what of mine own accord I shall willingly tell
thee; for when the heart is surcharged with sorrow, the ear is deaf to good
counsel; and at such a time, good and wholesome words rather incense, then
allay rage. Hear (my aged father) the last words that ever I shall speak unto
you. And if you entertain them, as I hope you will, you will rather excuse,
then condemn my error. I am sure, you both well perceive and hear that most
sad and doleful lamentation, which is made thorowout all this City; I am sure
you hear this great noise and ringing of bells, the skriking and cryings out
of all sorts of people, this howling, and barking of dogs, this noise and
clattering of Armor. Of all this, have I been the cause; I, even this very
day, have clothed the greater part of the Knights, and Gentlemen of this City
in mourning. I, even this very day, have left many servants orphaned, and quite
destitute of a Master. I have been the cause, that many a poor soul has now
lost it is alms and relief. I have been the occasion, that the dead should
have the company of the most complete Gentleman, for his good graces and
qualities that ever was borne. I have been the occasion, that the living have
lost the only Pattern and Paragon of courtesy, of gallant inventions, of
witty devices, of neatness and decency in his clothes, of speech, of gate, of
kindness, and of virtue. I have been the occasion, that the earth does now
enjoy the most noble body, and the freshest flower of youth, that ever was
created in this age of ours. And because you may stand amazed and astonished at
the sound of these my unusual and unaccustomed crimes; I will open the
business, and make this matter appear more clear unto you.

It is now (dear father) many days since that a Gentleman called Calisto,
whom you well knew, as likewise his Ancestors, and noble Lineage, did languish
and pine away for my love. As for his virtues and goodness, they were
generally known to the whole world. So great was his loue-torment, and so
little both place and opportunity to speak with me, that he was driven to
discover his passion to a crafty and subtle woman, named Celestina, which
Celestina, coming as a suitor unto me in his behalf, drew my secret love
from forth my bosom, and made me to manifest that unto her, which I concealed
from mine own mother; she found the means to win me to her will; she made the
match between us; she plotted how his desire and mine should take effect. And
if he dearly loved me, I was not therein deceived; she made up that sad
conclusion of that sweet and unfortunate execution of his will; and thus being
overcome with the love of Calisto, I gave him entrance into your house; he
scaled your walls with ladders, and brake into your garden; brake my chaste
purpose, by taking from me the flower of my Virginity. And thus almost this
month have we lived in this delightful error of love. And as he came this
lastnight unto me, as he was wont to do, even just about the time that he
should have returned home (as ill fortune would have it, who in the mutability
of her nature, orders and disposes all things, according to her disordered
custom) the walls being high, the night dark, the ladder light and weak, his
servants that brought it, unacquainted with that kind of service, he going
down somewhat hastily to see a fray, which he heard in the street between
his servants and some others that then passed by, being in choler, making more
haste then good speed, thinking he should never come soon enough, not eying
well his steps, he sets his foot quite besides the rounds, and so fell down,
and with that woeful and unfortunate fall, he pitched upon his head, and had
his brains beaten out, and dashed in pieces against the stones and pauement of
the street. Thus did the destinies cut off his thread; thus cut off his life
without confession; cut off my hope; cut off my glory; cut off my company.
Things therefore being thus; tell me (father) What cruelty were it in me, he
dying disbrained, that I should live pained all the days of my life? His death
inuiteth mine; inuiteth? nay, inforceth me, that it be speedily effected, and
without delay; it teaches me, that I should also fall headlong down, that I
may imitate him in all things. It shall not be said of me, that those that are
dead and gone, are soon forgotten. And therefore I will seek to content him
in my death, since I had not time to give him content in my life. O my Love,
and dear Lord, Calisto, expect me, for now I come. But stay a little, though
thou do expect me; and be not angry, I prithee, that I delay thee, being
that I am now paying my last debt, and giving it my final account to my aged
father, to whom I owe much more. O my best beloved father, I beseech you, if
ever you did love me in this painful forepassed life, that we may both be
interred in one Tomb, and both our Obsequies be solemnized together. I would
feign speak some words of comfort unto you, before this my gladsome and
well-pleasing end, gathered and collected out of those ancient books, which
for the bettering of my wit and understanding, you willed me to read, were it
not that my memory fails me, being troubled and disquieted with the loss and
death of my Love: as also because I see your ill endured tears trickle so fast
down your wrinckled cheeks. Recommend me to my most dear and best-beloued
mother; and do you inform her at large of the doleful occasion of my death.
I am glad with all my heart, that she is not here present with you; for her
sight would but increase my sorrow. Take (aged father) the gifts of old age;
for in large days, large griefs are to be endured. Receive the pledge and
earnest of thy reverend age; receive it at the hands of thy beloved daughter. I
sorrow much for my self, more for you, but most for my aged mother: and so I
recommend me to you both, and both of you unto your more happiness, to whom I
offer up my soul; leaving the care to you, to cover this body that is now
coming down unto you.


ACTVS XXI.
THE ARGUMENT.
PPLEBERIO, returning weeping to his chamber; his wife Alisa demands the cause
of this so sudden an ill? He relates unto her the death of her daughter
Melibea; showing unto her, her bruised body, and so making lamentation for her,
he gives a conclusion to this Tragic Comedy.

INTERLOCVTORS. Alisa, Pleberio. ALisa. Why Pleberio? my Lord! what is the
matter? why do you weep and snobbe? and take on in such extreme and violent
manner? I have lain ever since in a dead swound, so was I overcome with grief,
when I heard that our daughter was so ill. And now hearing your pitiful
lamentations, your loud cryings, your unaccustomed complaints, your mournings
and great anguish, they have so pierced my very bowels, made so quick a
passage to my heart, and have so quickened and revived my troubled and benumbed
senses, that I have now put away the grief, which I entertained: thus one
grief drives out another; and sorrow expels sorrow. Tell me the cause of
your complaint; Why do you curse your honorable old age? Why do you desire
death? Why do you tear your milke-white hayres up by the roates? Why do you
scratch, and rend your reverend face? Is any ill befalne Melibea? For I pray
you tell me; for if she be not well, I cannot live.


Pleberio. Out alas! Ay me; (my most noble wife.) Our solace is in the suds;
our joy is turned into annoy; all our conceived hopes are utterly lost; all our
happiness is quite overthrown; let us now no longer desire to live. And
because unexpected sorrows leave a greater impression of grief; and because
they may bring thee the sooner to thy grave; as also, that I may not alone by
my self bewail that heavy loss which belongs to us both; look out and
behold her, whom thou broughtst forth, and I begot, dash't and broken all to
pieces. The cause I understood from her self, but laid open more at large, by
this her sad and sorrowful servant. Help to lament these our latter days,
which are now growing to an end. O ye good people, who come to behold my
sorrows, and you Gentlemen, my loving friends, do you also assist to bewail
my misery! O my daughter! and my only good! it were cruelty in me, that I
should out-liue thee. My threescore years were fitter for the grave, then thy
twenty; but the order of my dying was altered by that extremity of grief, which
did hasten thy end. O ye my boary hayres, grown forth to no other end, save
sorrow; it would better have suited with you, to have been buried in the earth,
then with these golden tresses which lie here before me. Too too many are the
days that I have yet to live; I will complain and cry out against death; I
will accuse him of delay; how long will he suffer me to remain here after
thee! Let my life now leave me, since I must leave thy sweet company. O my
dear wife, rise up from her, and if any life be left in thee, spend that
little with me in tears and lamentations, in sobbes, and in sighs; but in
case thy soul rests now with hers; if out of very grief, thou have left
this life, why would thou lay this heavy burden on me? why let me remain
here alone, and have no body to help me in the unsheathing of my sorrows? In
this, ye women have a great advantage of us that are men; for some violent
grief can make you go out of the world without any pain; or at least cast
you into a swound, which is some ease to your sorrows. O the hard heart of a
father, why do thou not burst with grief? why do not your heart strings
crack in sunder, to see thy self bereaved of thy beloved heir? For whom did
thou build these Turrets? For whom got I honors? For whom planted trees? For
whom built ships? O hard-hearted earth, why do thou bear me any longer?
Where shall my disconsolate old age find any resting place? O variable
fortune, and full of change, thou Ministresse, and high Stewardesse of all
temporal happiness; Why did thou not execute thy cruel anger upon me? Why
did thou not ouerwhelme him with thy mutable waves, who professes himself to
be thy subject? Why did thou not rob me of my patrimony? Why did thou not
set fire on my house? Why did thou not lay waste mine inheritance? Why did
thou not strip me of my great revenues? What is it I would not thou should
have done, so as thou had left me that flourishing young plant, over which
thou ought not to have had such power? Thou might, O fortune (fluctuant,
and fluent as thou art) have given me a sorrowful youth, and a mirthfull age;
neither have therein perverted order. Better could I have borne thy blow,
better endured thy persecutions, in that my more strong, and Oaky age, then in
this my weak and feeble declining. O life fulfilled with grief, and
accompanied with naught but misery! O world, world! much have men spoken of
thee, much have men writ concerning thy deceits; and much have I heard my
self: And mine own woeful experience is able to say something of thee, as one
who have bin in the unfortunate fair, and have often bought and sold with
thee, but never had any thing that succeeded happily with me. As one who many
a time heretofore, even to this present hour, have silenced thy false
properties, and all because I would not purchase thy displeasure, and pull thy
hatred upon me: and that thou should not untimely pluck this flower from
me, which this day thou have cropped by the mightiness of thy power. And
therefore now will I go without fear, like one that has nothing to lose; or
as one to whom thy company is now odious and troublesome; or like a poor
traveler, who fearelesse of thieves, goes singing on his way. I thought in my
more tender years, that both thou and thy actions were governed by order, and
ruled by reason: But now I see thou art Pro and Con; there is no certainty in
thy calmes: thou seem now unto me to be a Labyrinth of errors; a fearful
wilderness; an habitation of wild Beasts; a Dance full of changes; a Fen full
of mire, and dirt; a Country full of thorns; a steep and craggy mountain, a
field full of stones; a meddow full of Snakes and Serpents; a pleasant garden
to look to, but without any fruit; a fountain of cares, a river of tears, a
sea of miseries; trouble without profit; a sweet poison, a vain hope, a false
joy, and a true sorrow. O thou false world! thou do cast before us the baytes
of thy best delights, and when we have swallowed them, they seeming sauoury
unto us, then do thou show us the hook that must choke us. Nor can we
avoid it, because together with us, thou do captiuate our wills: Thou
promisest mountains, but performest Mole-hils: and then thou do cast us off,
that we may not put thee in mind of making good thy vain promises. We run
through the spacious fields of thy rank vices, retchles^y, and with a loose
reyne; and then do thou discover thy ambushes unto us, when thou see there
is no way forvs to retreat. Many have forsaken thee, fearing thy sudden
forsaking of them. And well may they style themselves happy, when they shall
see, how well thou have rewarded this poor heavy sorrowful old man, for his
long service. Thou do put out our eyes, and then to make us amends, thou
anointest the place with oil: thou breakest our head, and give us a
plaster; after thou have done us a great deal of harm, thou give us a
poor cold comfort; thou do hurt unto all, that no man may boast, that others
have not their crosses as well as we; telling them, that it is some ease to
the miserable, to have companions in their misery. But I alas, disconsolate old
man stand all alone. I am singular in my sorrows; I am grieved, and have no
equal companion of my grief. No man's misfortune is like unto mine; though I
reuolue in my troubled memory, persons both present and past, I cannot instance
in the like. If I shall seek to comfort my self with the severity and
patience of Paulus Aemilius, who having lost two sons in seven days, bore
this brunt of fortune with so undaunted a courage, that the people of Rome had
rather need to be comforted by him, then he by them; yet cannot this satisfy
me, for he had two more remaining that were his adopted sons. What
companion then will they allot me of my misery? Pericles, that brave Athenian
Captain? or valiant Xenophon? Tush, they lost sons indeed, but their sons
dyed out of their sight, having lost their lives abroad in foreign Countries,
far from home; so that it was not much for the one, not to change countenanee,
but to take it cheerfully: nor for the other to answer the messenger, who
brought him the ill tidings of his sons deaths, that he should receive no
punishment, because himself had received no grief; for all this is far
differing from mine; less can thou say (thou world replenished with evil)
that Anaxagoras, and I, were alike in our loss; that we were equal in our
griefs: and that I should say of my dead daughter, as he did of his only
son, when he said; Being that I was mortal, I knew, that he whom I had begot
was to die. For my Melibea, willingly, and out of her own election, killed her
self before mine eyes, enforced thereunto through the extreme passion of her
love, so great was her torment; whereas his son was slain in battle, in a
just and lawful war. O incomparable loss; O most wretched and sorrowful
old man that I am! who the more I seek after comfort, the less reason do I
find for my comfort; for much more miserable do I find my misfortune, and
do not so much grieve at her death, as I do lament the manner of her death.
Now shall I lose together with thee (most unhappy daughter) those fears, which
were daily wont to affright me. Only thy death is that which makes me secure
of all suspicions and iealousies. What shall I do, when I shall come into thy
chamber, and thy withdrawing room, and shall find it solitary and empty? What
shall I do, when as I shall call thee, and thou shall not answer me? Who is he
that can supply that want which thou have caused? Who can stop up that great
breach in my heart which thou have made? Never any man did lose that which I
have lost this day. Though in some sort, that great fortitude of Lambas de
Auria, Duke of Genoa, seems to suit with my present estate and condition, who
seeing his son was wounded to death, took him and threw him with his own
arms forth of the ship into the sea. But such kind of deaths as these,
though they take away life, yet they give reputation; and many times, men are
enforced to undergo such actions, for to cumply with their honor, and get
themselves fame and renown. But what did enforce my daughter to dye, but only
the strong force of love? What remedy now, (thou flattering world) will thou
afford my wearisome age? How would thou have me to rely upon thee, I knowing
thy falsehoods, thy gins, thy snares, and thy nets, wherein thou intrap'st and
take our weak and feeble wills? Tell me, what have thou done with my
daughter? where have thou bestowed her? who shall accompany my disaccompanied
habitation? who shall cherish me in mine old age? who with gentle usage shall
cocker my decaying years? O Love, Love, I did not think thou had had the
power to kill thy subjects! I was wounded by thee in my youth: did pass through
the midst of thy flames. Why did thou let me escape? Was it that thou might
pay me home (for my flying from thee then) in mine old age? I had well thought,
that I had bin freed from thy snares, when I once began to grow toward forty;
and when I rested contented with my wedded consort, and when I saw I had that
fruit, which this day thou have cut down, I did not dream that thou would
in the children have taken vengeance of the parents; and I know not whether
thou woundest with the sword, or burnest with fire. Thou leauest our clothes
whole, and yet most cruelly woundest our hearts; thou make that which is
foul, to seem fair and beautiful unto us. Who gave thee so great a power?
who gave thee that name which so ill befitteth thee? If thou were Love, thou
would love thy servants; and if thou did love them, thou would not punish
them as thou do. If to be thy fellow, were to live merrily, so many would not
kill themselves, as my daughter now has, and infinite of us. What end have thy
servants and their Ministers had? as also that false Bawd, Celestina, who died
by the hands of the faithfullest companions, that ever she lighted upon in her
life, for their true performance in this thy venomous and impoisoned service?
They lost their heads; Calisto, he brake his neck; and my daughter, to imitate
him, submitted her self to the selfsame death. And of all this thou wast the
cause; they gave thee a sweet name; but thy deeds are exceeding sour: thou
do not give equal rewards; and that Law is unjust, which is not equal alike
unto all. Thy voice promises pleasure, but thy actions proclaim pain; happy
are they who have not known thee, or knowing thee, have not cared for thee.
Some led with, I know not what error, have not stickt to call thee a god; But
I would have such fools as these to consider with themselves, it sauors not of
a Deity, to murder or destroy those that serve and follow him. O thou enemy to
all reason! To those that serve thee least, thou give thy greatest rewards,
until thou have brought them at last into this thy troublesome dance. Thou art
an enemy to thy friends, and a friend to thy enemies; and all this is, because
thou do not govern thy self according to order and reason. They paint thee
blind, poor, and young; they put a Bow into thy hand, wherein thou drawest,
and shootest at random; but more blind are they that serve thee. For they never
taste or see the unsavory and distastful recompense, which they receive by thy
service; thy fire is of hot burning lightning, which scorches unto death, yet
leaves no impression or print of any wound at all. The sticks which thy flames
consume, are the souls and lives of humane creatures, which are so infinite,
and so numberless, that it scarce accurreth unto me, with whom I should first
begin, not only of Christians, but of Gentiles and of Jews; and all fo^^ooth
in requital of their good services. What shall I speak of that Macias of our
times; and how by loving, he came to his end? Of whose sad and wofu^l death,
thou wast the sole cause. What service did Paris do thee? What Helena? What
Clytemnestra? What Aegisthus? All the world knows how it went with them. How
well likewise did thou requite Sapho, Ariadne, and Leander, and many other
besides, whom I willingly silence, because I have enough to do in the
repetition of mine own misery? I complain me of the world, because I was bred
up in it; for had not the world given me life, I had not therein begot Melibea;
not being begot, she had not been borne; not being borne, I had not loved
her; and not loving her, I should not have mourned, as now I do, in this my
latter and uncomfortable old age! O my good companion! O my bruised daughter,
bruised even all to pieces! Why would thou not suffer me to divert thy death?
why would thou not take pity of thy kind and loving mother? why did thou
show thy self so cruel against thy aged father? why have thou left me thus in
sorrow? why have thou left me comfortless, and all alone, in hac lachrimarum
valle, in this veil of tears, and shadow of death?


FINIS.
To the Reader.
LO here thy Celestine, that wicked wight,
Who did her tricks upon poor Lovers prove;
And in her company, the god of Love.
Lo, grace, beauty, desire, terror, hope, fright,
Faith, falsehood, hate, love, music, grief, delight,
Sighs, sobs, tears, cares, heates, colds, girdle, glove,
Paintings, Mercury, Sublimate, dung of Dove.
Prison, force, fury, craft, scoffs, Art, despite,
Bawds, Ruffians, Harlots, servants, false, untrue:
And all the effects that follow on the same:
As war, strife, loss, death, infamy and shame.
All which and more, shall come unto thy view.
But if this Book speak not his English plain,
Excuse him: for he lately came from Spain.

