A TRVE RELATION of two most strange and fearful Accidents, lately happening,
The one at Chagford in Devonshire, by the falling of th(...) Stanary
Courthouse, the 6. day of March last.

The other at Branson within a mile of Burton upon Trent in Staffordshire, this
present year 1618.



LONDON, Printed for H. G. and are to be sold by I. Wright, at the sign the
Bible without Newgate. 1618.

GODS ANGER AND fearful Judgments, showed in two places of this Land: the
one at Branson within a mile of Burton upon Trent, in Stafordshire in Lent
last, the other at Chagford in Devonshire this present year of our LORD GOD,
1618.
THe anger and terrible countenance of God, of late showed in this Land here
amongst us, may awaken us from the fast sleeps of security, and turn us to
the Lord by true repentance. Therefore least his heavy Judgments in like manner
come upon us at unawares, and we be taken suddenly sleeping, let us with the
wise Uirgins in the Gospel kindle our Lamps, that we may be found ready when
our Bridegroom comes in great glory, to give every one as his works shall be.

For we are to acknowledge and consider, that the Lord has not ceased from
time to time, at his good will and pleasure, to send prodigies and wonders in
every age, to forewarne and forearme us of his Judgments hanging over our
heads for sin: as appears by the late examples declared amongst us.

In the County of Stafford in the parish of Burton upon Trent, dwelled of late
a free houlder of good lands and means, named Thomas Henworth, as well stored
with money and other household goods, as any one of his rank and calling in
that Country. Amongst which temporal blessings, God bestowed upon him two
sons, but not so happy in the elder as in the younger: for the first borne,
which by succession should have been his heir, and possessor of his lands,
was from his mothers womb borne both deaf and dumb, and withal, so silly and
simple, that he had not that sufficient reason of government as the younger
had: by which means the old man, as it were offended at Gods providence
disinherited the elder, and by will gave his whole means to the younger, upon
condition binding him to give yearly a certain stipend to his dumb brother.

This condition stood at the old man's death as a legasie, the younger
inherited, the elder dispossessed: the younger commanded, the elder obeyed: the
younger rich, the elder poor.

This was the partial policy of worldly wisdom, but God the giver and
bestower of all good things, hereat much displeased, gave but small blessings
to the possessor of these riches. For this young Heir in the midst of his
joys being richly married, was visited with sickness, and being struck (by
the hand of God) even unto death, called then to mind the wrongs done to his
poor dumbs brother: and therefore fearing a deserved justice in the world to
come, he returned back some part of his brothers right, and by will gave him
one half of his lands and goods, and shortly after dyed.

Thus the younger brother in the height of his prosperity taking his last
leave of the inconstant vain pleasures and profits of this incertaine world,
left his wife sole Executrix to perform his will and testament ordained in
behalf of his wronged brother: but she (as many Executors and Overseers do)
regarding neither right nor equity, neglected to perform the will of her
deceased husband: and to make her unjust dealings the more strong, within short
time she married another husband named Richard Crispe, a man as it seems
contented to take what he found and perceiving the dumb fellow to be destitute
of friends, became his own caruer, and most unjustly kept the dead man's will
unperformed: by which means the dumb fellow was kept in his former poverty,
and forced to rely still upon the bare allowance of his brother and sister in
law, which was almost nothing at all.

These unjust dealings passed on, until such time as the eye of heaven looking
down and espying the unconscionable dealings of this Richard Crispe, and
unjust wrongs sustained by the dumb wretch, became a gentle Judge, and took
the matter into his own hands, before whose face goods unlawfully gotten and
detayned, together with their owners, are consumed as stubble in the fire, and
scattered abroad as dust in the wind.

So happened it with this Richard Crispes estate: for in January last, having
his goods and cattle about him in abundance, his garners and barnes well stored
with corn, his ricks and stacks of pease and hay furnishing his yards, and
little remembering from whence it came, nor from whom it was wrongfully
detained, in the midst of this plenty the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth,
before whose All-seeing Eye not only the words and works, but the very
thoughts and imaginations of all men lie open and naked continually, suffering
now no longer the wrongs of this dumb creature to go unrevenged, sent a most
fearful and strange judgment, for all others, who in like manner make no
conscience to leave the wills of the dead unperformed, to take example by.

In January last, as I said before, there began a most secret and strange
fire in the middle of a Pease Ricke or Houell, standing in the yard of this
Richard Crispe, consuming the stalks and straw, but leaving the Pease unburned:
afterward with great violenes it flew to a hay stacke, in like manner wasting
down the same with such eager fury, as it was most terrible so see, leaving
standing upright in the middle of the hay, a long pole unconsumed, also an Ash
tree growing close by the same, which was not so much as once scorched
thererewith, after this immediately the fire flew as it were with burning wings
into a corn barn where it kindled very strangely on the top of a beam in the
middle bay, consuming and burning inwardly the timber, and straw of the sheafe
likewise, leaving the corn untouched, as it exceeded all wonder to behold.

Therefore I am here to insert a likelihood, that it was not the negligence of
man, but the angry hand of God, that wrought this fiery example, for
wheresoever this Crisp went, the fire as it were followed him, and seemed to
fly from others that sought to quench it, nine several times began it again
to renew, and would not quite be extinguished, until such time as Crisp
departed his dwelling and went to remain with a friend at the other part of
the parish: in whose absence, the pease and corn thus strangely left
unconsumed, was sifted and gathered together, but good for no use, no not so
much as feeding for hogs, for they would neither eat nor come near it: yet
let us judge the best and censure as mortals may do, and conclude that it was
only the will of God, and a casualty proceeding only from his divine
providence.

But again to our matter: This Richard Crispe, within a while after, having
repaired what the fire had wasted, returned again to his dwelling house, yet
nothing at all remembering she poor dumb fellows wrongs, which sat still in
the bosom of heaven soliciting revenge, whilst he both careless and dreadlesse
of any further mishap ensuing, went with his wife safely (as he thought) to
bed, in the middle of night, the fire began to kindle in a cheese-house over
his bedchamber, and increased so suddenly, and with such raging fire cenes,
that it quickly ouer-matstred man's help, and in a very short time consumed the
place over which it first took hold, with other rooms adjoining to the same,
burning inwardly, leaving the thatch of the houses untouched which lay as
couerings over the same, where not the least part thereof was wasted with the
smallest spark: which was as is it seems another judgment of Gods anger laid
upon this man, if without offense we may so speak it.

Yet for all this was his hard heart no whit mollified* but growing still blind
in his own conctous desires, until such time as a third accident affrighted
him more then the former two, which happened some month after, and thu^ it
befell: his losses being repaired the third time he came to dwell in the same
house again, where within a day or two after his coming, the fire began as
before, to kindle and take hold of a certain out-house, where his empty, wains
or carts stood for shelter of foul weather, but such was the raging fury
thereof, that it suddenly grew past all help of saving the same, and withal a
further Judgment happened thereon, for these empty waines or carts which before
were wont to be drawn^ forth by one or two men at the most, were at this time
grown so heavy, that ten or twelve were not sufficient to do it, by which
means they were quite consumed as they stood and burned into ashes.

Surely this was the work only of Gods hands, the third time effected to the
great fear of all the beholders, let no man therefore think to escape
unpunished, nor by any policy free himself from Gods Justice, that thus makes
an intended purpose, to defeat the helpless innocent, Orphan, or Widow, or by
power and authority goes about to contradict the Testament of the dead, for
there can be no more shame, nor greater injury to a countries government, then
in so doing; and in so doing, the poor are oppressed and the rich not blessed.

As for example, this unfortunate man whose estate being thus much
impouerished, is now become (as it is reported) sorrowful and repentant, and
most willing to satisfy to the uttermost of his power, all the Legacies given
and bequeathed by his predecessor his wives former husband, and is most
willingly contented to perform all dues and rites belonging to the poor dumb
Creature, whose wrongs no doubt have entered heaven gates, and procured gods
Justice to stand his best Arbitrator.

Thus by all humane reason can we no otherwise think, but that these
fore-passed accidents and strange Judgments of God, are sent us for examples
of punishment, to drive all other from the like wickedness, yet some there be
(I doubt) will give but small credence, and hardly believe the testimony by
which they are published: which incredulity and contempt of Gods wrath,
proceeds from our sins, our sleeping sins, from which our dreaming
worldlings might be roused up if we would but relent at these and such like
fearful menaces, and thus much for the first.

And now for my second, which happened at Chagford in Devonshire, where by the
fall of the Stannery court house, many good and worshipful Gentlemen received
their doomes of hard misfortune, as is verified, which through the cursed
imprecation of a periurd wretch fell upon them-therefore with your patience, I
will insert some few ex, amples of like fear and mischance, to make the matter
it self bring with it a truer touch of trembling terror.

AS the name of God it self is most glorious, so should we not use it but with
trembling and fear, for the Lord says he, shall be pronounced guilty that
takes his name in vain.

As for example, I have read of two young men, making but a jest of Gods most
glorious name, striued whether of them could swear most terriblest, or curse
most horriblest, but their jesting was so odious in Gods sight, that one of
them was presently stooken with madness, the other with sudden death.

There was another within these few years in the North of England, that
devised new oaths, such as were not common in use, whereupon the Lord sent a
canker, that soon eat out his tongue* even the very instrument wherewith he
blasphemed God, therefore we (...) that it is evil ieasting with Gods
reverence, for they that use it cannot escape due punishment.

Diverse other fearful judgments against this most vild sin of cursing,
swearing and forswearing, are left recorded for examples to us: as of a
certain Maid, who disobeying her Mothers commandment, her Mother cursed her
saying: The Devil take thee. And the same hour the Devil entered into her and
she fell mad.

In like manner there was a man in Friburg in Misnia, who commanded his son
to go about some business, but he neglected to go with such speed as his
Father commanded him, the Father sell to banning and cursing him with these or
the like words. Did I bid thee go in have, and stand thou still? Now still
may thou stand I pray God, and never may thou stir out of that place! And
presently a heavy judgment fell upon the Son, so that he was not able to go
nor to be drawn away by any strength, but there he abode for three whole
years.

I have likewise read that for taking Gods name in vain some have been
blasted with fire from heaven, some stricken with long and strange diseases,
some possessed of the Devil, some have had their mouths as black as coals, and
some such fiery tongues that they could not close their teeth, which they had
so often opened to blaspheme God.

Thus have you heard the reward of profane swearing, and bitter curses,
whereby Gods holy name is much dishonored, and the speaker in danger of
damnation, where unto I w^ll now add the late accident happening at Chagford in
Devonshire upon Friday the 6. of March last past, upon which day his highness
Court of Stanneryes being holden the Court set, and great assemblies of
Esquires and Gentlemen there present the Jurors called, sommond forth and sworn
upon their oaths, without partiality to give upright verdict: being thus
charged, falsehood must needs be odious has to God and man, and none but
graceless wretches will be so impious as to prefer the same unto the seat of
Justice.

But now mark the effect: There was (as it is reported) an evidence brought in
by a fellow, to which the Jury gave but little trust, the matter for some
special occasion I leave concealed, and therefore most fitly to be omitted:
but too true it is the evidence giver brought in, upon his oath a false
accusation, in whose mouth, as it seemd, a forged lie was ready, and there told
such an unlikely tale, that not only the Jury but the whole bench thought it to
be most fabulous, and therefore with good admonitions desired him to be
careful, and to take good heed upon what grounds he took his oath, yet
notwithstanding this audacious fellow destitute of all grace and goodness,
thus tempted the Lords anger, saying, if I swear amiss, (quoth he) or if I
speak wrongfully, let God I beseech him make me a fearful example to all
perjured wretches, and that this house wherein I stand, may suddenly fall upon
my head, and that the fall thereof may be seen to be the just judgment of
God upon me: Oh woeful wish! Oh cursed desire! Oh perjured homicide! Oh vild
tempter of Gods anger thus to solicit heaven to black vengeance! For no sooner
were these words spoken, but in short time after, the timber and walls of the
house (though seeming strong) the weather fair and clear, without either
storm or tempest) suddenly fell down, where by the fall and overthrow of
this large timber building, this graceless varlet with diverse others, were
sore bruised and beaten to death, and the number of sixteen or seauenteene
more grievously hurt and wounded, some in their arms, some in their legs,
some on their heads some on their backs, and other parts of their bodies, to
the great danger of their lives, and that which is more lamentable to tell,
certain Esguires and Gentlemen of good calling, by the fall of the said walls
and timber, were suddenly struck dead, and their limbs almost beaten in
pieces, which sodainnesse of death, not only amazed the whole Town, but
struck a trembling fear throughout all the neighboring villages.

The principal of these Gentlemen which thus taffed of this rigorous hard
misfortune, I will here make known. As first, Master Nicholas Eueleigh
Esquire, steward of the Court, a Gentleman of much virtue, and well beloved in
that Country: also his two Clerks, John Cleake and Richard Beer, for whom is
made much moan. Likewise one Master Richard Cottle Esquire, and Counselor of
the middle Temple in London. In like manner two Atturneyes of the Law, Master
Timothy Moule, and Master Robert Milford, with some certain others, which felt
the heavy burden of Gods Judgments, and had their bodies even bruized to
pieces, through the invocation of this wicked wretch thus incensing Heavens
anger, whom GOD forgive.

Only, I must now speak of a wonderful thing there happening. In the midst
of this confused heap of timber, stone and earth, under which so many lay
slaughtered, there was a young Child miraculously preserved, for in the midst
of these men of more able strength, which lay bruized and beated to death, as
it were with their brains dashed out, was the same Child found safe and
sound, whereon appeared not so much as the smallest hurt that might be: yet
judge we charitably, God only knows the means of this Childs preservation,
and the cause of his heavy punishment showed upon the others.

But now so strike terror into the hearts of the Readers, never was so great
woe made in Chagford, for so many good men covered over with the ruins of
earth and stone: never were so many Gentlemen of account, Counselors of
worth, Atturneyes and Clerks of the Law, thus at one time brought to unhappy
destiny. Some lay stark dead closed up in dust and earth: some wounded with
bruized and broken bones: some crying and calling for help: yea, such amazed
fear thundered about the whole Town, that it was marvelous to hear. The
neighboring people came from all the adjoining villages, some crying for one
friend, some for another, fathers for children, children for their fathers,
husbands for wives, wives for husbands, brothers for brothers, yea nothing but
lamentations rung peales of woe, and such a confusion of sorrow possessed the
people, that it was pitiful to see.

Thus have you heard how God cast down his irefull hand in this unhappy town,
as once he did at Oxford Sises, whereas in like manner, there was one Rowland
Ienks, that for speaking certain blasphemous speeches against God and his
son our Savior, procured his indignation by raising of a sudden stinking
dampe amongst them there present, that both the Judges of the Bell and Barom
were immediately stifled and struck dead, with many other Knights, Esquires,
and Gentlemen of good rank and calling, not one of the Jury but there dyed
immediately, with many others, to the number of three hundred at the least;
beside, the stench thereof bred such an infection in the Country, that in five
months following it was scarce cleared. These, and such like wonders God can
do, and where he pleases to strike with his Iron hand, it boots not us
weak worldlings to resist, therefore let us with humble supplications, make
our suits unto God, that he would keep us from sudden death. and that we may
have time of repentance always in readiness, and that the untimely confusion of
these here gone before us, may be a continual example, to put us in mind of
Gods anger threatened against us, so may we be all ready against his most
glorious coming.

What great cause have we that are here living to give God thanks for thus
warning us by other men's harms: What loving and gentle admonitions have we
received from the Counsel of Christ, that we should not take his name in
vain, yet neither his counsel* the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the
Evangelists, and Apostles, nor the examples of vengeance, as have been here
showed unto us, can work happy amendment: how much more justly then may the
Lord pour out his hot wrath and heavy displeasure upon us, then on nay other
Nation about us.

These forepassed Judgments are here recorded only for our instruction and
speedy amendment, shall we then be careless? shall we thou be senseless?
shall we go to Law, and forswear our selves for a little worldly pelf?
shall we speak warily for fear of offending man, and not keep our tongues
from offending heaven? Leave off I say, this vile vice of Swearing, it never
did good to any, give it over in time, deal justly in all things; swear not
at all, and you shall never be forsworn, which God grant for his glorious
Names sake. Amen.

FINIS.

