AN OCCASIONAL Discourse, upon an Accident which befell his MAJESTY in hunting.

Composed in Italian, By FRANCIS CEVOLVS, and thence translated into English.



LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, for ROBERT BIRD, at the Bible in St.
Laurence-lane. 1635.

Imprimatur hic Londini. Thomas Weeks, R. P. Episcopo Land. a sacris.

TO THE Honorable his very good Lord, CHARLES Lord HERBERT, Son, and Heir
to the Right Honorable, PHILIP Earl of Pembrooke, and Montgomery, Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household.
MY Lord, this Dedication can be no novelty to your Honor, who were formerly
acquainted with the intention. I do but here perform what I heretofore did
promise. Your own skill in the original is such, that I might have spared the
courtesy of the Translatour, but that I was ambitious to have more then one
Country take notice of that service I owe unto You; who shall ever think it
the greatest part of mine, to have had sometimes a relation to your Honor: If
there be any thing in it which may deserve your perusal, it is beholding to
the Subject, not to the Author. It may have the happiness to be presented to
his royal Eye, which I cannot hope for, save by the means of your Noble
Father, or your Self: The strangers that were desirous to come to Christ to
Philip for admittance, and I know no other method, no nearer way to approach
the Majesty of his Anointed then by him, who bears the name of that Apostle,
or your Noble self upon whom his Royal Majesty bestowed his own Name at your
baptism: and, it may be thought, conveyed withal not a few of his virtues,
whereof I here present you an imperfect picture, rudely drawn by an unskilful
hand, wherein I dare assure you of nothing good but the bare intention. May it
please your Lordship to accept of it as a propempticon before that voyage you
are now to make, from him who does heartily wish you a prosperous journey, and
a happy return.

Your Lordships most devoted Servant, Francis Cevolus.

AN OCCASIONAL Discourse upon an Accident which befell his MAJESTY in hunting.
REverence, and obedience are due to any Prince, but the good only have title
to love, and commendations: Subjects must, and strangers may, pay both; who can
plead no exemption from right, and custom. The royal virtues of the most
puissant Prince CHARLES, has made me willing to undertake, what my weakness
tells me I am not able to perform. The custom of well-doing has made it so
natural to his MAJESTY, that it is become a task of more difficulty for an
Orator to relate his actions, then for him to do them: and he is so frequent
in the exercise of his virtues, that after ages will truly judge the bare
history of his Acts to be no other then a continued Panegyricke. I shall not
meddle withal; as neither ambitious to be seen in His reasons of State, nor
curious to peep into his closet, but present him such as he presents himself
in public, and single out one particular, which once befell Him in his Royal
sports: then the object of others discourse, as it has been since of my
meditation.

Hunting has ever been an exercise in request with the greatest Heroes. Chiron
trained Achilles up in it, and Xenophon thought it not unbefitting the
compleatest Prince, when he presented it in his Cyrus, whom he proposes as a
pattern of persection. Nay, I have read of some people, who in the election of
their Kings did especially require that he were an expert hunter. The ancient
Romans, however they did not practice it at home, yet they did not dislike it
abroad, and I suppose it was rather want of convenience, then desire to use it,
which made them refrain it. It was always accounted an exercise masculine,
and military, as being the School, and Theater of war, and therefore the
Magnanimous King CHARLES makes use of it, as a recreation, not an employment;
free enough from what was imputed to Antiochus by his Country Host, That his
care of his game made him neglectfull of his government. Plut in Apopth.
He makes it but a sweet retire from his more serious affairs, solacing
himself in the shadow that he may be inured to the shocks of war: Enodius.
Agit vice spectaculi, quod sequenti tempore poterit satis esse virtuti. Though
he be the first borne Monarch of the Christian faith, and Salomon-like desire
to possess his Throne in peace, yet he has a portion of David's spirit, and is
not afraid of wars. His goodness makes him affect peace, but his wisdom
tells him the best means to conserve it is a preparation for war: therefore
he sets forth a royal Navy by Sea, therefore he delights in the martial
exercise of hunting by Land. Caesar carried a Pen in the one hand, and a
Sword in the other. The most Invincible CHARLES, has in the one hand an Olive
branch, the Emblem of peace; in the other a Palm, the Prognosticke of
victory: proposing to his enemies the same conditions that Rome did to
Carthage, to make their choice.

The ancient Heathens entitled the same goddess, Diana, both to hunting, and
chastity: in both which, the King has so deep a share, that Hippolytus would
think it an honor to be his second. The comparison being here as apposite as
in the first application, to Constantinople in regard of Rome, Suid.
Dignius est ab hoc secundum numerari, quam caeterorum omnium primum. For his
eminency in the one virtue, I take the voice of the public for a sufficient
proof, and of his excellency in the other I have had no less then experience,
When at Newmarket, anno 1633, his Majesty being attended with a glorious train
of Noble Courtiers, a pursued Hare run for protection to his sacred Person,
and freed herself from an eminent danger by taking sanctuary under his Horses
belly. An accident which howsoever to others but a nine days wonder, made a
deep impression in my thoughts, who imagined that little creature might afford
some considerations, not mis-beseeming so great a Majesty.

Perhaps she signified the affability, and natural courtesy of the King,
which makes him gracious in the eyes of all his observers: she being of old an
Emblem of loveliness, and sacred to that goddess, which it may be,
Philostrat. in iron
gave occasion to that jest put upon the Emperor Alexander Severus,

Lamprid.
Venatus facit, et lepus comesus,
Ex quo continuum capit leporem.
Perhaps she knew the justice of the King, and how much he tenders the
effusion of blood, requiring the punctual observation of the old Rule,

Qui gladio ferit, gladio perit.
Witness that memorable accident which befell in Fleet Street, where when the
Sergeants had arrested a man for debt, and were carrying him to Prison, some of
his friends or acquaintance, more transported by affection then judgment,
attempted to rescue him by violence, and amongst them one Stamphord, a
Gentleman of good fame, but bad fortune, sometimes an appendant to the late
Duke of Buckingham, being more courageous then discreet, by misfortune killed
one of the company; whereupon he was, according to the usual form of justice,
first apprehended, then condemned, and lastly executed. Nor could the dearest
memory of his deceased Master, or the humble petitions of the noblest
Courtiers, and such as were in greatest favor with the King, prevail any
thing for his pardon: howbeit he were a man which both had, and might have done
his Country better service. But offended justice must be satisfied; and the
cry of blood rung so loud in the Kings ears, that it drowned those of the
petitioners. He is armed with constancy against their importunity, and thinks
it not fit to bestow a courtesy which might happily cost the receivers a
repentance. God himself is often bountiful in denying our requests; and the
flight of Fabius was accounted for fortitude. Here the King triumphed over the
most intestine enemies, his passions, and made it known to the world that he
has a soveraignety over himself as well as over others: Georg. 2.
that his inclination to goodness is as sound in substance as spacious in show,
like Virgils Esculus, the root as deep as the branches high. A resolution
which holds good against the threats of an enemy, does often yield to the
entreaties of a friend: No violence to that of love, it is strong as death:
Cant. 8.
and yet he, who was never inexorable, if the suit were honorable, strongly
denied what was earnestly desired, by those whom he most affected: and made the
laws of love give place to those of the Land. His clemency knows how to
pardon an error, his discretion how to correct a fault, and his justice how to
punish a crime: which he sometimes does for terror to others, not because of
rigor in himself. However he be thrifty in dispensing pardons for public,
yet he is sufficiently prodigal of private injuries: and he that will punish
murderers has often forgiven traitors: if to break the Statutes, or deface
the pictures of a petty Prince be more then petty treason, he concludes it a
crime of a deeper die to deface the Image of the King of Kings: and therefore
will not indulge it, lest his mercy to man should make him guilty, and
injurious to God. But where the fact immediately concerns himself, he can as
freely pardon malefactors, as they offend: he has not grudged to let those
children enjoy their hereditary possessions, whose parents attempted to
dispossess him of his Throne, to let the Exchequer loose the commodity rather
then he his clemency: thinking it sometimes convenient to purchase that respect
by favors, which he might exact by force, that being a more proper act of his
goodness, this of his power; and he being resolved by Gods example, to be more
rare in the exercise of this, more frequent in that. But I fear in this long
excursion I have run counter. Therefore I return.

The Hare in her kind is endowed with a quick hearing: which may well betoken
the Kings facility in affording audience to the meanest suitors. Plutarke tells
us the Hare was anciently the Hieroglyphicke of attention; which is a known
virtue in the King: his hand is ever open to receive requests, and his ear to
hear: naught but the unreasonablenesse of the demand needs fear a denial:
his distressed Subjects never despair of remedy, if he be once acquainted with
their malady. The appeal of Machetas has not been heard of in his days;
against whom when King Philip of Macedon had by inadvertancy passed sentence,
he made his appeal, a Philippo, ad Philippum, from Philip winking to Philip
waking: his vigilance stops all such: and that's a quality may afford another
parallel.

The Hare is observed to sleep with her eyes open: whereby the Egyptians
expressed the vigilance of a Magistrate, Video virgam vigilantem, says the
Prophet: and the rod with the eye in it is the Emblem of the Scepter. The King
never slumbers in the affairs of his people, but watches over them that they
may sleep secure; and buys their rest by his own disquiet. Jupiter told
Agamemnon in Homer, it was not for a man in office to sleep all night; fit
counsel both for a god to give, and a King to take: all night he must not
sleep, lest he hazard the public, part he must, lest he endanger his
private welfare.

Lepus q. levipes Gellius ex Varrone. Firmicus, Astron. l. 8. c. 8.
The Hare is so observable for her swiftnes that it has got her a name in
Latin, and a surname in Greek: and the Astrologer gives out, that they who are
borne under her namesakes constellation are excellent in that quality. The King
of England has naturally such a swift, and nimble gate as has been ever
admirable, and sometimes wearisome to his followers. Pedibus velox Achilles is
the running title which Homer gives that worthy Heroes, and the vigorous, and
lively pace of his Majesty bewrayes in him a soul truly heroical, and borne
for action, to which the body is a nimble Servant, no unweldy burden.

Suid.
To meet a Hare was held ominous to the ancients, Apparens lepus infaust as
reddit vias. But the superstition of Gentilisme never enterd the heart of this
Christian Prince: while he that sits on Gods right hand is auspicious to him,
he needs not fear any sinister augury, whiles that Motto still holds true
which he has writ in letters of Gold, upon his Coins, CHRISTO AVSPICE REGNO.
The worst prodigies pretend no ill to good Princes: nor was this to him a
forerunner of harm but rather a foreteller of danger, for so it was not long
after an assassinate being careless of his own did plot against the life of
his Sovereign: but the providence of God respected the piety of the King, and
suffered not the malice of his enemy to go any further then a traiterous
intention.

Martial. l. 1. de Regulo.
Quis curam neget esse te deorum,
Propter quem fuit innocens ruina?
was spoken of a petty King in name, but is more true of a great one indeed. It
is just with God to honor them which honor him; and preserve their glory
untouched who are tender of his. When the Temple of Vesta was on fire, and
Metellus the Priest lost his eyes in rescuing the Palladium from the flames, it
was objected to him by the Orator, Ei propitios deos non esse, quem ne servati
quidem servant. But here we may more manifestly discern Gods mercy in the
Kings delivery; which is more apparently glorious in helping out of dangers
then preserving from them, Stantia non poterant tecta probare deos. And perhaps
the timorous Hare was sent to forewarne him. The Fable reports, that when the
Lion the King of beasts, was advised to cast off the Hare as unserviceable for
his Court, she told him she stood him instead of a swift Foot-post: and behold
this Carryer comes to admonish the royal Lion of England of his eminent peril
from an unnatural Subject. So sacred is the Majesty of Princes, that even the
most unarmed beasts will defend it, when men would violate it. Domitians Hare
was not afraid to play in the innocent jaws of his Lions, which were far
more merciful then their Master, whereupon the Poet tells her

Si vitare canum morsus, lepus improbe, quaeris,
Ad quae confugias or a leonis habes.
The case was the same with this, and the King; who has that of his Lions,
never to insult over the prostrate, he is not cruel to the provokers of his
justice, much less to the implorers of his mercy when he punishes, it is the
Magistrate, not the man; with the hand of justice, not his own; and those that
suffer under it cannot choose but adore it, Auson. cidy l.
Procris like, Cephalique cruentum

Diligit et percussa manum.
Philip of France was slain in hunting by a wild Boar: but CHARLES King of
England, and France was more miraculously preserved from a beast more savage,
and not less pernicious, had not his power to hurt been inferior to his
will: this being permitted, but that restrained by a greater power of him who
reckons this amongst his royal prerogatives, that by him Kings reign.

The Hare has yet one most obvious quality, her fear; for this I can find no
parallel in his Majesty, unless it be that which Sidonius discovered in
Theodoricke, timet timeri. His own innocence, and the love of his people is a
double guard which he most relies upon. He had rather, with Cyrus, to be
styled, the father of his Country, then with Cambyses the Master. His life so
strict, and unblameable, that to make a man completely virtuous, there needs no
other law but his example, and it is said Courtiers are beholding to him for a
great share of their goodness; he having set them such a fair copy, that they
are ashamed not to follow it, though they despair to attain it: and this is
it which begets in them such a general love to his person, not only his
place, which makes them like Hephaestion who loved Alexander, not Craterus who
loved the King. They need wish no addition to their felicity, but the
continuance of it: nay for the general good of the Commonwealth, I conceive
no prayer either more compendious or complete then that which is directed to
God for the sole safety of the King: wherein I shall concur with the public
votes of the people: desiring God ever to defend him who is the Defender of the
Faith, and like the Cherubim with the flaming Sword, does guard this earthly
Paradise, the Church of Christ: that he may hold on in the same tenor he has
begun, and reflecting upon his former Acts pray for the future in the words of
that ancient acclamation,

DIV FACIAT ET VIV AT CAROLVS.
DISCORSO Dun caso seguito a sua Maesta nella caccia.

Composto da FRANCESCO CEVOLI.



In LONDRA, Nella Stamperia di GIOVANNI NORTON, 1635.

All' Illmo et Eccmo Sigre e Pro'ne mio Col^ndmo Il Sigre D CARLO HERBERT
Primogenito, et Herede dell' Eccmo Sigre, Conte di Pembroch e Montgomeri,
Maestro di camera di sua Maesta.
NOn si maravigliera V. S. Illma della present dedicatione, essendogli gia
prima noto il mio desiderio; hor (...)ttendo la promessa, e se ben' ella
intend la lingua Italiana, adogni modo ho procurato sia trasferito il mio
originale per l'ambitione tengo di palesar a piu d'uno l'osseruanza e debito
mio verso V. S. Illma come sempre mi riputero a grande honor hav^^la servita.

S'alcuna cosa ui sara che meriti d'esser riguard^ta si doura attribuir al
sogetto e non all' autore, forsi potrebbe' ottener tanta felicita di comparir
auanti gl'occhi e presenza del Re il che sperar non posso se non con il di lei
favore, o di suo Padre. I Peregrini bramosi veder e parlar a Christo
ricorrevano a Filippo, et io non saprei trouar piu breue strada d'esser
introdotto alla Real Maesta che per mezzo di chi ha il nome di quest' Apostolo,
o per V. S. Illma al quale la Sacra Maesta del Re ha dato nel Batesimo il suo
proprio nome, et insieme forsi donato molte di quelle virtu la cui tavola
imperfettamente ho qui' abozzato.

Cofesso non esserui altro di buono che la mia intention, e quel che con rozzo
pennello ho adombrato, spero che con la penna del sottil ingegno e maestra mano
del Dotto Traslatore sara ritoccato.

Placcia' in tanto a V. S. Illma riceuere questo propempticon ericordo nel suo
buon viaggio che con tutt'il cuore gli prego da Dio prospero, uada' accompagna
to Virtute duce Fortuna comite con il felicissimo ritorno.

V. S. Illma et Eccma. Humilmo e Divotissmo Ser. F. Cevoli.

DISCORSO D'un caso seguito a sua Maesta nella caccia.
ACiaschedun Principe si deue riverenza et obedientia, ma l'amor e la lode non
ad altri ch'al buono I sudditi deuon di ragione pagar questi debiti, et i
forestieri presentar simili tributi, mentre non sono essenti da costumi et
osservanze de Popoli tra quali dimorano.

Le vere Reali virtudel Potentissimo Principe Carlo hannonel mio petto inestato
brama di cominciar quel che la propria debolezza mi detta non poter poi ridurre
al de siato fine,

L'oprar heroicamente s'e convertito in natura di sua Maesta in modo che quell'
gl'e facile fare per ^so, all' oratore sia dissicile dire, mentre sempre pius
avanza nell' essercitio delle virtu, si ch'i Posteri giustamente giudicaranno
la semplice historia de suoi fatti esser un non interotto panegirico.

Io non mi mescolaro nelle sue gloriose attioni gia che non vo ambitiosamente
dietro la ragione di stato, ne con curiosit a attendo il suo secreto gabinetto,
ma solamente tale lo rapresente^o qual egli stesso in publico si fa vedere, e
tra tuti gl'accidenti scegliero quello gia non molto gl'auenne tra suoi, reali
passatempi nella caccia che fucagione adaltri di parlare, et a me di pensare.

Era costume di grands Heroi dilettarsi della caccia. Chirone l'insegno ad
Achille, e Senofonte giudico essere grand ornamento al Principe, 't a questo
fine l'esorta al suo Ciro proposto per modello et Idea del Principe, anzi
alcuni propoli nell'elettione del Re osservauano in particolare se fusse buon
cacciatore.

L'antichi Romani se been nel proprio paese per incommodit a del sito non
andavano alla caccia ad ogni modo al^roue era da essi molt' essercitata.

La caccia e ombra di guerra, le fiere figure di feroci ^emi^i, il magnanimo Re
Carlo si diletta d'essa, e non puo esser tacci^to come un vill^no forestiero
picco il Re Antiocho dicen^ogli Plut in apopth.
la diligenza della caccia render lo negligente nel governo del Regno,

Si serve il Re Carlo della caccia* per solle vamento d^ll^ maggiori
ocupationi, ricevendo solazzo in qvesta dolce guerra per dover esser poi nell'
istesso modo pronto al vero tenzone. Enodius.
Agit vice spectaculi, quod seguenti tempore poterit satis esse virtuti.

Ben^he si^ Primogenito Monarca della Christiana feed, et a guisa di Salomone
desideri stabilire in pace il suo ^rono, non dimeno e anco^ herede dello
spirito Davidico, ne teme la guerra, la di lui bonta fa ch' ami la pace, la
prudenza gli so ministra non esser al^ro pi u convenevol mudo per conservarla
che apprestar la battaglia, quind' e ^he tiene in ordine un armata navale di
sorti e ben forniti vascelli reali che rassembrano mobili et inespugnabili
castelli di legno in mare, quind' e che per terra si da al Martial studio della
caccia.

Cesare in una mano haveva la spada, nell altra la penna e l Invitissimo Carlo
in una ti^nel' oliva Emblema di pace, nellaltra la palma impresa di vittoria,
proponendo al nemico l'^stesse conditioni che Roma gia a Carthagine, accio
elegga qual di due piu gl aggrada.

L'antic^^ Gentili dic^iararono Diana Dea della castita e della caci^, delle
quali prerogative talm^nte' e dotato il Re che Hypolito si terrebbe ad honor
appo luihaver' il luogo.

Questo paragone non disdice qui niente meno di quando gia f^^ fatto nel
paralello tra Constantinopoli e Roma, (...)id.
Dignius est ab ho^ secundum numerari, quam caeterorum omnium primum.
L'universal opinione e voce del popolo e assai buon testimonio per confermar
quanto sia ammirabile in questa ^^rtu, l'esperienza fa feed ancor nell' altra
avanzar tutti.

Si ritrovava a Neuu Market l' Anno 1633. accompagnato d^ molti nobili
cortegiani et ^^co un lepre seguito da cani correr all^^^lta di sua sacra
Maesta e come' in franchigia ricoura^s^ s^t^^ (...) R^al ^^vallo Cos^ per^^ to:
enuta da gl ^ltri se ben non piu di nove giorni come si suole dir per miracolo,
niente dimeno ^el mio petto piu profondamente s'interno pensando che questo
piccolo animalet^o dava occasion d'alcuni concetti non punto sconvenevoli alla
Real grandezza.

Forsi accennava la grande benignit a e natural piacevolezza del Re che ne
gl'occhi de riguardami non altro stampa che gratia. Il lepre gia era tenuto per
Emblema d'amorevolezza Philostrat* in i^on.
et alla Dea d'amore consecrato onde derivo il motto appropriato al Imperator
Alesandro Severo

Lamprid.
Venatus facit, et lepus comesus
Ex quo continuum capit leporem.
Forsi gl era nota la giustitia del Re e quanto schiv^ lo spargimen^o del
sangue, e vuol puntualmente sia osservato il detto Qui gladio ferit, gladio
perit.
Dicalo il memorabil fatto nella strada di Fleet Street, dove li sbirri
fermando un certo per debiti, mentre lo menav^no in prigione, a caso al^uni
suoi amici piu tosto dall' amore che dal s^n^o trasporta^i a viva forza
contendevano liberar lo e particolarmente un bravo gentil huomo chiamato
Stamford non molto tempo fa della famiglia del Duca di Buchingham, assai piu
p^onto di mano che di prudenza, mentre d'ambe le parti era gran z^ffa, non so
come quest' ardito spadacino amazzo' uno di quella baruffa, ma che? prevalse la
giustitia, f^ preso, condotto prigione, poco dopo condennato e con la morte
pago il sio del sangue sparso. La ^resca'e cara memoria del defonto Duca suo
signore, le supplichevoli preghiere de piu favoriti cortegiani non furono
bastanti ad impetrare dal Re perdon al homicida che con il suo valor haurebbe
potuto altresi pugnare pro Patria, ma fu di im^sti^ri che desse sodifattione
all' offesa giustitia e nell' orecchie del Re assai piu rimbombo il'grido del
s^^gue the le voci de gl' efficaci oratori.

S'armo d^lla prop^ia costanza contro Palirui instanza, ne giudico ^spediente
dispensare ^al favore a chi poi, se ne fusse pentito.

Spesse volte Dio e benigno, mentre volta le spalle all demand impertinenti,
la suga di F(...)o su stimat^ per gra de fortezza.

Le passioni sono i pi^ potenti nemici dell' huomo, delle quali ill Re trionfo
e fece palese saper non sol' altri ma se steso dominare. Insegno ancor a l'amor
della virtu dover essere non men Georg. 2.
bello, che sodo, conform l'albero descritto dal Latin Homero le cui radici
erano profonde tanto quanto irami in alto s'ergevano.

La costanza ch* alquando fu immobil colonna all' impetuose minacci^ de nimici,
si vede poi croll^re al sofsio dell amichevoli preghiere.

Cant. 8*
Non si trova maggior violenza dell' amore piu forte della morte, c pur quello
il quale may fu inesorabile all giuste domande, volle questa causa tanto
valorosamente negar quanto instantemente le person piu care e favorite
supplicavano concederla, volle le leggi dell'amicitia cedessero a quelle della
patria, ben ha saputo con la sua clemenza perdonar l'errore, con la prudenza
correggere la colpa, con la giustitia punir il misfatto; e parco nel perdonare
le publiche ingiurie, ma nelle private pur troppo prodigo, quello ch'a
traditori piu volt e ha perdonato non perdon^r a gia agli homicidi.

Se spezzare le statue de Regi, se seancellare i loro ritratti vien stimato
delitto di lesa Maesta certo che fracassare l'huomo viva imagine vero
simulachro del Re de Regi, sar a piu grave Colpa e non da perdonarsi, accio la
misericordia con l'huomo, non sia onta a Dio, ma quand'i falli sono comessi
contro di lui, e inchinato a rimeter' a delinquenti nell' is it esso modo
ch'eglino suron p^o^ti per offenderlo. I figli di ^uei Padri che tentarono
disturbar lui e la sua Real casa dal trono, soffri godessero i patrimonij ne si
curo diminuire l'entrate del fisco purche non scemasse la pretiosa fama della
clemenza, stimando cattivare l'animi piu per savore che per violenza,
annoverando quello tra fatti di bonta, questa tra ^attioni di podesta, et ad
esempio di Dio determinando in quel s^mbiant^ farsi vedere piu sp^ss^* ch'in
questa fogg^a.

Ma io dubito che questa digressione mi tiri fuor della traccia p^opostami* Il
lepre per natural istinto ha ^udito perfetissimo, figura del Re facile in dar
audienza alli homiecivoli ancor (...) bass^ condition*

Il lepre anticamente secondo Plutarco era toli^ per gerolifico dell'
attentione, questa virtu* e ben conosciuta nel Re, may ha chiuse le ma^i per le
suppliche e memoriali, sempre l'^recchie aperte all querele, nessuna purche
giusta domanda vien ributtata, i sudditi non diffidano della salute, quando il
male e noto al Re, non si sent punto l'appelatione di Machete quando Filippo
Macedone non havendo ben dato orecchie alla sua causa, promulgo
conseguentemente un'ingiusta sentenza, et s'appello a Philippo ad Philippum, da
Filippo addormentato a Filppo risuegliato, la vigilanza del Re provede a questi
richiami e da materia di far il seguente riscontro.

Il lepre ha per costume dormire con gl'occhi a(...)erti, l'Egitij se ^e
s^rvivano per Emblema d'un vigilante Magistrato* Video virgam vigilantem disse
il profeta, l'occhiuta verga e simbolo dello scettro. Non e sonnacchoso il Re
ne gl'affari del p^polo, anzi veglia dimodo che quelli possono sicur amente
dormire e con la sua vigilanza et inquietitudine compra il lor riposo.

Ad Agamemnone conform rapporta Homero disse Giove non star been ad un
consigliero dormire tuta la notte, consiglio veramente a proposito che meritava
esser d^to da Dio ad un Re, il quale non deve passar tutta la notte dormendo,
accio la publica salute non sia in periglio, ma part d'essa affin che la
propria sia sicura.

Lepus q. levipes Gellius ex Varrone. Firmi^^s, Astron* l. 8. c. 8.
Il lepre e dodato di tanta velocita che b^n gli quadra il nome Latino e cognome
Greco.

Dicono l'Astrologi ches'uno nasce sotto la stella da essi chia* mata lepre
sara di questa qualita assai ben forn^to.

Al Re d'Inghilterra la natura ha donato un caminar spedito e veloce e li suoi
seg^aci alquando son soprapresi da maraviglia, et alquando arrestati da
stanchezza, Pedibus velox Achilles cosi chiama sempre Homero quel grande Hero.

Dal passo Real^ ripieno di vigore e vitarisalta'un anima veramente heroica
nata per oprare, il cui corpo serve non per peso ma per agil ministro.

Havevano gl'antichi per infausto auspicio l'incontro del lepre Apparens lepus
infaustas reddit vias, ma la superstitione de gl'Etnici non s'annido nel petto
del Christiano Re. sin che quello il quale siede alla destradi D^o gli sara
auspicio, sin che sara vero quello che con lettere d'oro nelle sue monete si
stampa CHRISTO AVSPICE REGNO.

I catti^i augurij niente di male aditano al buon Principe, non fu a lui segno
precedente di da^no, ma aviso di pericolo, forsi non e vero? mentre non molto
dopo un certo parricida non curando di se stesso, machinava alla vita del Re,
ma la Divina providenza non dimenticata della pieta Reale, non permise che la
malignita del perfido s'avanzasse piu oltre della su^ intention

Martial. l. 1. de R^gulo.
Quis cu^am neget esse te Deorum
Propter quem fuit innocens ruina?
su detto d'un piccolo Re ma da me molto meglio appropriato a questo Grande Re

Dio e buono, e vuole render la pariglia a chi l'honora, et a chi e studioso
della di lui gloria.

Quand' il Tempio di Vesta ardea, e Metello sacerdote si spi^se tra le voraci
fiamme per salvar il Palladio rimase cieco, fu tacciato da un Oratore, Ei
propitios Deos non esse, quem ne servati quidem servant.

La misericordia di Dio piu chiaramente si dim stra in haver l^berato il Re e
piu gloriosa risplende quando riscatta da pericol: che quando non permette
incorrer in essi.

Stantia non poterant tecta probare Deos.
Io credo che questo timido lepre fusse mandato per aviso. Raconta unafavolach'
al Leone Re de gl'animali mentr'era persuaso cacciar il lepre dalla sua corte
per esser quasi inutile schiavo, il lepre rispose ch'aurebbe servito per
velocissimo corriro, Ecco non so semi dica un lepretto, opur u^a staffetta
spedita al nobile Leone Inglese figurato nell' armi Reali per avisarlo del
sopra stante pericolo per causa d'un non piu legitimo e natural maribelle
vassallo.

Tant' e sacra la Maesta de Principi che se gl'huomini oseranno violarla
l'istesse bestie et ancor in^rmi la diffendon^.

Il lepre di Domitiano non si spavento d'entrar e quasi scherzar uelli fauci de
Leoni assai piu miti del Tiranno ond' il Poeta

Si vitare canum morsus, lepus improbe quaeris.
Ad quae confugias o^a leonis habes.
Ne al^rimente avennetra questo lepre et il Re che hale qualita de^suoi Leoni
di per donare a sommessi, non e crudele con quelli ch'attizano la sua giustitia
molto meno con quelli ricorrono alla sua misericordia* quando punisce non si
rapresenta huomo, ma Magistrato e non con il suo bra^cio, ma con la mano della
giustitia, la qual ancor che p^sante la riveriscono,

Auson. eidyl.
Diligit et percussa manum.
Filippo Re di Francia nella caccia fu investito miseramente da un Cinghiale,
ma CARLO Re d'Inghilterra e di Francia con non minor meraviglia fu liberato da
una bestia non meno feroce che nociva, se le forze fussero corrisposte al
desiderio, la sourana potest a per la quale Reges regnant seben permise il
disegno, tronco l essette.

Restami a dire un' assai conosciuta condition del lepre ch' e il timore il
qual non conosconel Re, se pur non fusse quel che Sidnoio trovo in Theodorico
Timet timeri.

Non si fida d'altra guardia che della sua innocenza e dell' amor del popolo,
Ama piu tosto con Ciro esser chiamato Padre della Patria, che con Cambyse
Signore.

La sua vita e si giusta et incontaminata che chi vuol veramente divenir buono,
non ha bisogno d'altr^ specchio che del suo es^mpio.

Alcuni cortegiani dicon dover riconoscere la maggiore part delle loro virtu
da lui a quali risplende con si belesempio che si vergognano di no^ seguirlo
ben che non possino arrivarlo, quind' e ch accende tutti ad esser' emoli della
sua persona, ma nessuno della dignit a, gli rende simili ad Hephestione che'
amava Alesandro, non a Cratero ch'amava il Re; Non bisogna preghino per
accrescer lasua felicit a ma per eternala, anzi per il publico been non possono
essere orationi piu brevi e piu efficaci, quanto pr^gar per la salute del solo
Re.

Dunque accompagnato dalle communi voci m'appressero a Dio prega^dol^ ch'egli
difenda il difensore della feed ch' a guisadel Cherubino coula spada
fiammeggiant^ custodis^e la Chiesa di Christo, vero Paradis^ terrestre, accio
nell'istess^ modo che ha cominciato, seguiti' a regnare, e riguardando a
passati suoi fatti, anfios^ dell' avenire con quell' antica acclamatione prego
che

DIV FACIAT ET VIV AT CAROLVS.

