SIX SERMONS. Preached by EDWARD CHALONER, Doctor of Divinity, and Fellow of
ALL-SOVLES College in OXFORD.

LONDON Printed by W. STANSBY, 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, WILLIAM, Earl of PEMBROKE, Lord HERBERT of Cardiffe,
Lord Par and Rosse of Kendal, Lord Marmion and Saint Quintin, etc.
Chancellor of the University of OXFORD, Lord Chamberlain of his Majesty's
Household; Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter: And one of his
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
THese fruits of mine, receiving warm'th from the good affections of some
friends, have budded forth and blossomed too early, to withstand either the
Nips or Blasts of this critical Age, unless your Lordship shall vouchsafe to
be so hospitable, as to admit them within your Walls, and make them secure
under the Shadow of your protection. For, to whom should they fly for
Patronage, but to our Honorable Chancellor, under whose Branches they both
took Root and grew up; it being the Ordinance of Nature, that the same Hand
which creates, should conserve; and that the benign Influence which reigns at
the Birth, should be propitious also in continuing Life. Add to these, the
contents of the Work, which consisting of diverse pieces, as excitements to
piety, maintenance of royal and subordinate Authority, and a vindicating of
our Naioth's or Nurseries of Piety and Knowledge, from the detractions of the
Ignorant, may by virtue of your several Relations, to God, the State, and Our
University, challenge a greater share in your Lordship, then any other. Nor
can I suspect (were these inducements wanting) your Noble interpretation of my
boldness, considering that your Honor, whose study is to express the virtues
of ancient times in Life, has for your zeal to Learning, noble Patterns in
holy Writ, both to imitate and parallel. For what was Daniel, Dan. 2.28.
but Counselor to a great Monarch, and Governor over the Schools of the
wisemen in Babylon? 1. King. 18.3.
And what Obadiah, other then Ruler in a Kings House, and Patron of the
Prophets, the University men of Israel? I, for mine own part, since you
succeed them in their Titles and Merits, shall ever pray, that you may partake
with them in the Reward, that so, the Divine protection of the One may attend
you in this Life, and the blessed memory of the Other Crown you hereafter.

Your Lordships humbly devoted, ED. CHALONER.

Errata.
Page 17 leg. Merces. 26 contain, leg. contained. 64 leg. Ieduthen. 86 lin
antepenult. leg. Thus. 89 circa medium, of leg. for. 93 reches, leg. teaches.
99 Ecclesiastical, leg Enthysiasticall. 104 leg. Rucus. 117 refine, leg.
rescue. ibid. reconciling, leg. recoun^ing. 123 leg. assisting, dele on. 126.
leg Kepplerus. 137 dele either. ibid. with, leg. which 143 leg. Turner. 144
lin. antepenult. dele that. 149 leg. Petrus. 153 circamed. leg. no sooner. 159
leg defect. 168 vnremarkable, leg. remarkable. 174 as leg. and. 184 says he,
bis leg. say they. 187 leg. Rock circamed. 196 as Hercules pillars, leg. as
far as Herc. etc. 202 (...), leg. (...) 204 ruin, leg. revive. 206
disposing, leg. dispossessing. 288 Verse leg. Verge.

The Titles of the several SERMONS.
Babel, or the confusion of Languages.

Naioth, or the University Charter.

Ephesus common Pleas.

Iudahs Prerogatives.

The Gentiles Creed.

Paul's Peregrinations, or the Travelers Guide.

BABEL, OR THE CONFVSION OF LANGVAGES.
GENESIS 11. verse. 7. Go to, let us go down and there confound their language,
that they may not understand one another speech.


THe Holy Ghost having in the precedent Chapter, set down unto us, the
Propagation and Plantation of Noah's offspring, according to their Countries,
Heads, and Families, upon the face of the Earth: in this Chapter he proceeds,
Methodo Analytica, by way of Ascent, from the Effects to the Causes of this so
great a dispersion: and they were two, the one, Malum culpae, Man's impiety,
which incensed God: the other, Malum poenae, Gods vengeance, which he inflicted
upon man. The offense which the sons of men committed against God, was that
arrogant and presumptuous work of building Babel, Horat. Car l. 1. Ode 3.
Audax omnia perpeti gens humana, ruit per vectitum nefas. The vengeance which
God took upon Man, was the miraculous confounding of their Languages. The
proceedings of both are described much alike. Go to, say they, go to, says
God, a kind of Consultation in either, but the scope and conclusion of the
Consultations were contrary, theirs was Aedificemus, let us build; Gods was
Confundamus, let us confound; to note that where God is not a Builder, he will
be there found as a Confounder. Suppose the relics of mankind, within little
more then an hundred years, either in the Arc, for twelve months continuance
setting no foot in the buried Continent, or ^ut of the Arc, and yet not
daring ^o descend Armenias Mountains, at length increasing through that word,
which bade them multiply and replenish the Earth, to be compelled to leave
Ararat, and iournying from the East westward, to find a Plain in the Land of
Shinar. This Shinar, as most Geographers think, was a part of the Garden of
Eden, fruitful for the watering of two most famous Rivers, Tigris and
Euphrates, fruitful for the temperate situation in regard of the heavenly
influence, fruitful for the nature of the soil, returning, (...) Herod. l. 1.
cap. 193. Plin. lib. 6. cap. 26.
if Herodotus and Pliny may be believed, the seed sown in it beyond
credulity. Who would not have thought, that man lately preserved by Gods great
mercy from the tyranny of the Deluge, would now by feeling so fresh a taste of
his goodness, have consecrated unto him some immortal monument of gratitude
and thankfulness? Who could have imagined Man's affections to have been so
obdurate, as not to perform some memorable act redounding to Gods glory?
When, behold, turning this blessing to a curse, they say one to another, Go
to, let us build, Non Deo sed nobis ipsis, let us build us a City and a Tower,
whose top may reach up unto heaven. What would vain and humane presumption
have done, although it could have built a Tower as high as heaven? Tutam
veramque in coelum viam molitur humilitas, August. de ^mit. Dei, lib. ^6. c. 4.
says Saint Augustine, low humility is that which best conueyes us up to
heaven. Their desire belike, was to leave a monument to posterity, no matter
how good, so great enough; and there are two ends set down thereof, the one,
finis vanitatis, That we may get us a name; Horat Car. l. 1. Ode 3.
Nil mortalibus arduum est, coelum ipsum p^timus stultitia: the other, Finis
impietatis, Least we be scattered abroad upon the face of the Earth. Now what
this scattering should mean, some controversy amongst Interpreters rests yet
undecided; Joseph. l. 1. Antiq.
Josephus thinks they feared the danger of a second Flood. Cajetan would rather
have it that they would not be dispersed one from another, because, Caiet. ad
loc.
Homo est Animal politicum and societate gaudens, Arist. 1. Polit. c. 1. Hugo
S. Victor. in Annot. in G^t.
as the Philosopher teaches us; but others there are, which not improbably
conjecture, that a mere living asunder is not there understood, but rather a
diui^^on of Kingdoms. For, Nimrod and his Accomplices, hoping to reduce all men
under one government, and by that means to make themselves sole Monarchs of
the whole Earth, made Babel perhaps the beginning of their Kingdom, Aug. sup.
and the subject of their plot; the Tower their Fortress against their
Opposites, and the City their resedencie of Estate. For mine own part, having
the sacred Scripture for my Star, and craving the Spirit of al Truth for my
Steers-man, I pass not greatly, so I may conduct some to the Haven of Health,
if I strike neither into the Cimerian or obscure ports of Antiquity, nor yet
anchor in the boundless Ocean of modern curiosities. Whatsoever their drift
was, scattered they would not be, and therefore we can conceive in it no less
then high presumption, and such presumption as incensed the Maker of Nature, to
change and confound Nature in his best workmanship, Jun. Com. in Genesis 11.
Tanquam si aduersus coelestia tela cauere sibi hoc modo possent, says one,
Whether they feared a second Flood, or whether a dispersion, they thought their
own inventions had been powerful enough to frustrate the decree of the most
High. See here a Babel, a confusion of iniquities, one Work, not one Offense,
but many. They should have considered, how that the ways of men are in the
hands of God, and that he orders them as it best seems unto himself; they
should have harkned unto the voice of aged Noah, who, no doubt, as before the
Flood he ceased not to forewarne the old World of the Deluge to come, so since
the Flood he was not defective in aduertising his untoward offspring of their
danger at hand, but they, hard hearted as they were, disobedient to their
careful Parent, reprobate to every good work, will needs follow the steps of
cursed Cham, and his issue, and so proceed on in their ambitious design. But
the Lord in the mean time came down to see the City and the Tower, which the
sons of men builded, where see an Omnipotent Judge stirred up with just fury
against perverse and presumptuous offenders: Multa sed non multum dicit, his
speech was full, as befitting the Nature of so high a Court, and short as
becoming the Person of so great a Majesty, containing in it a Consultation,
and a Decree; an Exaggeration, or an Accusation and a Sentence, the former in
the Verse going before; the latter comprehended in the words of my Text, all
tending to this effect.

Secondly, think not thou degenerate issue of old Noah, but that al thy ways
lie open before me, thy practices, thy imaginations; the secrets of thy soul
are not hidden from my sight, and can yet thy wretched heart be so hardened, can
it be so wittingly impious, as to provoke thy Creator, and in the face of
Heaven, to dare combat to his Omnipotency? Remember the blessings wherewith I
blessed your Fathers, and call to mind my wonders of old time; Did I to that end
preserve your Progenitors from the Flood, that Children issuing from their
loins, should requite me with this contumely? Did I give you fruitful Shinar
to possess, and bless you with the fat of the Earth, that plenty should make
you stiff-necked and rebellious against me? Did I endue you with one language
and one speech, that you should abuse it in inciting one another to such
impieties? Behold, I have hitherto but looked down from Heaven, and said,
perhaps Man will turn from his wicked ways, and seek after me; but I will
now vnsheath my sword, I will go down to execute judgment; for the sins of
your mouth, and for the words of your lips, you shall be taken in your pride, I
will confound your Language, that you may not understand one another speech.

The total sum is, a brief of Gods proceedings against the builders of
Babel for their arrogancy; in the sentence or decree whereof,

Observe with me these three parts. First, Profectionem, the progress,
circuit, or expedition which he would make, Go to, let us go down.
Secondly, Intentionem, the intention which he had, and there confound their
Language. Thirdly, Rationem, the reason or end of his intent, that they may nos
understand one another speech.


Of these in order; as Gods grace shall enable me, and your Christian patience
afford me leave, and first, de profectione, of Gods progress or expedition
against these wicked Rebels, which comes in the first place to be considered,
Go to, let us go down, etc.

Fourthly, It is doubted amongst some Interperters, who they should be to whom
this descendamus, let us go down (it being a Verb of the plural number)
ought to be referred. The Jews ignorant of the blessed Trinity, as also some
others, would have it to be spoken to those Angels which God purposed to use as
Instruments in the effecting of this miraculous confusion. But were it so, the
Phrase would have rather been (go ye) then (let us go) for (let us) imports
an equality between the speaker and the hearer, which equality cannot be
found between the Creator and the Creature; besides, Angels being of a finite
essence, can have but finite and successiue operations, but to frame and infuse
in one and the selfsame moment, such variety of sounds, and senses into men's
brains, argues Gods immediate hand, and that in this action he had no partner.
I rather join therefore with our own Interpreters, and amongst the rest with
Calvin, Call. ad locum. Sic Chrysostom. Procop. Rab^n. Rupert. Cyrill. Tertull.
who ex hoc loco non inepte probatur, subesse in vna Dei essentia ^res
personas: that from this place the plurality of persons in one essence may be
well inferred. But my purpose is not stand upon a point so sufficiently
resolved by others. Another doubt here in my Text is, how God may be said to
go down; For is it possible, that he which is totus in toto mundo, should
now want a local descent to make him aliquid in part mundi? Whither shall I
go from thy spirit, says David, Psalm. 139.7.
or whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou
art there? If I go down into Hell thou art there also? If I take the wings of
the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there also
shall thine hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. To the clearing of
this point, we must observe, that this word descend, has a double signication
in the holy Scriptures, sometimes it is taken properly, for a local motion from
a higher place to a lower, and so the Angel of the Lord is said to descend
from Heaven, when he rolled away the stone from the mouth of our Saviors
Sepulcher, Matthew. 28. sometimes it is taken Metaphorically, when one by
manifesting himself in his actions, resembles a kind of descent in his
person, and so God may be said to descend, non mutatione loci, sed
patefactione sui, not by changing his place, but by declaring himself; For
though God being in his essence considered, is every where present; yet if we
consider him in his effects, and in his works: certi huius praesentiae gradus
dandi sunt, say the Schools, there be, as it were, certain degrees of his
presence to be granted. Greg. Com. in Ezech. him. 8.
Omnia tangit, non tamen aequaliter omnia tangit, says Gregory: so that he is
present in a several manner to several things: Communiter omnibus,
specialiter aliquibus, he descends by his works of Power, to all his
Creatures upon Earth; by his works of Grace, to his Servants Elect alone; by
his works of Confusion, to the wicked and Reprobates; and in this latter sense
I take to be understood the words of my Text, go to, let us go down. Now
this going down against these haughty builders is sufficiently expressed in
my Text, where God by the similitude of a King, who minding to punish wicked
and rebellious subjects, sends not others, but himself goes down in person to
do Justice, notes out unto us his just severity and vigilant care in
rewarding headstrong and ambitious Miscreants; but yet the reason hereof
appears better by the coherence of these words with the former Verse: Delr^e
ex Philon. and Chrysostom.
For whereas there God had thoroughly scanned and sifted, as it were, the,
thoughts and imaginations of these wicked builders, and by experience found,
that they were not now grown to an opinion alone, or a longing to commence
this prodigious action for the winning of a name, but that Pride was by this
time at her high tide, and that a resolute presumption had gotten the sole
swage of their affections, so that he by way of communication with himself,
describing, First, their condition, that they had not only imagined, or in
their breasts alone conceived this vanity, but had even already begun to do
it: Secondly, their resolution, that unless he with his Omnipotent arm
should interpose, nothing would be restrained from them which they imagined to
do, he adds immediately these words, Go to, let us go down, which being as
it were a Decree grounded upon the former communication, may not unfitly afford
us this observation. That to be bent upon a vain resolution of purchasing a
name, is a fearful presage of Gods coming down to work confusion.

Fifthly, no sin is so hateful to God, as this pride and seeking of glory,
other sins hurt most our selves, or our neighbors, but this directly as it
were, opposes it self unto God, by remembering our selves too much, it utterly
makes us forget our Creator. God therefore is said to resist the proud. 1. Pet.
5. to scatter them in the imaginations of their hearts. Luke 1.51. To destroy
even their house. Prou. 15. and whosoever is an exalter of himself, to bring
him low. Matthew. 23.12. Assyrias Monarch affects but a name from his strength
and wisdom, and is threatened to be consumed like thorns with a flame, Esaias
10. Nebuchadnezzar but triumphs in his Majesty and glory, and that goodly Tree
must be hewne down, and exposed amongst the beasts of the Field, Dan. 4.
Look upon the Prince of Tyrus, Ezech. 28. or the Israelites, Amos 6. and we
shall find that the exalting of their own name for blessings received of God,
was that which pulled down plagues and afflictions upon them. To omit many
others, we read of Herod, Acts 12. how immediately after the peoples shout,
terming his Oration the Voice of God, and not of Man; the Angel of the Lord
smote him, and why? not for any boasting of himself for ought we find, but for
not declining the too great applause of the people. So sudden has God been in
confounding those, which either proudly have sought, or vainly embraced a
glorious Name.

But what will some object, may no Fame be affected or Name be sought for?
Has God enriched some with such admirable gifts and excellent endowments above
others, and must all these be buried in obscurity without speaking of?
Beloue, mistake me not, it is not a good name, neither is it a great Name,
which I here dislike, but our own inordinate seeking of it. Things are of two
sorts, Thom. 2.2. q. 132. art. 1. Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 8. q. 3. punct. 2.
some are bona per^se, good in themselves, and these in themselves are to be
sought for, as Faith, Hope, Charity, and the like Virtues; others are not
good, but indifferent in themselves, and are to be hunted after only, as they
may be instruments of what is good in it self: and amongst these are reckoned
Fame and humane Glory. To seek Glory therefore, or a Name, as they may be
Instruments of a farther good is no sin, a good Name being rather to be
desired then great riches, Prou. 22. For first, as it is meroe^ des meritorum,
a reward of our deserts, it stirs up a desire of well doing in our selves,
and herein is to be desired: Secondly, as it is signum virtutum, a token of
Virtues in us, it makes our good endeavors the more passable amongst others,
and herein is to be disired; Lastly, as it is Argumentum cuiusdam excellentiae
diuinae in nobis, as Thomas speaks, it works an acknowledgement of Gods
graces toward man in us all, and herein is to be desired. And in these
respects Saint Paul bids us provide honest things not in secret only, but in
the sight of all men, Romans 12. And our Savior adds the reason, Mat. 5. That
men may see our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven.
Whereupon says Austen; Aug a^ frat. in Eremo se^m. 52. Iom. 10.
Tenete quod dixi, atque distinguite. Duae suntres, conscientia and fama:
Conscientia necessaria est tibi, fama proximo t^^. But to seek a name as these
builders did, without relation at all to any higher end, therein consists the
vanity. Our heavenly Father, he knows what we have need of, and has in
heaven rescrued a name for us, which he has written in the Book of Life: to
grudge because we want it in this world, is to weep for the extinguishing of a
Candle, when in stead thereof we are assured of the light of the Sun. And
indeed, Saint Paul gives and excellent example, to illustrate and confirm this
doctrine: for when some Corinthians began to make more account of the false
Apostles, that crept in amongst the^, then of him; he that he might by bringing
them to esteem of himself, bring them also to esteem of the Gospel which he
preached, stuck not to tell them, that he was not a whit behind the chiefest
of the Apostles: and to boast, that he had been in labors more abundant, in
stripes above measure, in prisons more frequent, in deaths often, 2. Cor. 11.
using the magnifying of his name, as an instrument to magnify his doctrine.
But when on the contrary side, othersome more fierce in their censures then the
rest, would give no equal hearing to his just defense, he appeald from man to
Gods Tribunal, and plainly showed what he esteemed of a great name, or of
men's estimations in themselves; As touching me (says he) I pass very little
to be judge of you, or of man's judgment; no, I judge not mine own self, 1.
Cor. 4. As a name therefore may serve for our own encouragements, the edifying
of our brother, and the glory of God, we are commanded to let our works shine
before men, and to purchase a good report amongst all men, but as it is a thing
in it self, merely considered without further use, we strictly are forbidden
ambitiously to seek it. What greater tokens of a zealous affection, then
prayer, fasting, and almsdeeds? By the one we commune with God; by the other
we humble our selves; and by the third we testify our loves unto our
neighbors: yet even these in danger of vainglory, or having not a farther end
accompaning them, are to be restrained from the eyes of men. Alms must be so
conceald, that the left hand may not know what the right hand does, Matthew. 6.3.
Prayers must be so secretly powered forth, that the Chamber door may not stand
open when we make them: Verse. 6. and a cheerful countenance must so color
our fastings, that we may not seem to men to fast, but to our Father which is
in secret; and our Father which sees in secret, will reward us openly: Verse.
18.

Sixthly, I would to God (beloved) that these our soothing times, could be
contented to hear this doctrine, not in thesi only, but would also as
willingly make use of it in hypothesi. It serves notably first against those,
who, live they how Epicurlike they list, be their possessions by fraud or
oppression gotten, they care not; a House yet, or some other Monument must they
leave behind them, if for naught else, yet to preserve their name. Weak
impiety; so much labor, such care, and all but to purchase a name. Why,
Achitophel has a name, Judas has a name, Beelzebub has a name: and, alas, how
easy a matter is it to leave a name, if that were all; Babylons ruins (me
thinks) might here lesson us; and one of those aged Syres, if you will, one of
Iaphets sons, from whom we are descended, were he now living, might thus
inform us; Build not Palaces, erect not Marble Monuments to win a name, disce
meo exemplo monitus, thy forefathers example may teach thee, that though thou
build them, yet God may name them, and to deride thy vanity, term them as he
did this Babell, a Confusion. Beloved, there be some here, whom if not now,
yet hereafter it may concern; give me leave therefore to add this for their
instruction; Are you desirous to have a name. I dissuade you not: but imagine
not that it relies in worldly pomp or humane glory: Men think (says David)
that their houses shall continue for ever, and that their dwelling places shall
endure from one generation to another, and call their lands after their own
names; Nevertheless, they shall not abide in honor, seeing they may be
compared unto the beasts that perish; this is the way of them: But if you would
get a name, I will show you a way (says Chrysostom,) (...)
do good deeds, give to the poor, distribute your Alms to the necessitous,
these things will be living monuments, and Statues reard in the minds of men,
when those of Stone and Brass shall derive naught but your vanity unto
posterity. Dispersit, dedit pauperibus (says the Psalmist) and iustitia eius
manet in seculum, in one day he dispersed his riches, and we see his memory
extends unto all ages. But will you needs build you Houses and lofty Palaces? I
forbid you not; only build them not on earth, if you will build, build a
Tabernacle in Heaven, Where Cankers cannot corrupt, nor thieves dig through
and steal. Would you adorn your dwelling places? yet first remember, domum
interiorem, your own souls, adorn them, and Christ will come in and lodge
with you. Would you line your walls with Tapestry and rich Imagetie? yet
remember when you have clothed them, that you leave not Christ naked and
destitute of clothing. Build you houses for habitation, not ostentation, and
be sure of this, that overmuch outward pomp will prove like a shoo being to
big for you, it will hinder you in your way toward the heavenly Jerusalem.

But let me wade a little farther (my brethren) for neither must this Example
altogether so literally be applied, Perer. Cor. Nel a Lapid. Diod. Sic. l. 3.
c. 4. Herod. l. 1. Theod. in quaest. in Gen 59. Hieron. l. 5. comment in Esai
c. 14.
but that it may likewise yield some matter of admonition even to us, which in
this place have consecrated our selves to our set professions. Commentators
much disputes the question, whether it were this lower, which is so described
by Diodore and Herodotus, and whether it were to be seen in Saint Hierome and
Theodorets time; Our latter Voyages affirm the ruins to be yet extant; For
mine wone part, I would not counsel any man to truel thither to decide the
controversy. No beloved, let him look at home and in a Map decipher his own
affections, he needs not with Galileus use perspectrue Glasses to descry
Mountains in the Moon. I fear, too many there be, if they would but pluck
the beam out of their own eyes would clearly see, that Babel is yet standing,
and that not in part only raised, as was this in my Text, but reared to the
Battlements; nay, (I am afraid) in too many mounted as high as the
Weathercocke. If we look abroad and cast our eyes with our Savior from the
top of the high Mountain upon the splendour of the World, no doubt, but there
we shall see Towers and Babels enough a building, we shall easily yield that
Princes, and Potentates, and Secular Policies have their hands full of such
work; but let us reflect our eyes upon our selves, and ask whether here may
not be some of Babels builders, whether here may not be some day-labourers,
which set their hands to the laying of that foundation? Perhaps one amongst our
selves would reply, that here are none but such as have renounced those forded
Trades, and have dedicated themselves wholly to the liberal Professions; but
alas; beloved, we are not sharpe-sighted enough in our own cause, Cucullus
non facit Monachum; let us ask Elezeus Servant, he which could discern the
Mountain covered with fiery Chariots, and he would tell us, that there be
indeed here many Noah's, many Sems and Hebers, which bewail the headiness of
their Brethren, and would restrain them if possibly they could from such
precipitate courses; but, alas, whilst some too much neglectfull of their true
scope, do day and night lie digging and deluing, and hewing out their wordly
advancement; whiles it is too common a fault amongst men, to ruff cast and
plaster over their own deformities; that with Simon Magus, they may affirm
themselves to be some body, whilst not a few with lives and travels stand
either measuring others actions, or else as if themselves were the Poles of the
world, are taking the elevation of their own worth; how can one choose but say
that here also may sit many of those Mechanickes, who (if I should speak, with
my Story) do make Brick and burn it, and carry slime and mortar to the
building of this Tower. Babylon (believe it) may as well be built in a
Scholars brain, as in the Plains of Shinar, and vain glory may in the one
be as fit an Instrument to promote the Devils kingdom, as in the other it
served for the erecting of Nimrods Monarchy. Sciences and Disciplines were
first invented for use, and contain themselves then within the bounds of
Modesty, but vain glory raising them above their proper Sphere, made them in
the end take folly for their Center. Whence grew those infernal Arts of
consulting with foul spirits, whence those scrupulous inspection of the higher
bodies; but that earth and clay knowing not it self which it was bound to
know, to get a name would needs know that which it ought not to know; might I
but particularize, I think, there is none ignorant in the several Ages of
Learning. What corruptions of Arts arose from Pride? What Sects arose like
Locusts to devour the flowers of all good learning? How by them Philosophy
losing her profitable uses, was turned to abstractiue and sophistical
speculations, how Divinity was stuffed out with curious and unnecessary doubts,
how preaching it self through postelizing became verbal, and bent only as it
were to delight the fancy of fond Auditors. I cannot much censure therefore
those Schoolmen, which held Divinity it self to be then a speculatiue
Science, when the Popes to build their Empire thought good to abstract it from
the practice. Non sic a principio, it was not so from the beginning.

Agrip. de vanit. Scient.
An Agrippa could supply my Meditations with Examples, and tell you how all
Disciplines assumed first their vanity from the affectation of humane glory,
and a Viues could derive unto you the causes of the corruptions of Arts from
aspiring cogitations. Viues, de causis corrupt. arti.
Till Arrogancy bear Dominion over Truth; the transcendencie of the Pope
found no footing in the Church. Till ambitious ends blinded the eyes of
judgment, the doctrine of massacring Princes was not known. Till
Schoole-learning turned Advocate to the pride of Antichrist, we knew no higher
Judge of Controversies then the Scriptures. But my purpose is not to prosecute
this subject any farther; I desire (Beloved) knowledge in you all, but I would
have it vestita, clothed with Humility, for as it is in it self nuda, it
puffs up, says Paul, 1. Cor. 8. but joined with love it edifieth. Let no man
therefore presume to understand above that which is meet to understand, but
that he understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt to every man the
measure of Faith, lest striving with these builders to get a name, he
participate of their confusion; which was the intention of Gods descent, and
comes next to be handled; and there confound their Language.

Seventhly, bow dangerous a weapon the tongue of man is, how liable either to
use or abuse, no Author almost is silent to report. With our tongue we will
prevail, say the wicked, Psalm. 12. Death and life are in the power of it,
Prou. 18. And to conclude, It is a fire, a world of wickedness, an unruly
evil, full of deadly poison: Iam. 3. No marvel therefore, if the Lord, when
he saw that man by depriving himself of his original justice, had lost the
true skill of using this weapon, did now somewhat shorten the length of it, to
the end that some proportion might be found between the wounded and worn
Soldier, and his vnweeldie blade. Had Adam still continued in his first
estate, reason in him like a golden bridle would have kept this member in
subjection; At hi iam mortui sunt, those Arms which then were lusty and
strong, have now lost their vigor, and the tongue as an untamed beast runs
over all it meets with, and tramples to the ground all such as give it not way
and passage. God therefore since the Rider had not any longer the free power to
restrain his beast, thought good to shorten his race, scantle his liberties,
and reduce the large Common where before it roued, and went astray into
several inclosements. Shemeis tongue may be free in cursing, but it shall
boot no where now but in Jury. Athenian Demagogi may be prompt in moving
seditions, but their eloquence must end with the bounds of Greece: and Caius
Curio may be facundus malo publico; but his Rethoricke shall be powerful only
in Romes Territories.

From hence we may observe many points worth our consideration, as first, that
all the punishments which it pleases God to inflict on the wicked in this
life, are no other then so many steps and stairs to promote the welfare of his
Church. For howsoever, the World abounded as much with wicked after, as before,
yet men being divided into as many factions as tongues, and having not so free
commerce as before, the Church might now seem to have an indifferent share,
being compared with any one part, though to all it bear no proportion.
Secondly, we may note the end of Gods punishments, how it is to repress the
ragings of sin, Greg. lib. 34 Moral. and Chrysostom. in Genesis c. 11. v. 6.
and to restrain it from growing to that prodigious hight which these builders
had raised it unto. For no doubt, the Lord seeing the imaginations of man's
heart to be evil continually, and that this unity of speech so much served
the wicked to win them partners in their wickedness, used this confusion of
Languages as a bridle to curb their audacious spirits, that if notwithstanding
all this, they should have as much will to sin, yet should they have less
power to hurt: and though perhaps there might be as many wicked, yet should
there be fewer partakers in the same wickedness. Alas, God might, as he did
to Sodom, have rained down fire and brimstone upon them, and so have consumed
their work with them, but then he had not left us the posterity of that wicked
consort, as a perpetual argument of his mercy: he might with Lighthings or
Earthquakes have demolisht their work, and not them: but then he had only
detered them from proceeding in that mischief, not taken away the means of
beginning a new. Wherefore he like a prudent Judge, that this malum poenae,
this punishment which he would inflict upon them, might take some effect in all
their Posterity, suits their punishment to their offense: the unity of lunguage
caused the^ to incite one another to build, and the consusion of Languages
shall for ever take from them the means to proceed; similitude of speech, made
them seek a combination, and a diversity of speech shall cause their final
seperations; likeness of Tongues, made them conioyne in consultation, and
division of Tongues shall divide their humors and affections. Kingdoms be
divided by speeches, and speeches by the causes of the divisions of Kingdoms
so that now to reunite all men again under one visible form of government, is
to reedifie Babel, and to frustrate that course which God by this confusion of
languages established in the world. I cannot tell what others may conjecture,
but, me thinks, it cannot be but a fond imagination of the Papists, to think
that now all Nations should again conspire and agree under one visible head:
did God so miraculously scatter and divide men, lest being undivided they
should again return to their vomit, and their Commanders incite them afresh
to hatch such Monsters as this was; and must all Mankind subject it self once
more to the command of one Nimrod, and all concur to the raising of a second
Babel? I confess with Aristotle in the third of his Politickes, that a
Monarchy is the best form of Regiment absolutely, and the best in one City
and one Country, as most symbolizing with the order of nature, and being the
best preserver of Unity and Concord, which is Aristotle's main ground; yet
considering the manifold defects of men, amongst which this confusion of
Languages is not the least; (and therefore when our Savior was to give his
Apostles a large Commission to preach unto all Nations, he supplied it with the
gift of Tongues) considering, I say, the imperfections of Nature, I deny a
Monarchy to be the best form of Regiment, in respect of the whole World, and
every part thereof so far distant and remote one from another. For to omit
the impossibility and inconveniences alleged by Ocham, a Schoolman of their
own, in the second of his Dialogues and first Tract, who thinks it most
dangerous to have all men subject their ears and understandings to one man's
Dictates; least he in whom they put so much confidence by falling into error,
like the Serpent, should draw the most part of the stars from Heaven with his
tail; to pass by, I say, these Arguments, we may find proofs strong enough
in our Text; For if God used this confusion of Languages as a remedy for man's
Pride and Arrogancy, because a universal combination of men in the infancy
of the World brought forth such prodigious births as was this Babel, into what
wickedness may we conceive, might Mankind in its more declining Age headlong
throw it self to its greater confusion? This only, I say, old Babylon rayseth
the doubt, and new Babylon has resolved it.

But whilst we strive to subdue our open Enemies, we must be wary, least our
bosom friends, our own affections, subdue us. Lets see therefore, what lesson
each of us in particular may for his private use deduce from the manner of
punishing, which God used in this place. The whole Earth was of one Language
(says the Pen man of this story) and dixerunt alter alteri, aedificemus, and
they said one to another, let us build us a City and a Tower; and quia vnius
labij ideo dixerunt alter alteri, had they not been of one Language, they
could not have said one to another, Let us build. God resumes the argument in
the sixth Verse; Behold, the people is one, and they all have one Language, and
this they begin to do. Wherefore he dealt not with them, as sometimes
Physicians do, who for a Disease in the head apply the Plaster to the foot,
he punished not their eyes with blindness, as he did the men of Sodom, Genesis
19. nor their bodies with the leprosy, as he did Gehazi, 2. Kings, 5. no; that
member which stird them up (...), to wage war against him, by the same he
makes them (...), Cyp. sermon. de lapsis.
in Languages to discord amongst themselves. Inde coepit poena, vnde coepit and
crimen, says Cyprian, where the fault began, there began likewise the
punishment; It was the tongue that set them on work, and in all Justice he
makes the tongue to pay for it; some say, vt qui vnanimiter per linguam
offendissent, linguam ad orandum vnanimiter veniam non haberent: that because
they had offended jointly by the tongue, they should not now have a tongue
whereby they might jointly ask pardon: Austin says it was, Vt qui alto
superbiae tumore membra contempserant, in fragilissimo substantiae suae membro
poenam vtique sermonis sentirent, that by the just Judgment of God, they which
pust up with Pride did contemn and abuse their parts, should in the weakest
part they had sustain the punishment of confusion. Howsoever these men having
by the tongue so heinously offended, and being by the confusion of tongues so
severely punished, may yield a general caveat unto all those which abuse those
gifts and good parts, whatsoever they be which God endowes them withal, and
may point out unto us this Observation.

That when good gifts are employed to a wrong end, God oftentimes by them does
scourge those on whom he bestows them, and turns them to be Instruments of
their owners confusion.

Eighthly, All men who-euer they be, have some enemies or other which wish them
hurt, so that it truly may be said, Neminem habet amicum, qui neminem habet
inimicum; but here is the difference, the godly they have their Persecutors
without them, but the wicked has his own members rebellious within him, and
he knows not; an suo se iugulet gladio, whether God have reserved him or not
to be his own Executioner. If we look no further, yet Saules, Achitophels,
and Judas example may win credit to the Assertion. But Gods judgments
oftentimes are more particular; Eli offends by his Sons, because his Sons
ran into a slander, and he stayed them not, and in his Sons God threatened to
punish him, 1. Sam. 3. Jeroboam put forth his hand to lay hold on the man of
God, and straight ways his hand withered, 1. King. 13. Zachary, Luke 1.
doubting of the Angels promise, asked, Whereby shall I know this, and the
Angel gave him this for a sign, thou shall be dumb; Chrysostom.
(...). says Chrysostom, thy tongue which was so officious in opening the
distrust of thine heart, shall now sustain the punishment of thy hearts
distrust.

Ninthly, We need not run through all particulars, Cyp. sermon. de lapsis.
Cum per orbis multiformes ruinas tam delictorum poena sit varia, quam
delinquentium multitudo numerosa; vnusquisque consideret, non quid alius passus
sit, sed quid pati and ipse mereatur, says Cyprian, when through the manifold
ruins of the World, the punishment of offenses is as various, as the multitude
of offenders numerous; let every man consider, not what another man has
suffered, but what he himself deserves to suffer. We are many of us more
backwards then old Eli in reproving, perhaps, as impatient as Jeroboam, to
hear those men of GOD which reprove us: we are most of us more distrustful
of Gods promises then righteous Zachary, nay, some perhaps, as presumptious as
these builders, of his mercy. Why, may not that which befell them befall us?
Why, may not we sustain the like punishment which do commit the like
offenses? Examples of this nature are more frequent amongst us, then we are
aware of; Though we perceive not many so obuious to the senses, yet are there
not a few more hurtful to the soul. It is Satan's main ward, when God permits
him not to offer us violence himself, more cruelly to persuade us to be
Murderers of our selves, and by our own parts to work our own confusion.
Cyp. sermon de zelo and liuore.
He objects illuring forms to the eyes, that the eyes may expel pure thoughts
from the understanding; he fills the ears with the melody of bewitching
harmony, that by the eats he may mollify the vigor of Christian zeal; he
instigates the tongue to reuilings, Cyp. ibid.
the hands to blows, Vt dum zelo frater in fratris odio conuertitur, gladio
suo nescius ipse perimatur, says Cyprian, That whilst one Brother is incensed
with hatred against the other, he may unwittingly become his own Murderer:
Famam quidem fratris aut corpus vulneret, at propriam animam excidit, He may
hurt his Brothers fame, or wound his body, but he kills his own soul. It is
a wonderful advantage, and strange odds that a good man has of a bad in all
quarrels: For, alas, men consider not when they let their hands to do
mischief, they do but heap on more coals for themselves against the day of
Wrath; when their feet are swift to shed blood, or they suffer them to walk in
the broad way, they use them but as Carts or Hurdles which daily convey them on
their way to their place of execution; when they are bitter in censuring one
another, they do but teach God how to judge them in another life, which in
this life were so severe Iudgers of their Brethren. In observing therefore
these homebred and domesticke Traitors, it behooues a Christian Soldier to
keep narrow watch, and to lie (as it were) perpetual Centinell. For as those
Ulcers which breed of themselves, are far more incurable, then wounds which
proceed from outward causes, because the evil is inward, and the complexion
and constitution feed it; so the mischiefs which befall unto us from our
selves, and of which our own members or affections are the Authors, are
hardlyest remedied because they are such sins, as to which we give express
entertainment, and besides, are tabled and countenanced by the corruption of
our natures. And so I come, ab intention adrationem, from the intention to the
reason of this confusion, which follows in the last place to be spoken of,
That they may not understand one another speech.

Tenthly, Vt non exaudiant, implies the original, that they may not hear one
another speech: whereupon some would have a general deafness, either to
have gone before, or at the least to have accompanied the beginning of this
confusion. But what says the common Rule, rebus in obscuris quod minimum est
sequimur: I am sure that many of the best Interpreters do make great doubt,
whether any such deafenes were prefixed or annexed to this Miracle or no, but
that they understood not one another speech, all do jointly agree. Wherefore
I rather follow herein our own Churches Translation, which by a usual
Metaphore has rendered it; that they may not understand, in stead of, that they
may not hear: for, Cic. Tusc. quaest. l. 5.
in ijs linguis quas non intelligimus surdi profecto sumus; in those tongues
which we understand not, we are but deaf, says Cicero. And this gives us a
good foundation for the answering of that objection which some make upon this
place, how the gift of Tongues in the second of the Acts could be as a blessing
given to the Apostles, when as here the multiplying of Languages was a curse
inflicted upon mankind for their arrogancy and pride? We answer therefore
(beloved) that the punishment consisted not in having many Tongues, but in the
not understanding of them. The Apostles, they indeed had several Tongues: but
to the end that others might understand them, and they others; and therein was
the blessing: these builders of Babel had many Languages likewise, but to this
end, as my Text speaks, that they might not understand one another speech,
and therein consisted the curse; so that so far I am from assenting any thing
to our adversaries, which pretend Latin Service to be most profitable and
convenient for an illiterate Auditorie, that me thinks if other proofs were
deficient, yet this one punishment of the builders, might sufficiently confirm
us in this position,

That it is a curse and no benefit for men in Civil matters, much more in
Divine and religious, not to understand one another speech.

Eleuenthly, but this may easily be confirmed by other places; for first,
Deuteronomy. 28. when Moses had told the people, if they served not the Lord their God
with ioyfulnesse and with gladness of heart, how hard a Captivity it was they
should undergo, he amplifies it from their iron yoakes, presses their hunger
and thirst, describes their nakedness which they must sustain, quis talia
fando temperet a lachrymis, but he goes one degree farther, and signifies,
That God will bring a Nation from far against them, a Nation whose Language
they shall not understand. Poor men, the tongue is the instrument of imparting
the affections, it is the Character of the mind, and bond of humane society;
might this but plead his owners cause, the fury of the enemy perhaps would
be assuaged by the supplications of the Captive, the victorious Conqueror
would melt and relent at the cry of the oppressed; but when this is taken
away, Pity, alas, is banished, Mercy stops her ears, and the sorrowful
sighings of the Afflicted are no more heard. Jeremy therefore, Chap. 5. after
that, for their Atheism and carnal security, he had denounced the terrible
Judgments of the Lord against the men of Israel, adds this as the
accumulation of their misery to ensue, that God would bring upon them an
ancient Nation, a Nation whose Language they knew not, neither understood what
they said. In Civil conversation therefore, we will see what a tyrant to our
wills, and how adverse to our earnest desires, is this, not understanding of
one another speech: But in Ecclesiastical and Divine matters, Saint Paul 1.
Cor. 14. seems more purposely to dispute it: for when the Corinthians much
glorying in the gifts of strange tongues, did impertinently oftentimes abuse
them to the prejudice of their Auditors, the Apostle arguing their vanity,
tells them, that Tongues are for a sign, not to them that believe, but to them
that believe not. As if he should have said: You see, my Brethren, that this
hearing of unknown tongues which you so greedily affect, is no benefit of God
to the faithful, but rather a punishment and token of vengeance to come on
unbelievers; For with men of other tongues, and other lips, will I speak unto
this people, says the Lord, Esaias 28. and it follows, that they may go and
fall backwards, and be broken, and snared, and taken, Verse. 13. Thus the wicked
do oftentimes through their sins cause God to remove from them, even those
good means which might the better draw them unto the knowledge and
understanding of the truth.

Twelfthly, but there is a mystical Babylon, which bids me wander no longer in
the Plains of Shinar, but return homeward, and take a short view of it by the
way. This is Rome, which as in respect of her Civil estate she resembles
Babylon, having lost her Language, left her seven Mountains to plant her self
in Campo Martio, changed her face and fashion, and is so entombed in her own
ruins, Lips. de mag. Romans l. 3. c. 11.
that Lipsius cannot so much as trace the ancient tract of her walls: even so
in respect of her state Ecclesiastical, that which not long since was the
Garden of Eden, is now ouer-growne with weeds; and the Daughter of Sion is
become the Whore of Babylon. Many Writers have observed many several
circumstances, by reason whereof the holy Ghost rightly termed Rome under
Antechrist, by the title of Babylon, for Power, Glory, Whoredoms, Tyranny.
But to come home to my Text, me thinks, that nothing may seem wanting to
furnish out the similitude, even the confusion of Languages, and not
understanding of one another speech in spiritual Babel may well hold play.
For is not their prayer in an unknown Tongue, a present proof of this
confusion? What is their prohibiting of vulgar Translations, what their
celebrating of Divine Service in Latin only? What the intermixing of barbarous
and vnsignificant terms in all their Missalls and Breuiaries, but forehead
marks of this Babylonish confusion? I am the willinger (beloved) to insist a
little upon this point, because Bosius in his sixth Book, de signis Ecclesiae,
and fifth Chapter, has made the gift of Tongues to be an evident note, that
the present Church of Rome is the true Church. To let pass his brags of their
Linguists, we must observe, that this confusion of Languages consisted not
simply in not understanding of Languages and Tongues: but whether we make this
one another in my Text to be (...), vicinum, with the Septuagint and Chaldaick
Paraphrase; or proximum, with Hierom, or with Pagnine and Arias Monta^us to be
socium our companion, all argue, that not only the final cause, but also the
formal Ire of the confusion consisted, in the not understanding of their
speech, with whom they were to converse, and to whom they did associate
themselves in their Churches, and public meeting places to join in Prayers,
and the worship of God; that then, I say, they understand not one another
speech, then they participate of the curse and punishment of these wicked
builders. But see how the Serpent is still a Serpent; if he cannot build
Babylon by the unity of Languages, he will do it by the confusion of
Languages, if he cannot by a speech which men understand, he will do it by
not understanding one another speech; if he cannot by the abuse of Gods
blessings, he will do it by the use of his curses. It is strange (beloved) how
in other things men are Eagle-eyed, and pry too far, only in those things
which concern regnum coelorum, the Kingdom of Heaven, they desire to be
purblind, and wilfully cast a veil over their own eyes: we would esteem him
an improuident Champion, which being to combat with a strong enemy, will
assail him at such weapons only, as he himself knows not how to use; and
is it not the like case with our adversaries, who being encountered by a potent
enemy, the devil, will strive to put him to flight by such weapons only, and
such prayers as they know not the power of? Say the best of their prayers that
may be said, that many of them are zealous, and fervent, penned by the
Fathers, received by us; yet let them know, that we have the sword drawn, they
have it but in the scabbard; we see the mark we shoot at, they coward-like
wink when they fight, and sottishly hood-blind themselves, when they should
see how to direct their strokes. I deny not but that in their rapsodie of
Tracts, Sequences, Responsoryes, Graduells, and the like, some Pearls are here
and there intermixed, yet to the non intelligent Auditory, they are but as the
light which shined in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not, Ioh. 1.
Or as that of Jacob in Bethel, Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it
not, Genesis 28. For what absurdities have daily issued from this Romish
confusion, not the practice only of the Lay ignorant do testify, who
promiscuously apply the same prayers to God, to our Lady, to the Nails, and
other Relics, but the writings of the learned do confirm. It boots not
much, though Aue Maria, God save thee Mary, which is a pure prayer to God for
her, be turned to a prayer and petition to her: neither breaks it square,
though to the Image of our Lady, they say, Pater noster qui es in coelis, Our
Father which art in Heaven, as the Tredentine Catechism in the fourth part,
and sixth Chapter, permits men to do, and as Bellarmine seems to allow, who
denies not, but that that prayer may be applied to any Angel or a Saint; in
his book de sanctorum beatitudine, and twentieth Chapter. How good their
Linguists are, which Bosius vaunts of, in other things I know not, in these
cases I am sure the Delphian sword serving for all purposes, and the
Philophers, quidlibet ex quolibet comes to short; either they make the Romish
dialect more flexible then any other, or else the world has been defective
hitherto of an expurged Priscian. But I will go no farther in the pursuit of
our Common adversary.

O Thou which formest the hearts of thy servants, and openest their eyes, that
they may behold the worderful things of thy Law, send knowledge we beseech thee
out of thine holy heaven, and from the throw of thy glory, that it being
present, the understanding of all men may be so enlightened, and their
judgments so reedified, that they may discern An^ec. rist, not only by the
ruffenesse of his hands, but also by the confusion of his Tongue, and that
those which are now in bondage to him, as in the house of Egypt, may no longer
speak the Language of Babylon, not understanding one another speech, but the
Language of C^naan, and swear to the Lord of Hoasts, which lives and reigns
one God and three persons world without end, Amen.

NAIOTH OR THE UNIVERSITY CHARTER, A Sermon preached at the Act, upon Sunday in
the fore-noone at Saint Mary's in Oxford, Anno 1620.

BY Edward Chaloner Doctor of Divinity and Fellow of Allsoules College in
Oxford.

LONDON, Printed by William Stansby. 1622.

NAIOTH, OR THE UNIVERSITY CHARTAR.
AMOS 7.14. Then answered AMOS, and said unto AMAZIAH, I was no Prophet,
neither was I a Prophets Son, but I was an Heardsman, and a gatherer of
Sycomore fruit.


IT is the beaten policy of Satan, that old Serpent, when he cannot master
the Truth by meaner Agents, to interest great ones in his cause, 1. King. 18.
Judge. 21.20 John 19.12.
and to pretend the Kings Title. Eliah's must be thought Enemy to Ahab, Christ
a Corriuall with Caesar, and Amos in this Chapter, Amos 7.10.
a Conspirator against Ierobeams person, at least a figure-flinger of his
Fortunes, rather then Amaziah the Priest of Bethel should have his Traffic
decay, or his Kitchen, by reason of the others preaching, hazard freezing.
Politic Idolatry is ever supported by pillars of the same stuff and making.
What other Oratory do the Priests of Bethel now two thousand years since this
Emblem perished, pierce the ears of Princes with all, then that they are
their trustiest Guard and securest Pensioners, and that in maintayning of them
their own safety and assurance does depend? What other streines does their
pretended Zeal resound, then what Amaziah with the voice of a Trumpet chaunts
in the Court and amidst the Counselors of Jeroboam? It is not private lucre
that makes him by profession of Priesthood devoted to peace and quiet, at
length to sustain that odious and ungrateful office of a Promoter, the Swords
of Amos his Accomplices hang over thy head, O Jeroboam, this, this, is that,
which makes Amaziah an accuser, and in accusing vehement. You see then
(Beloved) how Satan begins first with violence and cruelty, if this take not
effect, as here it did not, then puts he off the frocke of a Woolfe, and as
our Savior foretold, makes his next encounter in sheep clothing. False
priests are his best Chaplains, Matthew. 7.15.
and follow him nearer at the heels then any other. Amaziahe enters now, into
private parlie with Amos, and seeks if possibly he can, to rid his
jurisdiction of him by good counsel. He first suggests unto him the danger he
was in, and upon this ground counsels him to fly into Judah. Secondly, he
presents before him the duty and reverence he ought the King, and therefore
wishes him upon a double respect to forbear Bethel, his Diocese, (as Hugo
Cardinalis terms it) the one religious, because it was the Kings Chapel, Hug.
Card. ad locum.
the other civil, because it was the Kings Court. Unhappy Jeroboam, in whose
Chapel Amoses are silenced; and in whose Courts Prophets are proscribed and
banished the Verge. But God will not suffer Mankind to be miserable, though it
would be miserable, Let Jeroboam repine, and his priests conspire to fortify
their works of malice with the Kings Signet, yet, hoc vnum necessarium, this
one thing is necessary for thee, Amos, it is the command of the Lord of Hosts,
that great Captain, that thou should stand Sentinel in Bethel, and lie Perdu
in Israel, what ever betyde thee.

True it is, that Amaziahs counsel was of as good touch, as the flattering
lips of worldly friends do use to impart; who begges not attention, or
inoculates not his faithful endeauours into his Friends Creed and Belief,
with a Tale of vtile, profit, commodity? But when God has made it thy calling
to prophecy unto his people Israel, there is nullus consultandi locus, no
choice left thee, that Roman magnanimity now challenges to find place in
thee, Necesse vt cas, non vt vinas: it is necessary that thou go, and
prophesiest to Israel, it is not necessary that thou live. And this was
indeed, the mayn substance of Amos reply unto Amaziah, and it is contained in
the 15. Verse. of this Chapter; as for my Text it is a Prolepsis, or removing of
an Objection, which might be thus framed against such an Answer. Thou say,
that God sent thee, and that he bid thee prophecy unto Israel; how shall this
appear? God is the God of order and not of confusion; Nor may any man take the
honor of the Ministry unto himself, Heb. 5.4.
but he that is called of God as was Aaron, who gave thee this authority?
Produce thy Commission, show thy Orders. The Orders of Prophets, whose calling
is extraordinary, as they are written in the Court hand of Heaven, so are they
sealed with Miracles. Of Moses we find, Exodus 4. tha^ he requiring of God some
testimonial of his sending, God gave him the power of turning his Rod into a
Serpent, and 2. Kings 2. the Sons of the Prophets which were to view at
Jericho, seeing Elisha part the waters of Jericho, with Eliahs Mantle, said,
The spirit of Eliah rests on Elisha, thus were these men's callings read in
these Miracles, as in Characters of Gods writing; nor is it less miraculous
that an Herdsman, should suddenly proceed a Seraphicall, or illuminate Doctor;
it was that one argument which put the subtle and profound Masters of the
Jews to a non plus, John 7. How knows this man Letters, seeing he never
learned, and to say the Truth, it is an Epitome, and an abridgement of all
other Miracles whatsoever: In this, the blind (so come our souls into the
World) are made to see the wonderful things of God; in this the dumb (so
poor Grammarians are we by nature, that we salute the ligh^s with none but
inarticulate sounds) have the gift of tongues; in this a Steward and Dispenser
of Gods Word, has the abiltie to feed five thousand souls at once with the
same Barley Loaf, to awaken the very dead out of their graves of corruption,
and to raise up even of stones Children unto Abraham. If therefore any in this
Assembly prize the Learning required in a Teacher at that low rate, that they
conceive the purchase of it to be but a few idle hours work, or otherwise
that by Gamesters it may be found sitting in the fields, let them know, that
Amos here was of another opinion, and that such slender provision of theirs,
for a work consisting of so many parts, requiring such variety of Tongues,
dexterity in Arts, profoundnesse in Sciences, may be as conuertible an
Argument to prove them, no Prophets Sons, as it is in my Text urged to prove
Amos a Prophet, Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet,
neither was I a Prophets Son, but I was an Heardman and a gatherer of
Sycomore fruit.

The sum (you see) of Amos his Answer (as concerning my Text) is a
confirmation or proof of his extraordinary calling to the Ministry, from the
meandness and simpleness of his education, which he exemplifies two ways
principally,

Viz. First, Negatiuely, in declaring what he was not, I was no Prophet,
neither was I a Prophets Son.

Viz. Secondly, Affirmatively, in declaring what he was, but I was an Heardman,
and a gatherer of Sycomore fruit.

In the Negative, we may consider the terms, first, absolutely in themselves,
A Prophet, a Prophets Son; Secondly, with relation to Amos, I was no Prophet,
I was no Prophets Son; In the Affirmative, we may observe likewise (if the
time could permit) the Trades he was of; the one about Cattle, I was an
Heardman, the other, about the fruits of the earth, I was a gatherer of
Sycomore fruit. And now have I presented before your eyes, the Inauguration, or
Generation rather (if I may speak Physically in a Divine subject) of a
Prophet, his progress, a non esse adesse, his terminus a quo and ad quem, it
is a sampler of our new birth in Christ, where the Author of all Prophecy by
the anointing Oil of his Spirit, takes us from amongst the herds, whose
companions we are by imitation, and the Sycomores or wild Fig Trees of whose
lineage we are become by barrenness and degeneration, and enrols us in the
lists of his Prophets; He which lifted Amos from an Heardsmans bank, to a
Prophets Chair, eleuate our earthly thoughts from such Objects to the Chair
of Prophecy, and confirm his Calling as effectually by the power of his Word,
as his Word by the Miracle of his Calling, whilst first I treat of the terms
absolutely in themselves, which here are negatiuely spoken of him, and come in
the first place to be handled, A Prophet a Prophets Son?

Thirdly, the word Prophet, has ever enjoyed a sacred and religious use, and
although the Heathens were guilty of that Sacrilege, that they stole it from
the Church to adorn their Poets with it, yet in its own right, it still
contained it self within the Arc of the Covenant, and the Offices of the
Sanctuary, and in them received a threefold acception. For first, and most
usually it noted that extraordinary Calling of those which attained to the
knowledge either of things to come, or otherwise mysteries above the Sphere of
man's natural apprehension, by Divine Revelation. And in this classis or rank
sit the Prophets which were the Penmen of holy Writ. Secondly, It signified one
which celebrated the honor of God in Hymns and Psalms, and Musical
Iustruments, and so David erecting or preparing rather a Quire for the Temple,
is said to separate the sons of Asaph and of Heman, and of Iedulthion, who
should prophecy with Harpes, with Psalteries and with Cymbals; 1. Chron. 25.
Thirdly, it pointed out any one, as he was an Expounder and Interpreter of the
Law, and so of Aaron it is said, Exodus 7. That he should be Moses Prophet,
which Iunius and Tremelius render, constitui Aaronem vt esset interpres tuus,
and in this sense Saint Paul opposes Prophecy as an ordinary gift, to that
extraordinary gift of Tongues, 1. Cor. 14. making Prophets and Doctors of the
Church (says Mercer) to be Synonima's and of equivalent sense. Now relatiues
being best known by their correlatiues, the surest way to find out the meaning
of this word Prophet in my Text, will be by his sons, quaelis filius talis
pater, Like son, like father. A Prophets son in the old Testament, is not the
son of a Prophet so termed, for generation or adoption; no, this were to hold
the graces of God in fee simple, and to entaile them to a Stock or Lineage, but
for institution and education sake. They are mentioned sundry times in the
Books of Kings, and by the circumstances of the places, as also the
concurrence of Interpreters, are found to be nothing else but young Students,
trained up under religious and learned Teachers, as in Schools and Accademies
of piety. A Prophet then in this place (by the nature of relatiues) is the
Master or Teacher; and a Prophets son, the Scholar and Auditor in a
University. Yet give me leave to affirm the root of a Prophet in my Text (I
speak not grammatically) for this is denied by many, but historically to be
Prophets inspired, who have as it seems, bequeathed the name of Prophet, upon
such Instructors as these, because they were the Founders of the Order, and
their Predecessors in the Chair. For whom do we find standing over the
Prophets in that illustrious School of Nayoth, but Samuel? 1. Sam. 19. whom
over the Colleges in Bethel, Ierico, and Gilgal, but first Elias, and after
him Elisha, 2. Kin. 2. and fourth Chapter? So that the Office and function of
Teachers in Schools, being adorned with that sacred title of Prophet, and the
Chair consecrated by the Prophets themselves, who were the King of Heavens,
Professors in those most ancient Accademies of the Prophets sons, warrants me
to infer, the institution and erection of Schools, or to speak plainly, of
Universities, the ordination of Masters and Instructers in the same, the
co^course of Youth reduced under a certain prescript of Discipline therein, not
to be a plot (as some imagine) of human invention, but sacred and of Divine
institution. Vide Johan Regij. Dantiscani Doruss. orat. 2. de comparatione and
Paradisi: Genesis 3.8.
And indeed, where shall we begin, and not discover some Athenian ruins. What
was Paradise before the fall of our first Parents, but a glorious School,
wherein magnus ille peripateticus, God who was heard walking in the Garden, did
till that time possess the Chair? What was the Evening, Genesis 2.19.
wherein Adam gave names to creatures according to their Natures, but a
Phylosophicall vespers? Genesis 3.1.
What the conference with the Serpent, but a disputation; where such was the
fortune of the day, that the Serpent which before was but allowed to ask a
Placet, and dispute an argument upon the victory then gotten, mounted the
Chair, and ever since opened Schools of his own. Good cause then had the
Church to be as sedulous and careful in building staire-cases for Heaven, as
the Devil in digging descents to Hell. And do you think it was not? Joseph
antiq. Iudaic. l. 3. cap. 2.
Caine (says Josephus) found out the Art of Weights and Measures; Iabal the
Architecture of those days, he was the Father of all such as dwell in tents
(says the Scripture) Iubal invented Music, Genesis 4.20.21.22.
he was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ; And Tubalcaine
an instructor of every Artificer in Brass and Iron. Thus was there a mixed
Accademy of Mechanics and Mathematics erected within the Serpents Pale. The
Devil might here brag as much as Endemon, Endaem. in Causab.
or any Jesuit, penes se esse imperium litterarum, that the Empire of Learning
was within his Dominion. It had been no disgrace to the Church to say, these
were their Drudges to make Instruments and Tools for them to employ in the
maine work, to wit, in the doctrine of true Religion, as it is no disgrace to
a Physician that he has an Apothecary to compound his Medicines, or an
Astronomer, that a Smith makes his Instruments: but yet shall we imagine the
Sons of God destitute, or without Schools; nay, complete Accademies of
these and other Sciences? Joseph ant^q. Iud. lib. 1. c. 2.
Seth (says Josephus) lived in an wonderful happy state with his sons, they
were all of a towardly disposition, and inhabited their Country in marvelous
tranquillity, without sedition, they found out the knowledge of Astronomy, the
which against the malignitie of Fortune they wrote upon two Pillars, the one of
Brick, the other of Stone. I will not dispute the certainty of this, though
Josephus affirms, that one of them was to be seen in his time in Syria; thus
much is certain, that the Houses of those Patriarchs were very Schools of
all these Disciplines. I call to witness the Arc, the fabric and building
whereof was a very Lecture of exquisite Mathematics, Buteo de arca Noe.
Berosus Annian. Histor. Scholast. in Genesis Joseph. antiq Iud. lib. 1. c. 7.
as Buteo upon this point has learnedly declared. I join that sudden spring
of rare knowledge immediately after the Flood: some mentions Chams Astrology,
others Abraham's Lectures to the Egyptians: there are not wanting, that specify
the Wisdom which Joseph taught the Senators of Pharaoh to be the Arts, which
that Country has been always proud of: and it is worth the inquiry, Ps.
107.22.
what that Kiriathsepher, or City of Letters among the old Canaanites does
import; Judge. 1.19.
plain it is, that Moses is noted in the seventh of the Acts, Acts 7.21.
to have been learned in all those Sciences; and it is not credible, that the
Egyptians within that small space of time comparatively being but seven hundred
and sixty years after the Flood, besides, having their lives shortened, should
attain unto that exactness in all Arts, which the long-liued Fathers before
the Flood, in one thousand six hundred could not. Well, hitherto the Schools
of the Church were contented to share in the fortunes of the temporal state
thereof, to be Pilgrims upon earth, and to travel from place to place; and
what marvel then if the tracts of them be somewhat the more obscure. Lets see
the Arc but once stationary, and the Church well secured from enemies, and then
what more eminent thing in the whole Land of Jury then these Schools? they
are no more couched in valleys, but seated upon Mountains, upon which ground
(as Iunius observes) they were termed Gibha, Iun. de accad.
which is as much with the Jews and Syrians, as an hill or high place, as also
Labratha, which amongst the Armenians and Egyptians, the neighboring Nations of
the Jews, signifies a place of descent, and so in the first of Samuel, and the
tenth, what was the place where Saul meets the Prophets descending with their
Tabrets and Psalteries, but an high place, and the Hill of God? As who would
say, that Schools of Learning and Piety are the Beacons which must give light
to the whole Land, and therefore ought to be seated in the most conspicuous
places. I cannot tell whether the Court envied the Country this felicity,
sure I am, that anon after, a Kings Palace was converted into an Accademy, and
himself Regius professor in the same; which confutes that common conceit had
of Plato's Commonwealth, Plato de repub. lib. 5.
that it is but an Idea of what he would have, and not what ever was: for who
can deny it to be in Israel during the reign of Solomon, where they were
guilty of that happiness to have a Philosopher to be their King, and their
King a Philosopher. I pass by his books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Canticles, which Hierom diuides into Moral, Hieron. comment. in 1. Ecclesiast.
Theoricall, and Supernatural, observing in them Ethickes, Physics, and
Metaphysics. I omit his learning in the Mathematical Disciplines, wherein it
is meant as I suppose, that he excelled the Children of the East, and the
Wisdom of Egypt, their chief learning consisting in those kinds. I will not
trouble you with his Lectures of Plants, and Beasts, and fowls, and creeping
things, whereof a Gesner is fitter to discourse then a Preacher, Gesner. de
stirpibus and ^ist. animal.
thus much let me say of them before I pass farther, that he which thinks
Schools even of these subjects superfluous, calls Salomons Wisdom into
question, and proves his own folly in confuting him. Well, Schools being
thus enobled by a King, had sacred Heralds to draw from thence forth a
perpetual pedigree of their descents, to show how they branched themselves
into sundry Families in Bethel, Gilgal, and Jericho, 2. Kin. 2.4. 1. King. 18.
under the auspicious conduct of Elias and Elisha; they had likewise the Kings
Chroniclers to register their fortunes amongst the acts of the Kings, to tell
the divine protection they enjoyed by the means of Obadiah; Ier. Lament. ^. 7.
they wanted not Jeremy to insert their dismal disasters into his
lamentations; and yet after all this, to prove the immortal temper they are
of, they give the world to understand, that they lived when their Country
died, and that in Captivity it self they were free. Then was their poverty
and exile beautified with the rich and incomparable learning above all the
Chaldeyes, of Daniel, Hananiah, Dna. 1.20. Genebrard. l. 2. Cronol. Montan. in
Apparatu. Ambros. in 1. Cor. 14.
Mishael, and Azariah: from thence issued that skillful Scribe and perfect
Rabbi in the Law, Ezra, whom the Jews make the Founder of that Accademie in
Jerusalem, in which Gamaliel taught, and in which our Savior disputed amongst
the Doctors; Luke 2. But leave we the old Testament, and come we to the new,
and whom do we first salute there, but John admidst his Disciples, who as
Porphyrie to Aristotle, reads an Isagoge to Christ, a preface to the Gospel:
whom do we next meet but our Savior himself, whose conversation with his
Disciples was nothing else but a School and Lecture of piety. I should burden
your patience in recounting the several Sects amongst the Jews, Acts 6.^.
as Pharisees, Saduces, Herodians, and others, each of which had their petty
Accademies; the Libertines, Cyrenians, and Alexandrians which had their
Colleges; Sigonius de repub. Hebr. lib. 2. c. 8.
Scribes and Doctors of the Law, that wanted not their Synagogues, which were
Schools of Religion; and were so frequent, that Jury it self seemed nothing
else but one entire University of Prophets and Prophets Children: and what
marvel, Dico illorum hominum (says Austen) non tantum linguam, Aug. contra
Faustion. lib. 22. c. 24
sed etiam vitam fuisse propheticam, totumque illud regnum gentis flebraea
quendam magnum, quia and magni cuiusdam fuisse prophetam; that is, not only
the language, but life also of those people was prophetical, and all the
Kingdom of the Jewish Nation, was even a great Prophet, because the Prophet of
a great one. And now have I derived the race of our Prophets and Prophets
sons, through the whole volume almost of sacred Writ, I find yet farther a
form of a Scholasticall exercise; and though not a Sylogisticall, yet an
Oratoricall disputation mentioned by Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 14. together with the
Laws prescribed, and the style of Prophet retained still with it; Let the
Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge: which gives a glimpse at
least, if not an authentike warrant for a Christian School: Zanch. orat. de
conseru. in Eccles. puro Dei verbo.
thus much Zanchius bids me say, that wheresoever you find Catechizing
mentioned by the Apostle, you may affirm, that there was training up of Youth
in this Discipline: and such (says he) was at Antioch, whereof Barnabas was
Teacher, Acts 13. and this School was extant in the time of Constantine the
great. And so having seen the Doctrinalls of this Prophet and Prophets son
in my Text, lets see what use and application, we may frame thereof unto our
selves.

You see (beloved) here in my Text an University Charter dated from Heaven,
confirmed by the High Parliament of the sacred Trinity, and the words and
style of the foundation expressed by those most glorious titles of Prophets and
Prophets Children. Other dignities are borrowed from the world, and the world
may challenge its own again; but this one privilege to be Prophets and
Prophets Children, is the phrase of the Court above; it is the language of the
Spirit of God, and this none can take from us. If we be religious in preserving
the Liberties and Immunities granted us by the Princes of the earth, we should
be sacriligious in neglecting this which proceeds from the King of Heaven, it is
high impiety to have one word of this razed, or one tittle altered, it must
be ingrost not with letters of ink, but in the Characters of man's life, our
actions and professions, that whosoever can understand, may read, and
whosoever read may find, as it were engraven in the living frontispiece of
this our body, prophetas and prophetarum filios, both Prophets and Prophets
sons. First, Prophets, and that is, when in the Schools we have no other
Regents then the Prophets themselves; and this liberty we have recovered
again, which once was lost, 1. Kin. 19.2 1. Ki. 18.13
when the Roman Iesabel forced Elias to fly, and the Prophets to hide
themselves, to keep their Acts in Caves, and confine their intertainement to
bread and water; they are now (thanks be to God) returned from exile, and
possess their ancient places: and here I turn to those, who lothing the
beauty of their native Soil, vpbraide us with defects and imperfections in
our Nurseries, extolling the superficial and histrionical teaching of the
Jesuits, with the title of Method and Expedition; the barbarousnesse of the
Friars with the appellation of solliditie and soundness, and ask, what are
those balances in which they weigh the ware of these men? I am sure there
never wanted on our side a David to encounter the stoutest Goliath which they
could bring into the field: thus much my Text warrants me to say, that where
the oldway, of which Jeremy speaks, Ier. 6.16.
is not stood upon, but via Thomae, the way of Thomas, as the Dominicans
speak, and via Scoti, the way of Scotus, as the Franciscans, where the Masters
of the Sentences are not the Prophets, but Peter Lumbard grows to be a Text,
where Moses lies as in Popish conuenticles at the Popes feet, and he usurps
his Chair, they may have a trunk or case of an Accademy; but the soul and
life of it, which are Moses and the Prophets is departed, they have forfeited
the privileges given them by God, and let them vsurp what Angelical or
sublimated titles they please, the best of them can say of himself no
otherwise then Amos here, whilst he was an Heardsman, non sum propheta, I am
no Prophet. And if the case stands so with the Master, that he has this
sacred name of a Prophet pind on his sleeue for a monitor, how does the
Prophets son reflect upon the Scholar. Doubtless no otherwise, then a
picture does upon him that it represents, I may almost say, as a definition
upon that which it defines. For, not to speak with that rigor in Logic, a
son may analogically be the matter, and a Prophet the form; the one the
genus, the other the differentia, in the definition of a Scholar or Disciple.
Take the common qualities of a son with the restringent qualifications of a
Prophet, and they make that sweet harmony which the Psalmist found in
Brethren that dwell together in unity: For as a natural father begets the
body of his son, so a Prophet informs the soul of him, and no less
restores that life which Adam lost, then the other that which it never had.
Again, as our earthly Parents communicate their worldly goods, so these
spiritual Parents the Prophets their spiritual treasures to their sons, and
make them heirs not by halues as the Pope, but of all that they have. And
lastly, as a natural son is a part of his fathers family, so whosoever is
truly the son of a Prophet, is incorporated into the family of a Prophet,
submits himself to live in rank and place and obedience of a son; if
otherwise, he either takes the Cell and Hermitage he lives in, to be a Kings
Palace, and a School of fashions, or with cursed Esau contemnes his
Birthright, Genesis 25.34
and sells his Fathers inheritance for pottage, he is no true son of a
Prophet but an embrio, an abortiue fruit, a Changling, or rather a Cucko
hatched in his neast, making perhaps a ridiculous singing in the Spring and
May-time of his life, stammering for good reason before the Summer of it, in
the Autumn dumb, and when the Winter of old age approaches, taking no other
thought, then how to shroud his nakedness in some obscure hole from the sight
of the world. The consideration hereof should rouse up (beloved) every one in
his several place to look about him, and see in what rank he is ordered,
what is required of him, and how strict an account of so high a Calling we
must make. For, if Vices once ascend Gibha, the Hill of God, where shall they
not enter? If Satan plant ill manners in the most eminent place of the Church,
in the houses of Prophets, what will he not do in private Families? Samuel,
the first builder (we read) of Colleges, calls his College Naioth, that
is, 1. Sam. 19.
even beauty itself, now a small spot in beauty is a great blemish; again,
Colleges are Epitomes of the Commonwealth, as Athens was of Greece, and what
a thing were it in an Epitome to find superfluity? Universities are the Eyes
of a Kingdom, and a Mote in the eye is a great trouble; briefly, Ezech. 47.
Barad. in concord. and hist. Fuang. Tom 1. li. 2. cap. 6.
they be Ezechiels Rocks or Bays, where Salt is prepared to season the World,
but if the salt lose its savor, wherewith shall it be salted? They are not as
some conceive, those Parian Mines, those lapidarie materials, wherewith the
womb of the Earth travails at our doors, that have raised us from such
modest beginnings to this splendour, the pollisht stones to garnish the house of
the Lord are you; not those shady Groves which encircle this Palace of the
Muses, that have contributed to our Architecture, the Lebanon from whence
Timber must be fecht to build the Temple, are you; not those Appian aquaducts
you see, or that sweet confluence of Tigris and Euphrates to to this our Eden,
that crown our happiness, the Fountains and Conduits, to derive water into
the whole Land, are you; you that Ptolomean structure to be gazed upon, you
that common Library of this I Will, the books to be read by every capacity,
you, the living Glosses, Commentaries, Institutions, Fathers, Prophets, are
you, and you only. Much more do the terms of Prophets and Prophets children
in my Text, utter in a real and Laconike fluencie, where lest weight should be
wanting to words, Amos himself interposeth, and bids us consider them no more
absolutely in themselves, but in relation to him which succeeds in the second
place to be treated of, I was no Prophet, neither was I a Prophets son.

It were to be enquired into by those that are Critickes, what reading is most
authentike. Vulg.
For the vulgar renders it in the present tense, non sum Propheta, I am no
Prophet, Iun. Tremel.
Iunius and Tremellius in the preterimperfect, non Propheta eram, I was no
Prophet, A. Mont.
Arias Montanus without any note of time, as if Cronologie were not herein
necessary to be looked into, non Propheta ego, I no Prophet. This variety has
caused interpreters not a little to vary in their expositions. Greg. lib. 22
Moral. c. 41.
For Gregory thinks that he remoues from himself by this negative, the
perpetuity or duration of his Prophetical function; Hugo Card. and Lyran. ad
locum.
Hugo Cardinalis the act of Prophecy, not the habit; some of the Rabbines, a
lineall descent from any of that Order, and Lyra the title of false prophet;
which meanings being so far fetched, and impertinent to the matter in
question; Amos beside, being now called to the Bench or Consistory of Amaziah
the Archpriest, they make the good man herein to play the Jesuit or
Seminary, and to use a trick of mental reservation, allowed by Parsons and
others, Parson.
in case the party conuenting be held an Heretic, not much differing from
this, I am no Priest, that is, according to the Order of Melchisedech.
Wherefore Ribera, Riber. Calvin. Pelican. ad loc.
as also Calvin, Pelican, and the best of our reformed Interpreters, are
contented that he shall by this negation, shake off the name of a Prophet, not
in that superlatine sense, as it notes one enriched with supernatural
revelations from above, but only in a common and vulgar acception of those
days, as it pointed out any one that being before times trained up in the
Schools of the Prophets, became an ordinary Professor or Teacher in the same.
And this without fraud or coining, seems to be the very drift of Amos, and
suits moreover most nearely with the subject in hand. For, whereas Amaziah
seemed to lay to his charge the ignominy of a false prophet, and that he
betook himself to prophesying, Amos. 7.12.
rather for by-respects, to beg his bread like a Friar mendicant, then
otherwise, he falls smoothly upon the most weighty question, how a man that
pretends he is a Prophet inspired by God, may be discerned to be such an one
or no, and cleares himself by two most invincible demonstrations, which
contain in effect the decision of that point. The one by the fulfilling of
things foretold, according to that rule given by God himself, Deuteronomy. 18. And if
thou say in thine heart, how shall we know the words that the Lord has not
spoken? why, when (says he) the thing follows not, neither comes to pass,
thou shall not be afraid of him; Rupertus in prolog. in Hoseam Ribera in
praelud. in Expos. omnium Prophet.
Where Rupertus notes, that where a long space of time did intercede betwixt
the foretelling of things and the accomplishing of them, as it often happened in
the Prophesies of Christ, the Prophets were wont to prophecy of some things of
lesser moment, but yet more immediately to ensue, as the destruction of such a
Man, or such a Family, and therefore if Amaziah doubt of Amos his
extraordinary calling, he tells him, that he should ere long read the truth
of it in his own calamities, Namque dies aderit quam non procul auguror esse,
O^id. Meta. mo^^h.
the day would come, and that it was not far off, when his Wife should be an
Harlot in the City, and his Sons and Daughters die by the sword, and
himself die in a polluted Land. v. 17. The other demonstration or rule for the
discerning of a Prophet inspired, are Miracles, which are not conuertible with
this kind of Prophet we speak of, for many did none at all, yet where they
are, we may conclude such a man, to have the power of God, and a more
immediate calling from above. This is Eliah's sending confirmed by fire from
Heaven, 1. Kings 18. The Apostles mission, by signs and wonders, Marc. 16. And
to be brief, Amos his extraordinary gift of Preaching, by denying in him the
ordinary, I mean, the gift obtained by ordinary means, by instruction in
the Schools of the Prophets; and thus he seems to press Amaziah in my Text;
If neither at this time he were, nor heretofore had been by pains and
industry in his studies, promoted to the place of a Teacher, or Instructor of
Youth in the Schools, the which we understand by the word Prophet in my Text,
nay if he never went so far as to been an Hearer or Disciple of such
Teachers and Instructors, which is meant by the Prophets son, then that he
now ascends the Pulpit, and like a perfect Scribe in the Law, becomes a
publisher of the Mysteries of God, must needs be miraculous, argue his Calling
to be immediate from God, and extraordinary, and himself to be a Prophet of
an higher rank, taught his lesson from Heaven.

Many excellent observations may from hence be drawn, as first, what is
required of ordinary Pastors in the Church; for, if not to have been
instituted and trained up in the Schools of the Prophets, be here produced, as
no less then a Miracle to prove Amos his Calling to be extraordinary and
immediate from God, it cannot be but an affectation of the like Calling, and a
mistake of that order which God has now settled in his Church, for any man that
has not that immediate Calling to intrude himself into the Function of the
Ministry, with the neglect and contempt of that Discipline. No man is borne an
Artificer. The Soul of every one comes as naked into the world as his Body,
not having so much freedom as to set open Shop in the meanest Trade without
serving an apprentiship. That which the Poets faigne of some, that they became
most learned, solo Musaruni and Apollinis afflatu, has a Poetical license for
its Pasport; it was the privilege of those Legates, a latere, in the new
Testament, the Apostles and the truly Apostolical Nuncio's; Matthew. 10.19.
the Evangelists, when they were brought before Kings to speak their embassage
without conning, and though (says Austen, August. de doct. Christ. in pro^og.
de doctr. Christ.) it be reported that Saint Anthony could without any
knowledge of Letters, repeat the whole Scriptures by heart, and that a
Christian bond-slaue obtained by three days prayers, to read any book at the
first view, yet upon these relations should no man look to be rapt up with S.
Paul into the third Heaven, or expect a parley with our Savior of his
instruction. No (beloved) God has founded his School on Earth, and the
Lecturers in Ordinary, to whom he sends us for our lessons, are men.
Cornelius, though an Angel certifies him, his prayers found their acceptance
with God, yet to read unto him the Doctrine of his Redemption, the Angel
meddles not with the task, but refers him to Peter, Act. 10. The Eunuch plods
upon the prophesies of Esaias, and God, like a tender Master, looks upon him
with the eyes of compassion, yet he neither speaks to him himself, nor
dispatcheth a winged Messenger from Heaven, to inform him, but sets Philip
like a speaking Commentary in the way to be his Guide, Act. 8. Saint Paul
found that grace to be spoken unto by Christ, and to have that sweet Oratorie
of our blessed Savior, solicit him in his journey, but it was only a
general summon; if, Paul, thou will know particularly what thou must do, Get
thee into the City, and there Ananias shall tell thee, Act. 9. The ends hereof
are many, to procure honor and respect to teaching, to make us the true
Temples of the holy Ghost, by delivering his Oracles; and lastly, to open a
door for Charity, to diffuse and communicate the rich treasures of Knowledge
to others. This made the most excellent and most renowned in both testaments
for learning, both acquisite and infused, to propose their own education in
this kind unto others, for a rule to imitate; Joshua under Moses, Samuel under
Eli, Elisha under Elias, Solomon under Nathan, Baruch under Jeremy, Timothy
under Paul, and the Apostles themselves, as domestic Disciples, under our
Savior, were first trained up, before they were sent out to preach. Nay, that
most glorious Redeemer, which is the sole founder of this prophetical Order,
that chief corner Stone upon which we build, and to whose meritorius
intercession unto his Father, we owe this sacred Charter in my Text, made
choice, Luke 2. of the Hierosolymitan Academie, and of all times, their Acts,
as it seems, to be the entrance and presage of his future Ministry: there
is he found, for his place, in medio Doctorum, in the midst of the Doctors;
for his gestures, a true Academick and a perfect Schooleman, observing the
forms of the Schools in his Questions and Answers. Was it that he would
recommend unto us from his own practice; the trayning up of youth in these
exercises, and in this method, or that withal he gave the World hereby to
understand, that he offers himself, first, (this being, as it were, the first
fruits of his prophetical office) to the Prophets and Prophets sons, such as
in the School of piety are industrious and vigilant in the purchase of
Knowledge, unless this also may be added for the honor of the Prophets, that
he was first saluted God and Man, Matthew. 2.
by the Wisemen of the East, and presented in the Temple with the style of
Illuminate Doctor by Simeon, Luc. 2.25. Galat. l. 1. c. 3.
whom Galatinus makes to be the Divinity Reader in the Hierusolymitane
University. The Fathers in the primitive Church, who were the Guardians of
Christian Religion in its None-age, knew well the behoof and necessity of
this Doctrine, and therefore whom preferred they to the stern of the Church, but
such as had not only been sons of the Prophets, but also were worthy in
respect of their rare and excellent learning, to be Prophets themselves? For
from whence was Polycarp advanced to the Sea of Smyrna; or Irenaeus to that of
Lions; Iren. aduer. haeres. l. 3. c. 3. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 19. Hieron Epist. 29.
Socrat. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 22. Nazian. Orat. 2: in Julian. and in laudem
Basili
but as Irenaeus himself tells us, from that flourishing University of
Ephesus, founded by John the Apostle? Whence Gregorius Neocaesariensis lifted
to the Pontick Bishopric, but as Socrates recites, from Caesarea, that
renowned School of Palestina? Whence Nazianzen set over the Sasimians; or
Basil over the Capadocians, but from the Athenian Academie? In a word, whence
were Pantenus, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, and so many able and victorious
Captains, in that desperate and forlorn state of the Church, pressed forth to
stand in the Gap, and in the forefront of the Battle, but from the Seminary
and Source (as Saint Hierome has it) of all good Literature, Hieron. Catolog.
scriptorum Ecclesiast.
erected by Saint Mark himself in Alexandria? The reason is, because when we
hope to know any thing by special and immediate revelation from God, we use
not to betake our selves to study and meditation, but to prayer only and
other good works; nor to the most learned, but to the most zealous and devout:
and therefore we are not to be steared by such as are only more religious
and devout then others, but such as are withal more learned, the holy Ghost
sending us not now as in the old Testament, 2. King. 22.14.
to Huldahs and Amos his Women and Heardsmen, but to the Prophets and Prophets
sons; for the Spirit which guides the Church unto the consummation of the
World, Speaks not of it self, but whatsoever it hears that does it speak.
Ioh. 16.

A notable lesson (beloved) for these Fanaticall times of ours, wherein a
bastardly brood descended from the loins of Montanus, and his prophecesses,
Priscilla and Maximilla, have multiplied and increased above measure; and as if
revelations were parcells of their Trade, Heardsmen have stepped in to the Pulpit
with Amos, thinking this warrant sufficient, that they can say with him, Non
Propheta eram, neque filius Prophetae, I was no Prophet, neither was I the
son of a Prophet. I will pass by the Swinckfeldians and Libertines, Sleidan.
Comment. l. 10. Meshou. Hist. Anabaptist.
out of whose camps, Storkius in Saxony, Shackerus in Heluetia, and that
Leiden Botcher in Munster, laid siege to the very root of Christian
institution, by fostering this opinatiue inspiration, because with such
Innouators as destroyed the Principles of Faith, and took away the common
Medium of all Disputation, God himself the only Disputant in a desperate
case, confuted them with horrible and fearful destructions, as Historians do
manifest. I could have wished the funerals of the men and their pernicious
doctrine, had been concluded both in a day, and that the same grave had
covered them from the view of the World. But the apparitions so talked of in
Popery are but their ghosts, and the spirit so much bragd of by some more
zealous then knowing, Pythagoras would swear were their souls travailed into
other men's bodies. There are degrees (I confess) wherein some stand guilty in
a greater measure then others, in the entertainment of this error. Offenders
in the highest degree, are those that think neither the skill of the Prophets,
nor the attention of the Prophets sons, to be any whit necessary to the
expounding of the Word. The Popish Scholemen bid me reflect for this tenent
upon the Anabaptists in Germany, Bellar. l. 4. de verbo Dei, cap. 9. Gerson.
Distinct. vision. verarum and falsis. Caietan. tom. 2 opusc tractat. 1. de
conceptione Virginis, cap. 5. Bosius, l. 16. de signis Eccles. c. 9.
but by their leave, howsoever Bellarmine disclaimes new revelations; Gerson
excuses Friars visions with a fit of melancholy; and Cajetan advises the Pope
not to rely upon them, in as much as Saint Brigit and Saint Katherine of
Sienna, pretended contrary revelations for the conception of the Virgin Marie
in original sin, yet whilst they make the Bishop of Rome, whether learned
or unlearned, whether with advice of others or alone, whether using his
reasonable assent, or with Caiphas and Balams Ass, Sunt 26. artic. in quibus
Magisler non tenetur. Vid. crrares Parisijscondemnat. ad sinem P. Le^^b.
speaking what he knows not, to be so far assisted by the Spirit of Christ,
that in his interpretations of the Scriptures he shall be out of the Sorbons
lash, Magister hic non tenetur, what do they in effect, but put the madman of
Munster upon their Lord the Pope, and by supposing him to be such an
irrefragable Doctor, without being either this Propheta or Prophetae filio, in
my Text, depose him of his ordinary Pastorship, which they so mainely avouch,
and commute it, if Amos his Logic be sound, into an extraordinary Calling.
Not much inferior in madness are those, who as if perfection still reigned, or
the highest points of Religion were a service for a second course, inuit the
Determinations of the Schools to their private Tables, presume to raise and
define more confidently, having never been either Prophets or Prophets sons,
then ever the Pope durst in a general Council, or the perfectest Ezra with
the help of a well furnished Liberarie. Hieron. in Ep^ad Pau^^n.
Saint Hierome complains in his Epistle to Paulinus, how far this bold
Baiardnesse of blind souls had encrochd in his days; that whereas the
Practitioners of all other Arts, contained themselves within the bounds of
their professions, Quod medicorum est promittunt medici, tractant fabrilia
fabri, only the skill of the Scriptures every one challenged to himself,
Scribimus indocti doctique poemata passim, hanc garula anus, hanc delirus
senex, hanc sophista verbosus, hanc vniuersi praesumunt, lacerant, docent,
antequam discunt. Nor does Saint Basil enforce less in his sharp reply
(mentioned by Theodoret) to one Demosthenes, Theod. l. 4. hist. c. 1.
who being but an Officer of the Emperors kitchen, durst encounter that Doctor
of the whole world with wrested Scriptures, (...), It belongs to thee to look
to the pottage pot, whereby he condemns not the reading of the Scriptures by
the ignorant, nor the reasoning upon them by the common sort, but that sottish
arroga^ce which quickly inuades the simple, whereby they will undertake to
run before they can go, read before they can spell, and adventure with the
dim prospectiues of their brittle capacities, to judge of things a-farre off,
whilst yet (God knows) they see but glimmeringly and uncertainly, Judge. 9.36.
and with Zebul in holy story, either take men to be but the shadows of
Mountains, or the shadows of Mountains to be men. Let these men inueigh
what they list against the Pope, their rash relying upon the Spirit of Truth,
not using the means which the Spirit requires; makes them corriualls with him
for his Chair, and works a facile belief that there might be a Pope Ioane at
Rome and she Angla, Platina.
when experience tells us, there be so many of them of like quality here in
England. Good God, is it so that we so lately abandoned Rome, and rescued our
selves from the worship of the Beast, and are we now relapsed again so
suddenly to a new Apostasy? Has the whole frame of nature gron'd for so many
years, and shrunk under the burden of one Ecclesiastical Head, and must we
now play the Arithmeticians and multiply the number? Aug. Con. s^ss. l. 8. c. 8.
Surgunt indocti and rapiunt regnum coelorum (says a Father) the unlearned
arise and take by violence, they take indeed, but what? he says, regnum
coelorum, the Kingdom of heaven, not Cathedras Doctorum, the chaires of the
Learned. The Church in the Canticles, Cant. 3.3.
seeks for him whom her soul loves, it is the task of every one to seek
after our Savior, but it was a custodibus qui obeunt ciuitatem, of the
Watchmen of the City, those wise and learned Teachers, whom God has set as so
many watchmen upon the walls of his Jerusalem. The parents of our Savior in
the second of Luke (as you have heard) sought for him too, and found him, but
it was in medio Doctorum, Luc. 2.44.
in the midst of the Doctors, as if one should say, three days they sought for
him and found him not, because they sought amiss, they enquired for him in the
City, and in private Conuenticles amongst their familiars, he which will most
expeditely find him out, must first walk into the Temple, and frequent the
Schools, and ask of the Prophets and Prophets sons for him. Every body has
a judgment of discretion, to look into the Wells of living Water, to see
whether they be conveyed purely or not unto him, but to roll away the stone
from the mouth of the Well, that is, to remove difficulties, whereby not only
Jacob and his sons, that is, the learned, but also the Cattle and the
Sheep, Origin in Matthew. 4. cont. Cells.
that is, the rude and ignorant may drink, as Origin allegorically expounds
it, (which pertaines to the judgment of Direction) for this we must ask
counsel at Abel, 2. Sam. 20.18.
it is the birthright of the Prophets and Prophets sons to do it.

Here therefore give me leave with Ioash, to smite the Earth yet this third
time, and with Leui to go in and out from gate to gate amongst mine own
Tribe. It is no marvel, if Prophets and Prophets sons be Aliens and
Strangers to the children of the world, if they sind enemies amongst the
ignorant, sluttish entertainment amongst the stupid, course diet amongst the
barbarous, yet they call you friends and kinsfolks, and shall they salute any
in the way with amice, vnde venisti, friend, whence came thou, Matthew. 22.12.
who finding his nakedness, shall become speechless? or with more courteous
language, God speed my Brother, and have this answer returned, Non sum
Propheta, neque filius Prophetae, I am no Prophet? neither am I the son of a
Prophet? Others may esteem the training up under Samuels and Elisha's, in the
Schools of the Prophets, to be a matter of ornament, to thee, which art a
Guide of the Blind, a Light of them which sit in darkness, an Instructor of
the Ignorant, if thou dreamest not to be inspired with Amos, my Text assures
thee, it is to thee necessity. The Calling and Profession we undertake is
weighty, the knowledge thereto profound, life short, adversaries subtle, and
we have a perpetual combat within the Church against Vices; without the
Church, against Errors; being by consequent, reduced to the condition of
Nehemiahs laborers, who building the walls of Jerusalem, Neb. 4.17.
held the Spade in one hand, and the Sword in the other, and must repair the
breaches of the Church in the face of the Enemy. Now, have thou an heart to
fight the Lords battle and want a shield, come to the Schools of the
Prophets, behold, the Targets of Solomon, all of beaten gold, are there? 1.
King. 10.16.
Art thou to encounter a blaspheming Philistim, 1. Sam. 21.
and art destitute of a weapon, come to the Schools of the Prophets, the Sling
of David and the Sword, wherewith he smote off Goliahs head, are there? Have
thou a Spear whose point is blunt and wants sharpning, go down to the
Schools of the Prophets, the Grind-stones of the Philistims are there? in a
word, 1. Sam. 13.20.
want thou ought for the furniture of so great a War, repair to the
Schools of the Prophets, August. de d^ct. Christ. l. 2.
for, lo, the gold and silver of Egypt is there? I could instance in
particulars, if the time would permit, and show how unprofitable Soldiers they
be, who press themselves into this holy War, having neither borrowed Arms
from these sacred Armories, nor taught their hands to war, and their fingers
to fight in these Schools of Discipline: Sacred Divinity is that Saint, to
whose Shrine the Princes of the Earth do bring their glory; and that
Empress, into whose Exchequer the Learned of all Professions cast in their
Mite. She wants neither Valesius, Valles. de sacra Philosophia. Buteo de arca
Noe.
for a faithful Bailiffe, to bring in a just account of her natural
commodities; nor Buteo for a Ship-wright, to take the measure and sum the
Tons of her Princely Admiral, R^ber, de Templo. ^ illalpand. Comment. in
Ezech.
the Arc of Noah; nor Ribera and Villalpandus, for Masters in Architecture, to
ouer-see the workmanship of her royal Mansion house the Temple of Solomon; nor
Ruens for a Lapidarie, Ruens de gemmis in Scriptura. Lemnius de plantis sacru
and herhis Biblicis. Danaei Elencl us haereticorum.
to show her Casket of precious stones; nor Lemnius for a Herbalist, to look
to her privy Garden; nor Danaeus for an Advocate, (...), to convince and
display the Sophismes of her adversaries the Heretics; nor lastly, many
Stewards of her House, of whom, if thou learnest not (...) (as Saint Paul bids
thee) to divide her food aright, and to distribute it in due season; whilst
thou labourest amongst the people to diuido the Word, 2. Tim. 2.15
thou will make the Word a mean to divide and distract the people. I speak
not this to discourage the endeavors of the weakest of the sons of the
Prophets, but only to make good this Argument of Amos, alleged for the proof
of his extraordinary Calling, by showing the difficulty of the work, and how
many followers they must bid welcome, that would give due entertainment to so
worthy a Ghest. God himself has given us a remarkable demonstration hereof in
these latter time. For, as in the first plantation of his Gospel in Europe, he
shipped the Arts before into Greece, that they might be Harbengers unto it, as
Tertullian speaks; or as Saint Hierome, the Munition to batter the Forts of the
Wise, meaning to send the Soldiers soon after: so in the reviving of the
Gospel, in the days of our forefathers, there seemed to go before it a
general resurrection of all humane learning; and the effectual means of all
this, a discovery of that most noble Art of Typographie, Melan^^b. Chron.
Carrion. lib. 5.
which seems reserved unto the weightiest times of the Church, even the
revealing of Antichrist, that so the whole powers of Nature and gifts of Grace,
might unite their forces and join in one battle against the Dragon and the
Beast. Be not deceived (beloved) the war is not against the Volscians, Liu.
lib. 3. Luc. Flor. lib. 1. c. 11. Cic. de sinib. bon. and mal. lib. 2.
where a Cincinnatus, a Dictator, taken from the Plow, will serve the turn;
nor against another Jericho, where the walls will fall down, if we only
walk about them and blow Rams horns, but against the sons of Anacke, those
Giantlike voluminous writers of Rome, in regard of whom, ought but a well
grown son of the Prophets, will seem but a Grasse-hopper; and against the
aspiring walls of Babylon, to lay siege to which, the whole Armor of God is
necessary, and all the furniture of the Prophets but sufficient. This ought
not a little to work a true acknowledgement of Gods favorable aspect toward
us, as in other blessings, so more particularly in the Nurseries of the
Prophets, and nursing Farthers of Kings, which we enjoy above other Nations,
lest the neglect or contempt of so great benefits, cause God as in the Church
of Ephesus, Revel. 2.5.
to remove his candlesticks from us and place them otherwise. We know how
heretofore the Eastern Churches contended for houses of the Prophets, with the
whole World: where are now those famous Schools of Alexandria? Hicron.
descript. Eccl. Revel. 1.20. Sozom. hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 13. and lib. 6. c.
34.
where those seven renowned Churches of lesser Asia? where those Colleges of
Monks dispersed throughout Egypt and Syria? where those Basils, Nazianzens,
Chrysostomes, Nissens, Cyrils? were they not (being ungrateful) unworthy of
those treasures, and therefore as the barrenness of the good Olive tree,
caused the engrafting of the wild, that is, the unbelief of the Jews, the
communicating of Gods mysteries to the Gentiles; so by the just judgment of
God, where these means have been despised or abused, Matt. 4.18.
the functions of the Scribe have been deputed to Fishermen, and the message
of the Prophets and Prophets sons, committed (as here in my Text) to the
delivery of Heardsmen, and gatherers of Sycomore fruit, which is the
affirmative condition or state of Amos, and should come next to be handled.

But as to treat of Heardsmen, is a point of husbandry beyond the sphere of
my profession, and an admitting of them without license from the Patriark of
Philosophers, Arist. Polit. lib. 7. c. 9.
first obtained, within the precincts of the Chair: so were it to conspire
with Amaziah the Priest, in removing our Prophet from Bethel, to present him
before you in the Plains of Techoah amidst his flocks, Amos 1.^.
and I cannot tell: besides, the unseasonableness of the day for so long a
journey, whether the learned palates of my Auditors, could relish such homely
entertainment as those barren Deserts do here in my Text promise, of a dish of
Sycomore fruits, though it were of Amos his gathering; I will therefore keep
home for this time, and circumscribe my Meditations within this present circle
of the Prophets and Prophets sons. And so, to GOD the Father, GOD the Son,
and GOD the Holy Ghost, be rendered all Honor and Glory, Might, Majesty, and
Dominion, from this time forth for evermore. Amen.

EPHESVS COMMON PLEAS. Handled In a Sermon before the Judges in Saint MARY'S,
at the Assizes held at OXFORD in Lent, An. 1618.

By ED. CHALONER Doctor of Divinity, and Fellow of ALL-SOVLES College in
OXFORD.

London, Printed by W. STANSBY, 1623.

EPHESVS COMMON PLEAS.
ACT. 19.38. Wherefore if DEMETRIUS and the Craftsmen which are with him, have
a matter against any man, the law is open, and there are deputies, let them
implead one another.


HE which shall peruse the Annals of the Apostles, shall find Satan; not like
a Sage of the more ancient and better times, apparelled still in one and the
same fashion, but in a copious Wardrobe, no less attyring himself in change
of suits; then Proteus amongst the Poets was painted out in variety of hapes:
At Lystria he appenres like a Commediun, Act. 14.12. Plautus. Amphit.
as if a Scene of Plautus were to be presented upon the Stage, would have
Jupiter and Mercury be thought to act the parts of Paul and Barnabas. At
Antioch he comes like a Jesuit with Traditions in his mouth, Act. 15.1.
and would choke the proceedings of the Gospel by the mixture of abolished
Ceremonies: At Athens he sallies out of the Schools like a Philosopher, Act.
17.
and under the habit of a Stoike or Epicure plays the Sophister; here at
Ephesus he presents himself in his Apron, like an Artificer: and yet surely of
all these, I know not wherein he showed more Art and Cunning; either then,
when he masked under the Philosophers Gown at Athens; or now, when he makes
himself no better then a Townes-man of Ephesus. I am not ignorant, what Sects
Philosophy has been distracted into at Athens, nor what, contentions have
arisen amongst the professors of each part, witness the heart-burning which
sometimes Aristotle cannot dissemble against Plato, but the fray still ended
with words, neither was Saint Paul more discourteously, entertained amongst
them then with scoffs or sarcasmes, What will this Babbler say? or, Act. 17.
We will hears thee again of this matter. In the conclaue of these
Mechannickes, the wits of Hell are scraped to the uttermost for a plot to ruin
him; Profit and Commodity, the most potent arguments of Rhetoric are culled
out, Verse. 27.
by this man, our Craft is in danger (...) be set at naught, and if by great
chance Religion lurk in the skirt of some man's Conscience, then a Climax
promotes the business, and the Theam^ is aggrauated from an amicle of their
Creed, the Temple of the great Goddess Diana is despised by him, and her
Magnificencie is destroyed whom all Asia and the World worshippeth. Demetrius a
Siluer-smith by Trade, that thus artificially blew the coals of commotion
amongst his Fellow-artificers, and one that made (as the Text tells us) silver
Shrines for Diana; yet pardon me, if I think, not more curious in making of
those Shrines, then in the composure of this Oration. Plin. l. 36. c. 14.
What the Temple of Diana vilified and set at naught? a place so magnificent
for the structure, having been, as Pliny relates it, two hundred and twenty
years in building; so renowned for the Oracles of the Goddess; so magnified
for the Image supposed fallen down from Jupiter; V. 35.
so honored by the Oblations of all the Astatike Potentates: no marvel, if
the violence of these blasts shake the foundations of Ephesus, Solin. Polyhist.
c. 52. and Plin. lib. 2. c. 84.
and the City so subject as Geographers relate, to the rackings and tremblings
of the inferior Element, do now feel and unwonted and unheard of Earthquake
in the bowels of her Inhabitants: And think it as soon done as said, only
pass forwards, if you please, and imagine this done, what place such a mixrand
heady multitude would pick out, to breath forth those sulphurious and
restless vapors which disquiet them within. But my Story travails to your
conceit, when in brief, it names the Theater, a place so dissonant to
deliberat consultations, and indeed to the acts of the reasonable faculty,
that we may well hold those Commentators excused, if they err, who would have
this Day to have been the Time, and this Assembly in the Theater, the Beasts
which Saint Paul, in the 1. Cor. Theophilact. in 1. Cor. 15 Thom. Gloss. Haimo,
Carthus. Bruno, Anselm.
is said to have fought with at Ephesus after the manner of men. Let me spare,
for brevity sake, other passages of the Story, the Ephesians acclamations,
Saint Paul's courageous resolution, his friends discreet counsel, Alexander the
Jews enterprise, and obscrue what my Text leads me unto, The Towne-clerkes
demeanor in stilling the vproare. And here may you behold a Map of a perfect
Politician. The commotion and insurrection he would allay, and Paul with his
associat, for I know not what affection, he would refine, but the means he
stands not upon, whether by reconciling the fabulous original of Diana's
Image, or by an unjust excuse of Paul's companions, that they were not speakers
against their Goddess. This was not the desire of these Saints, to be freed by
such Pleas; Paul, thou had lost thine honor, and Demetrius had won the
day, if thou had paid so dear for thy liberty. The titles and names,
wherein thou now live, had here perished and breathed their last, had thou
consented to redeem thy safety by such an Advocate. But see our Orator is
somewhat mended, he ends better then he begins, reserving his weightiest
strokes for the farewell of his speech; where he satisfies Passion with
Reason; Fury with Justice, and in my Text diuerts the rapid stream of an
hare-brain'd Assembly, by presenting the majesty of an Assizes or Sessions,
where you may observe,

viz. First, A producing of accusers, Demetrius and the Crafts-men.

viz. Secondly, Directions for their hearing, The law is open, and there are
Deputies.

viz. Thirdly, A prescription, or a form to be used in this hearing, Let them
implead one another.

Thus have you the parts and parcels of this Text disioynted, let me crave your
patience and attention (right Honorable and the rest Beloved) in my handling
of them, whilst, first, I shall produce the accuse^s, for whom I will desire
your favor no otherwise then they deserve, Demetrius and the Craftsmen which
are with him.

The best inventions we see are liable to abuse; The Devil has in all Trades
some bound apprentise unto him, whom he teaches some mysteries or other above
their fellows. As here these Siluer-smiths amongst the rest, whose Trade is
approved for use, affected for ornament, warranted by the skill inspired into
Bezaliel and Aholiab by the Holy Ghost, Exodus 35. have yet some additions from
Satan, and become in many things the fosterers of Idolatry and Superstition.
Had Demetrius and the Crasts-men employed their industry only in what their
Trade was ordained for, Paul's preaching would neither have prejudiced their
commodity, nor they have been his accusers. But now they find sweet gains in
making Shrines for Diana, which, whether they were such concaue Cells as in
Popish Churches the Images of Saints are housed in, Lyran.
as Lyranus thinks, or rather Images representing the Temple of Diana, not
unlike to those which are now made for our Ladies Chapel at Loretto, as
Lorinus conceiues, Lorin. ad loc.
I will not now stand to dispute; it is sufficient that our Adversaries may
know whence to derive the pedigree of their Idolatry, and we not unfurnished
of a Lesson for our instruction, learn, how in an honest course of life which
men profess, unlawful gains may make them to be unjust accusers. But this
practice may challenge prescription, and if Antiquity be any note of Verity
and Truth, I doubt not, but that Demetrius and the Craftsmen in my Text, may
with ease produce such examples in all Ages, as might warrant their Saintdome
in the Popes Calendar. In the Scripture, what is more familiar then for a Ziba
to accuse his Master, 2. Sam. 16.
or false witnesses to condemn a Naboth for commodities. 1. King. 21. Marc.
11.15.
When comes Christ to strokes but with the Money Changers in the Temple? or
where, as if the remembrance of the Pharsalian Field twixt Caesar and Pompey,
had yet some impression in the Inhabitants of Philippi, Act. 16.19.
are the Apostles worse encountered then there? for that Paul spoils the market
of one which made a newfound commodity of the Devil. I could enlarge this
passage with variety of patterns, but that our Saniour has foretold, The
Servant must expect no better usage then his Master: and let me then ask you,
Matthew. 26.15.
why did Judas betray him? the thirty pieces will tell you, it was for gain:
why did his accusers brand him with blasphemies? their hyer says, it was for
gain: why did the Priests and Pharisees conspire his overthrow? their
consciences pronounce gain; for they said, If we let him thus alone, all men
will believe on him, and the Romans shall come and take away our place, Ioh.
11. Thus do those arguments drawn, a vtili, sway the world, whereof our times
do yield pregnant testimonies. Look out into the Shrines of our Adversaries;
if they were erected only for the advancement of Religion and Piety, their
accusations against us, might carry more authority in their foreheads, but if
they be but the Popes Exchequors, and their Priests, but like the Publicans
which sit at the receipt of custom, pretend what they can, allege what they
will, their quarrel against us is but the same of Demetrius and the Crafts-men
against Paul, they fight not so much, pro aris as pro focis, I may english it,
for the Chapel as the Kitchen.

But my desire is to make my application more general. You have hitherto
beheld the condition and quality of Paul's accusers, Demetrius and the
Crafts-men with him are now vanished; and Time, which has devoured itself,
has also eaten up both their Shrines and them also; so that I shall not need
to implore your aid in insisting of Paul or his companions at Ephesus. But the
Devil, though he cannot play upon the open Stage of this world, as in those
days, yet creeping into the Temples of men's hearts, and advancing therein the
high and shining Idol of Riches, the all-commanding Image of bright Gold, he
prompts the Heirs of Demetrius and the Crafts-men, to continue the quarrel
against the Ministers of the Gospel, and has won them to receive fury and
mad nesse as parcel of what was bequeathed them by their seditious
predecessors. I mind not to impose upon you, that the Temple of Diana is yet
standing, no, the ruins of that wonder are intombed within the entrals of the
Earth, which once bare it; but, good God, other Deities do now bring gains to
the Crafts-men, and which is to be pitied rather or admired, I cannot tell,
such as fear no period but the dissolution of the world, nor whose Oracles
shall cease but with Christ's second coming, as the former did with his first.
What Shrines are now erected to Intemperancie, what Altars to Pride, what
Phanes to Luxury? Let Paul himself dissuade his auditors from approaching of
these Temples, and Demetrius with the Crafts-men will cry out, Our Craft by
this man is in danger to be set at naught. Thus are the Preachers of the Word
thought ill Commonwealths men, when they seek to enlarge the territories of
the Church, and to beat down the Forts of Satan. If we persuade Sobriety,
then those Cages of unclean birds, those Sinkes of drunkenness, exclaim, we
deprive them of their customs; If we wound Pride, or correct Vanity,
Fashions grow out of fashion, and their Inuenters sit down with loss; If we
preach Charity and Conscience, Usurers fear that their dealings are censured
and their gains questioned; If we touch Simonie, how many Patrons think the
Church would deprive them of some part of their just inheritance? O what
Logicians are the Devils scholars, how subtle Sophisters are they in framing
conclusions through all figures and moods. Had Saint Paul been Pastor of
Ephesus, and then challenged Demetrius for detayning some Tithe or Gleabe from
him, it had been no unaccustomed Plea, if Demetrius had enflamed the
Artificers with, it is your own case; but when Paul only preaches Christ
unto the Ephesians, and winnes them unto his Gospel, what Enthemems, what
Consequences must Demetrius infer one upon the neck of another, before he
can make Paul's preaching to be either his own or the Crafts-mens undoing? I
congratulate here (beloved) the humility of Divine Sciences, which having
sequestered, as it were, themselves from the corruption of the World, do with a
dutiful acknowledgement of superiority, without these repinings submit
themselves to the correction and check of Gods Word; Indeed Demetrius might
give a good reason of this quiet and still temper of Mercury; for in dealing
in principles of Arts and Sciences, the Preacher touches no man's commodity;
for what was Aristotle the richer for denying Vacuum in the World, or
Democritus the poorer for affirming it? what is Galilaeus the wealthier for
discrying mountains in the Moon, or Kepplenus the less landed for not seeing
them? to be a Nominalist or to be a Realist are held matters of great
importance amongst some, and yet make the most they can of Universals, genus
and species cogitur ire pedes. I think that neither of them will make any
great market of either. But descend to other Problemes, convince Briberie, tax
Oppression, dissuade Depopulation; or if you list to look over sea, and deny
the Popes Ecclesiastical and Temporal Jurisdiction, or question Purgatory,
his Market-towne; Indulgences and Pardons, his Ware; now you touch Saint Peter's
copie-hold, these bold Preachers must look to themselves, there want not
Demetriuses and Crafts-men enough to accuse them. But here you may behold as in
a Mirror, the state of Christ's Messengers in this Church militant upon Earth;
you may see what Bands of Atheists; what Armies of Epicures, what Legions of
covetous Mammons, they necessarily do provoke and incense against them. The
General of these Troops is not a bodily but a spiritual Enemy, whose Dragon
eyes pries into all advantages against them, intermits no time to entrap them,
no stratagem to subdue them. Now, what safety can there be for simple
Innocence, where there is so vigilant a Captain, so officious Soldiers?
Antichrist may come with Peace in his mouth, when he has War in his heart;
he may court it with the flatteries of an Harlot, when either he has Poison
in his cup, or Powder-plots in his head; we, where Christ has set up his
Flagge of defiance, must deliver his Message in his words; we may not either
by mental reseruations, or verbal equivocations, or secret euasions
whatsoever turn either to the right hand or to the left, but that which he
puts in our mouths that must we speak. Quid proderit non puniri suo qui
puniendus est alieno peccato? (says Prosper.) What will it boot a man not to
be punished for ones own sins, when if he cease or omit to reprehend others,
he shall be punished for their sins? so that in this naked Warfare which we
undergo, in this plain Song of the Word which we sing, we find a weapon
offensive perhaps to some, no way defensive to shield us from their malignitie;
hence Backbitings, hence Slandrings, hence Reuilings, hence false Accusations,
how few Paul's, how many Demetriuses how few Patrons of Religion, how many
Crafts-men? And how should the chance fall otherwise? for think you that the
world will now brook a check of our rudeness, when the Divine eloquence of
the Apostles was so harsh unto it? or will the sons of the Earth suffer
without indignation the least diminution of their riches by our means, when
they welcomed S. Paul himself with such affronts for attempting it? nay,
rather perish Religion, fall Churches, cease prayers; be forfeited all the
treasures and conduits of grace to the uttermost rack of Salvation, and the
loss of Heaven to boot. But I hope better things of this Auditorie, I trust
(right Honorable) that your grave wisdoms will be a Sanctuary unto those
which are accused by Demetrius or their factious accomplices. Magistrates, as the
best commission they can show for their authority, is the Word written; so the
best Agents they have to cause that their commands are executed, are the
Ministers of this Word. You deal not with Barbarians but Christians, this is
our labor; your laws are executed, not of constraint, but willingness; this
is our diligence: you are obeyed, not for fear, but conscience; this is our
industry. O what an happy thing were it then for England, if the place which I
now stand in to defend against the Crafts-men, were less contemned, more
reverenced and obeyed, we should then need no Assizes but the Judgment Seat of
God, no Accusers but Conscience, no Blood to shed but Tears, no Torments to
affrighten but Hell, no Death to die but to Sin and Iniquity; As for the
rest of this judicious Assembly, whereof the greater part are interested in
Paul's cause, my best hopes are, that they will not leave any which possess his
room to the bitings of such Dogs, if their merchandise have corrupted any to
be favorers of their gains or touched with their loss, I should rather hold
them meet to be admitted into the Corporation of Demetrius and the Crafts-men,
then to be reputed successors either of Paul or his companions. And so I pass
from the accusers produced, Demetrius and the craftsmen, to the directions for
hearing, which come in the second place to be treated of, The law is open, and
there are Deputies.

(...), says the Original, which in Latin may be rendered, Forenses aguntur,
or to use Cicero's phrase, Forum agunt, the Pleas are held, or the Courts are
kept. Now, what these Courts should be, I find some difference amongst Writers.
The Syriack translation implies (as Tremellius observes) the Corporations of
Artificers, to which either Numa, Dionys. Halicar. lib. 1. Plin. lib. 34. c. 1.
Flor. in Epist. Baron. Annal. Tom. 1.
as Dionysius Halycarnassaeus and Pliny report; or Seruius Tullius, as Florus
affirms, gave these immunities, to have Causes heard and determined within
their own Halls; Baronius would have them to be understood of certain
Circuits, which the Roman Proconsuls deputed for Asia, (whom he would have
here meant by Deputies) made at set seasons in those Provinces, and were not
altogether differing from those which at this time are presented to our view;
Lorin. ad loc.
and this Lorinus moreover confirms out of Dion, Chrysostomus, and Festus, de
verborum significationibus. Howsoever, two things worth our consideration at
this time, do in these words offer themselves to be discussed: the one, the
free access which ^ourts of Justice do yield to all Plaintiffes, argued in
that he says, The Law is open. The other, the due Ministers of Justice, for
the satisfaction of all complaints, where he adds, And there are Deputies. For
the first, where it is here said, The Law is open, the question arises how
far the borders of this Liberty do extend. Some distinguish between the
duty of the Magistrate, and the duty of private Persons. Sot. lib. 4. de
inst. q. 4. art. 2.
The Magistrate (says Sotus) is to proceed according to the injury of the
Patient, because the forgiveness of trespasses, which our Savior enioynes his
followers to perform, is an act appertaining to a man in his absolute state of
Christianity, and not as he is respectively considered in some Office or
Function of the commonwealth; therefore, unless the pardoning of a crime in
an Offender, be more expedient for the common good (to which every private
person is to submit his Cause) the Law, says he, is open on the Magistrates
side to all; the consideration whereof made the Courts of Justice in all times
to set open doors, as we read of the Elders of Israel, They sat in the Gates
of the City, that so whosoever went in or out might have their Causes
determined, and free access might be given to all Comers, least the
complaint of Absolon against David should be verified, 2. Sam. 15.
See thy Matters are good and right, but there is no man deputed of the King to
hear thee. But if we consider private persons, the reason is different, for
concerning these, Thom. 2.2. q. 68.
Thomas gives two rules. The first, that in matters which concern the common
good or common hurt, the Law is open to every man in particular, to be an
Actor or Accuser. And indeed in such Cases, beside that (as Ambrose says) qui
indulget indigno, ad prolapsionis contagium prouocat vniuersos, in being
pitiful to some one, we may be cruel unto many, Achans stealth unrevealed,
Eli and his sons defaults unreformed, cost the lives of many Israelites; one
Ionahs disobediece almost sunk a ship, wherein were many I^^ocents; and by the
crime of some one person, oftentimes the whole people are held defiled. The
second Rule of Thomas, is, that in matters which concern not the common good
or common hurt, but only some men's particulars, there is a larger scope given.
Though the Gates of Justice, as I said before, stand wide open, yet before we
may enter them in our private business; we must consider, first, the End of
our entry, that it be not revenge, but either the repair of our own losses,
or to amend our adversaries; for in this latter Case (says Austen) he which
meditateth Justice, Eleemosynam facit quia misericordiam praeslat, does
Almesdeeds in that he compassionately reclaimes his brother from an error.
Secondly, we must weigh the quality of the business, if it be weighty and
not trifling; if necessary and not friendly to be composed: and, lastly, if
such, as is subject to restitution. [As always we must forgive our
Adversaries, in respect of hatred to their person, and of private revenge; so
some times in respect of Legal satisfaction. He which will go as far in all
points as the Law will give him leave, must hope for an Advocate to plead his
Cause at the last Day, and be sure, that Forfeitures and Aduantiges be as
current Law in Heaven, as they are upon Earth. The drink of Gheistians is the
soft sliding Siloah, not Esecke, and Massa, and Meribah, the waters of Strife
and Contention. We may remember the Doom which lighted upon the Servant in
the Gospel, Mat. 18.29
that forgave not his fellow Servant the hundred pence which he ought him,
when his Lord had a little before forgiven unto him ten thousand Talents. All
the while (says Chrysostom) that he had wasted the ten thousand Talents, his
Lord was mild unto him; Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. 27.
now when he grew cruel unto his fellow, O thou wicked servant (says he) I
forgave thee all that debt, those ten thousand Talents, for a little lip
service, because thou desiredst me, should not thou in so small a matter, as
one hundred pence, have had compassion on an Equal of thine, thy fellow
servant? The application is easy, we our selves ask pardon daily for talent
sins, as I may call them, and ought not we to forgive our brother penny
offenses? But the Law is open (says my Text) true; that thou may use it when
necessity requires it, not when thy Avarice and Malice abett thee: when
Justice has absolved thine Adversary, what is that to thee? We say not,
forgive us our trespasses, as the Jury shall acquit them, which trespass
against us, but as we forgive them. It were good that we should mark this
Clause more carefully, least we be constrained to do as Latimer reports of
some in his days, (...).
who being not willing to forgive their Enemies, would not say their Pater
noster at all, but in stead thereof took our Ladies Psalter in hand, because
they were persuaded, that by that, they might obtain such favor as
forgiveness of their sins at Gods hands, without putting in of so hard a
Condition, as forgiveness of their enemies into their bargain. But I need not
insist longer upon the explication of our Town Clerks, meaning, where he
says, The Law is open; if he had done this to incite them to Law, under
favor, I might justly think that he had either spoken for his commodity,
but I think he could not expect large fees from a man so poor and honest, as
Saint Paul. Act. 24.26.
He which would not have his Cause suspected by bribing Felix, would not now
have sought favor by feeing the Town Clerk, and therefore I leave this
phrase with its favorable construction. The second point, with the Town
Clerk, in this direction mentions, was the Ministers of justice, specified
here by the name of Deputies. A double way of satisfaction is intimated in my
Text, the one private, used at this time by Demetrius, who suspecting, perhaps,
the equity of his Cause, brought not the matter before the lawful
Magistrates, but caused an vproare amongst the common sort, and thought by
their fury to be avenged upon Saint Paul and his Companions. These
proceedings, the Town Clerk, in my Text, disswades them from; for, besides
the danger which might accrue to the City (being now subject to the Romans)
from such commotions; reason would confute these Anabaptisticall proiects, of
working Reformation without the authority of the Magistrate: therefore, the
Town Clerk tells them of another remedy for their griefs, if they had ought
against any man, by making their complaints known in open Courts, and in a
lawful Assembly to the Deputies. This course, not the twelve Tables of Rome,
not the Edicts of the Emperors, not the Plebiscites of the people, not the
Decrees of the Senate do authorize, but the Magna Charta, even the Acts of the
blessed Trinity, do warrant for authentical. I might here summon for
confirmation, those frequent admonitions ingeminated again and again in the
Laws of Moses, Exodus 23.6. Exo. 18.21.
to incite the Judges to the due performance of their judicial authority;
Leuit. 19.15.
I could fortify it with the presence of the Almighty, whom the Psalmist
makes the President of the Bench, Deus stat in medio Deorum, God stands or
assisteth in the midst of the Judges, Psalm. 82. I might, if it were not
prejudicial to the Pope, add that appeal of Saint Paul's to Caesar, Act. 25.
or that Patent which he delivers Magistrates from Heaven, that their power is
ordained of God, Romans 13.

But I desire for use sake to apply these directions in my Text, concerning
the deciding of Law Cases, to this present Age. The World is compared to a
Theater; Let the Theater wherein our Towne-clerke is orating, be the Emblem
of it; Two sorts of Auditors he had, the one which knew not wherefore they were
come together, and may not altogether be unlike to the Anabaptists, and
Trinitarians of our times; they suffer Demetrius and the seditious Crafts-men
to have their fetches, and by a wilful neglect disarme the Magistrate of his
force, and suffer a Fire to increase without quenching. These can distinguish
like Vtopian Statists, Virum bonum a bone Ciue, a good Man from a good Citizen,
as if, forsooth, every man were to be a watchman over his own ways, but the
care of the Commonwealth were outlawed by Christ, and had pitched her
Tabernacle only amongst the Tents of Kedar. To go to the Court of Justice for
redress, was a thing (say they) permitted the Jews, who were but as Children
in the knowledge of Divine Mysteries; now in the maturitie of the Gospel, our
Savior has given other precepts; Matthew. 5.39.
He which shall smite thee on the right Cheek, turn to him the left; he
which shall take thy Coat, give him thy Cloak also. Truly, with some
contentious Adversaries, this doctrine may liberally hold for good counsel,
lest by too much wrangling one spend not his Cloak only and Coat, that is, his
outsides, but be stripped of his inside also; yet (as they conceive it) it is
more profitable to thieves and felons, then honest men, to the broachers
whereof, I wish but Sergius Paulus Propretor at Cyprus, Act. 13.7. Romans 13.23.
and Erastus Questor of Corinth, both Christians, and Saint Paul's Hearers, to
confute them with the Sword of Authority, which their profession (I wis) made
them not to depose. So absurd and ridiculous was that objection of Julian the
Apostata, Aret. loc. commun. p. 474.
and Proclus in the time of the Fathers, against Christians, as if they had
been the Patrons of this error. It is true indeed, that if we speak
comparatively, rather then to set our minds upon private revenge, the
magnaminitie of a Christian should be showed in sufferings, and we should
share with Socrates in his choice, who answered, that if his hard lot were
such, that either he must bear or offer wrong, for his part he would suffer
injury: But when we read these or the like sayings in holy Writ (as are
above mentioned) Saint Austin ad Marcellinum, well determines the doubt, that
these are precepts and necessary, quoad animi praeparationem, that is, for the
inward disposing and preparation of the mind, but quoad executionem externam,
for outward proceedings, we are ever to do that which we shall see most
expedient for the glory of God, the good of the Church and Commonweal; and
lastly, their salvation with whom we deal. But me thinks these sort of
Sectaries are already gone out of the Theater, they are soon vanished; and I
know not where to find any more which offend in this defective vice, the world
is more pestered with the redundant quality, with those Demetriuses which are
so far from not returning evil for evil, that rather then the Magistrate
shall fail in retaliating their injuries, will take the Sword into their own
hands, and lest they should seem Anabaptists, in taking two blows for one,
will give two blows for one. Thus will every man be a Pope in his own cause,
depose the Magistrate, at least appeal from him to himself. These are the
Ismaelites of our days, their hand is against every man, and every man, and
every man's hand is against them. It is pity that an Heathen Orator could rid
a Theater of such wild beasts, and that the persuasions of the Gospel, the
threatenings of the law, the authority of the magistrate should not tame them
in a Commonweal. If there were no Judge in Israel, yet the Law of Nature would
back thee no farther then to defend thy self; but now this Plea is wanting,
(...), see, The law is open, and there are Deputies, a weapon is lift up to
avenge thee of thine adversary, but it is the Magistrate that must award the
blow.

There is nothing so bad which has not found its Patron and Extoller,
Baldness its Synesius, the quartan Fever its Fauorinus, Folly its Erasmus,
Drunkenness its Furner, the Devil its Bruno, the Pope his Advocates, and I
know not with what success our Humorists, conciued under Mars and borne in the
Dog-daies, have found some Italians or other, to vp-hold their Paradoxe of
counterfeit valor, against the rule of Equity and square of Justice. Be they
who they will, seeing their practice savors no more honorably then of
Demetrius and the Crafts-mens proceedings in my Text, who sought not to the
Magistrate for satisfaction, but would needs be their own caruers, the
justness of the consequence, and the opportunity of the time, prompts me to
say somewhat.

Whatsoever the wits of this Age can pretend, I find no solid Writer ever so
bold, as to determine the question affirmatively, Whether in any Case
whatsoever, single combats undertaken and accepted, be lawful. It has been
the practice in Liuonia, and is an old relike of the Gottish Empire, in some
countries of Europe to make it a part of judicial proceeding, that yet few or
none do peremptorily maintain the lawfulness of it, nay, most do apologize
for themselves, that rather they prescribe cautels for moderating the abuse of
it, then any wise allow the use, and the reason given, is this, that whereas it
is taken up as a divine lot to discover the Truth, the means is nothing
correspondent to the end, in as much as the victory falls rather to the more
strong or more skillful, then to the iuster in cause; an example whereof, P.
Mare. in 1. Sam. 17. Ca^et. in Thom. 25.2. q. 95. art. 8. Valent. in Thom. tom.
3. disp. 3. q. 17. punct. 1. and Nauar. in manual. c. 11. and 15.
P. Martyr produces out of the Decretalls, de purgatione vulgari, cap.
significantibus, where is set down such a Duel, in the which he with whom the
theft was afterward found, slew the other which accused him. Cajetan indeed
with Valentia and others, put a Case, wherein though the Magistrate may offend
in adiudging the Combat, yet it may be lawful for a party to accept it, and
that is, when an innocent person is unjustly adjudged, that either he must
accept the Combat or suffer death; but these are cases wherein the Magistrate
gives toleration to the action; the point which my Text oppugnes, is the
proffering, or accepting of these challenges to* right ones self against, or
without the knowledge or consent of the Magistrate. That this is wholly
unlawful; besides, the Antithesis or opposition which it stands in with the
Word of God, mihi vendicta ego retribuam, vengeance is mine, and I will repay
it, says the Lord, we may see the goodness of the cause by the persons which
ever have been practitioners in this Art. If we search the antiquity thereof
in Records, we shall find the original master of this science to have been
him, who was a Lier and a Murderer from the beginning; The School which he
erected was not amongst the Sons of God, whom the Scripture makes to descend
from Seth, these could not be caught with such fallacies, but it was amongst
the posterity of Cain, which the sixth of Genesis distinguishing from the seed of
faithful Seth, to show what we should expect from them, styles with the name
of the sons of men. Amongst these, Caine himself was the first Scholar G^n.
4.8.
that practiced this Art, who slaying his Brother Abel, seems to have laid
down some rough hewed principles thereof, but because he did it not upon
terms of honor, in that he drew Abel abroad guilefully, and slew him at too
much odds; Genesis 4.23.
Lamech his son refined the Art, and brought it to that acuteness and
subtilitie, which we see it has at this day; he slew a man to his wounding,
and a young man to his hurt. Cains murder, no doubt, was detestable to all his
kindred, for besides that, he showed himself to be his Fathers own Son,
killing his brother, as the other did his whole posterity; he did it grosso
modo, basely, but Lamech perhaps seeing the reproach of Cain, painted the face
of that ugly monster, revenge, with the beautiful colors of Fortitude, yet in
this Action of his, we may note two circumstances; the one, that he dared not
make any of the Sages of his time judges of his picture, but his Wives, who
could not be thought skillful in martial Laws, hear my voice, ye Wives of
Lamech, hearken unto my speech; the other, that his conscience told him, a
presumptuous and brauing murder to be as odious in Gods sight as an insidious,
If Cain shall be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seventy seven fold, Genesis
4.24. The example of David's Combat with Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.
makes nothing for their purpose, for besides, that he was licenced by Saul the
King to enterprise this action, all writers do agree, that he did it by an
immediate instinct from God, whereas these do it by an immediate instinct from
the Devil. Nor of greater moment is the Combat mentioned between twelve of
the Tribe of Benjamin, 2. Sam. 2.
and twelve of the servants of David, for besides, that these were authorized
hereunto by two Generals of either side, Valent. Nauar. Caiet. vtsup.
Abner and Ioab, Valentia doubts much, whether it be lawful at all for a
General to make so bloody an action, the subject of a spectacle, Caietan
condemns it, Navarre allows it no way, unless it be to win an opinion of
strength and courage in the one side, and so to dishearten the other, as the
fall of Goliath did the whole Army of the Philistines, so that unless our
Duelists will pretend more subtlety then the Schoolmen themselves, I cannot
see any thing in the Scriptures that can avail them. Mat. 26.51
Some bring in here Peter smiting off Malchus his ear with his Sword, but this
Bellarmine makes to be none of the eight and twenty prerogatives of Saint
Peter, nor can more warrant this cause, then the denying of his Master, can be
a warrant sufficient for the Pope his pretended successor to do the like. Nay,
in his third Book, de Laicis, and two and twentieth Chapter, he confesses
this Action of Peter's to be justly reprehended by our Savior, because it was
done by private authority, besides, an other goodly reason which I cannot
omit, tunc enim Petro nondum Pontifex sed discipulus erat, for that Peter was
then only a private Disciple and not Pope. So then by his reason it were a
laudable thing in the Pope to play the Swordman, to smite off not the ears
only of his subjects, that they may not hear the Scriptures read in a tongue
known, for this he does, but to cut off the heads of all powers that dare
oppose his temporal Monarchy. I might here say with Saint Bernard, quid tu
denuo vsurpare gladium tentas, Bernard, lib. 4. de consideratione.
quem semel iussus es ponere in vaginam, why do thou attempt to handle that
Sword, which once thou were commanded to put up into the scabbard? Why does the
Tradentine council excommunicate, Council. Trident. sess. 25. c. 19.
even the spectators of single combats, when thou canonizest the actors and
plotters of heynours murders? But admit that these challenges did not
contradict the Laws of God, nor abrogate the authority of the Magistrate; to
whom the execution of Justice appertains, yet lets consider the little
satisfaction which can arise from these Duels to the party wronged. And because
there is a new kind of philosophy invented for this practice, I will examine it
acording to the grounds of Philosophy usually delivered, that so those which
are now trained up among us, may when they come into the world remember, how
far differing these combats are from those rudiments which they once
embraced. A man you know has diverse considerations, either in general,
whereby he may be wronged in his Naturals, by terming him dull, heavy or
sottish; in his Moralls, by stiling him dishonest, intemperate or covetous; in
his Politickes, by branding him with Traitor, or Violator of the Law, or else a
man may come to be considered in some particular science or profession which
he is of, as Divine, Lawyer, Phisician, Tradesman, or the like. Now let me
ask the question, when a man chances to be wronged any of these ways, how
does the Field redeem his credit, which he thinks is diminished. Lying,
Couzenage, or Folly is objected to you, and you would disprove it in single
sight; hereby indeed you argue your self, if you vanquish, to be a better
fencer then the other, or more nimble and strong, but who objected a want of
these things unto you? who cast a defect of them in your teeth. Opposita must
be ad idem, you clear your self of that which was never objected to you,
that which you were vpbraided with, that you answer not, no more then if two
Painters should contend about their skill in painting, and he should be
preferred which overcame at the point of weapon. But some will say, is single
fight therefore wholly unlawful; I Will unfold my paradoxe in few words, single
Combats are not only lawful but also necessary, but what Combats are they?
why, such as are performed by weapons suitable to the quarrel; if the
contention be about cunning and skill, show by skill and cunning that the
victory ought to fall on thy side; if about honesty, let honesty by actions
proportionable to it self vanqiush the accuser; if about wisdom, let discreet
proceedings quell the spirit of the ditractor; if about Religion, let Devotion,
Sanctity, Obedience, Patitience, and Charity, enter the lists and fight for
thee. Here thou do all things contrary to reason, thou stormest that thou art
not held virtuous, and in this action declarest, that thou can no more
moderate thy affections then a mad beast, thou frettest that any conceive thy
reputation to be weak or sick, and in this remedy, thou discouerest thy self
like an unsound body, which no sore is touched but cries out; thou would
make thine adversary repent him which wronged thee; but thou bring the
greater repentance upon thy self; thou would maintain the credit of thy
family, but thou stainest it with blood and vnchristian-like actions, thou
would be highly esteemed of by others, but thou show a base esteem of
thy self, who prizest thy life at so low a rate, as a few rash speeches of an
enemy. Time is too precious to be wasted the pursuit of such ignis fatui, such
brains which conceive nothing but phantasmes and apparent meteors of true
Fortitude. I know that they appear outwardly, like Sehons and Ogges, or as the
sons of Anake, to affrighten Israel with their big words and lofty
speeches, yet I doubt not, but many punies here meanly grounded in the
rudiments of Philosophy, would with ease so abase their high look in a just
disputation at this time, that they should rather seem the Grasse-hoppers of
Egypt, or fained Pigmyes, supposed by Geographers beyond Lapland. Yet, if thy
constitution be so vnproportionably tempered with the elements, that nothing
will satisfy thee but fighting and combating, I will show you another Duel
which is behoofefull for thee to accept. God has set in hostill opposition two
enemies, the old man and the new, the flesh and the spirit, for as Saint Paul
says to the Galathians, Gal. 5.17.
the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh:
neither, as in any other place, he says, shall any be crowned, unless in
this warfare he have fought lawfully. Perhaps, in this skirmish thou have
seen Widows and Orphans oppressed, and not protected them, the poor
destitute, and not shielded them, Passions and Perturbations besiege Reason,
and not queld them; Traitors to Christ and Religion harbor within thy breast,
and not expulsed them; O shame and infamy to thy profession of Manhood, that
thou should set at naught the glory of these Prizes, and make such rubbish
as fillips and blasts, the trophes of the conquest. I know that generous
Spirits are awaked and rouzed up with the just reward of Virtue, Renown, and
Glory; why, think not that your actions are done in secret, or obscured
within the confines of Lime and Sand; you are placed in a magnificent Theater,
for you are made a spectacle to God, to Angels, and to Men; the Combat is not
the turning of an Houre-glasse, nor the Annual course of one Sun, nor the
period of one Olympiad, lest this finished, you should feed your gall with the
imperfections of your brethren; but it is the whole iournall of this life; the
Champions which do en^^r the Lists with you, are not Thirsiteses or Turkish
Asapies, rather to tire then to try your prowess, lest you should not think
them to be the subject of praise and honor, but the Apostle describes them to
be, Principalities, and Powers, and Rulers of the darkness of this world,
Ephesians. 6.12.
and spiritual wickednesses in high places. Here our Captain and Forerunner
sends us into an hard Fight, but most honorable; O let our fury and emulation
be spent in this warfare; as for other prouocations, let us seek to the gods
on Earth, the Magistrates, for justice; if here we are not satisfied, let us
appeal to God in Heaven. Remember the saying of Saint Basil, In rixa is
inferior est qui victor est, In private contentions he has the worst that
ouercomes; it is the summum jus of a Christian in this life, if they have a
matter against any man, the law is open, and there are Deputies, they must
implead one another; which is the form in my Text prescribed, and comes last
to be handled.

Amongst all the Symbols of a just Judge, that Character which our Savior
fastened upon those, whom he constituted for Judges of the World, has not the
least rank, Matthew. 5.14.
Vos estis lux mundi, ye are the light of the World. The light of the World is
the Sun, seated in the midst of the Planets, in Heaven, equally communicating
his beams to all inferior vessels of illumination, though some by reason of
their unequal densitie are less capable then others to receive it; in Earth,
equally diffusing his influence into all matters, though some, by reason of
their imperfect composition, do resolve and putrify, whereas others do
purify and enhanse, as it were, the prices of their worth and estimation. So
Soles hi Iustitiae, these Suns of Justice, a^^se alike upon the good and the
bad, upon the just and the unjust; they shine not upon the one, and appear
eclipsed to the other, but as a Center in a Circle do protend equal Lines
toward both sides; yet because Vice is exorbitant and irregularly distant from
this Center, the Lines drawn out, make oftentimes sharper Angles in the one
then in the other; for, that which the Soul and Heart is in the Body, the
same is the Magistrate in the Commonweal; the Soul, we say, in Philosophy
is, tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part, at least in respect of his
operations, and the Heart is in the midst of the Body likewise, and disperseth
his heat into all parts; yet by the same operations of the one, and vital heat
of the other, are excrements and contagious humors expelled, but pure and
profitable nourishment refined: so that, Justice which in conclusion seperates
the Goats from the Sheep, with her all-discerning Touchstone tryes dross and
sophisticat Gold, as well as pure; weighs Lead in her Balances, as well as
Silver; and as some conceive of the Needle of a Sea-compasse under the
Equator, is alike affectioned to either Pole, and till Reason conducts the
Ship a Degree this way or that, is fixed on neither. Such is the indifferency
or Apathie (if I should not seem Stoike) which the Oracles of Justice should
be possessed with, toward the Accuser and Defendant, till, as my Text says,
they have implended one another. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. sermon. 20.
Nihil paratum and meditatum domo differt, (says Ambrose, speaking of such an
one) sed sicut audit ita judicat. He brings no determinations or divisions
with him from home in his tables, but as he hears, so he speaks. The
rudiments of this practice were first by God himself delivered in the
Arraignement of Adam and Eve; he was nearer to the Offender then the Bark to
the Tree, by reason of the presence of his Godhead, which fills Heaven and
Earth; and therefore taking them in the fact, might have condemned them without
further proceeding; but to dictate a form unto Mankind of executing Justice,
from himself the Fountain of Justice, he first cites Man to the Bar, Vbi es
Adam, Genesis 3.9.
Where art thou Adam? there Man making his appearance; God begins an
inquiry, but which in effect implies an Accusation against him, and produces
Conscience for a Witness, Have thou eaten of that Tree, whereof I commanded
thee that thou should not eat? Verdict might forthwith have been given up,
where Conscience confessed the guilt; but this merciful Judge would hear what
the tongue could say, where Adam he first begins: alas, he could not deny
the Fact, but extenuates it, by laying it upon the Woman, and she upon the
Serpent. What patience, what mercy, what indifferency was here showed by God
to Man, what should Man be to Man, Brother to Brother? We read how after this
Cain slew Abel, Abel said nothing, but his blood accused Cain; every drop of
innocent blood has a tongue, and is not only vocal, but articulate; yet God
proffered the same law unto him, Where is thy Brother Abel? though Cain at his
enditement answered stubbornely, and as he had not grace to avoid his sin,
for he had not then grace to confess it. God varies not in his works of
clemency; almost two thousand years after this, he deals in the like kind
with Miriam and Aaron, when in Arabia's Deserts they murmured against Moses,
Numb. 12. But he has not only by example, but by precept also established
this form of Judicial proceedings, in the thirteenth of Deuteronomy. says Moses, If
thou shall hear say, that certain men of the children of Belial are gone out
from amongst you, and have drawn the Inhabitants of their City, saying, let
us go and serve other gods which ye have not known; were they presently to
smite the Inhabitants of the City with the edge of the sword? were they upon
this rumor to levy an Army, and to raze their Walls level with the earth?
no, the Text says, and that with great Emphasis and weight of words, Thou
shall enquire, and not so only, but make search, nor here rest, but ask
diligently if it be truth, and the thing certain; see the Stairs and ascents
to mature and ripe judgment; enquiring, searching, asking, diligent asking,
words of industrious and sedulous inquisition, glossed and expounded by
Nicodemus in our Saviors case, Ioh. 7. does our Law judge any man before it
hear him? had Pharaoh and Potapher observed this precept; Joseph, innocent
Joseph, had not so long felt the miseries of wrong imprisonment, Genesis 39. Had
Irijah, Captain of a Ward in Jerusalem, used this preservative; poor Jeremiah
the Prophet had not been delivered into the hands of his persecutors, Ier. 37.
Had the Magistrates of Philippi used this equity toward Paul and Silas, these
Saints had felt the warmth of some justice, and not been beaten unheard and
uncondemned, Act. 16. The law of Reason, therefore has set this print of her
foot in all well-founded Policies, to give free audience to both parties. I
must confess, that the manner is diverse, for in the Areopage at Athens, the
Accuser might freely accuse, but the Defendant only speak to what was
objected, Vlpian. in orat. Demost. de falsa legate.
but in the Forum of Rome, whereas the Accuser had but six hours allotted him
to accuse, the guilty had nine hours to make his answer; which custom, when
it ceased, I know not, thus far Festus declared the Roman fashion, which my
Text aims at; It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die,
before that he which is accused have the Accusers face to face, and have
license to answer for himself, concerning the crime laid against him, Act.
25. But whilst I press, the excellency and equity of this form, mistake me
not (beloved) as if taxed hereby all those forms, where the Magistrate
proceeds against the Offender, not by producing Witnesses to implead, but ex
Officio, by virtue of his Office, clearing the doubt by requiring an Oath of
the Party suspected; for, I take, that this course is not contrary, but
subordinate to that which I have hitherto insisted upon. For in this case the
Commonwealth, whose person the Judge represents, (as Valentia says) is the
Accuser, Greg. de Valent. in Thom. tom. 3. disp. quast. 13.
and alleges either an infamy, or great suspicions, or at least an imperfect
testimony against the Offender; so that in an important business, which
concerns the good either of Church or Commonwealth, let not the Party
questioned say, that he is brought contrary to the law of Nature to accuse
himself, or that he shall be condemned without impleading of Accusers, for
the Infamy, the Suspicions, or the Witness, though perhaps not sufficient to
condemn thee, have already accused thee, and the Commonwealth in the person
of the Magistrate acts the Accuser; do thou see how thou can purge thy
self, ho thou can preserve that reputation of an honest man, which if thou
never had been urged by the Magistrate, yet in Conscience thou had been
bound to do. It is true that Writers do give some advice for the
administration of such Oaths; as, First, that the person which is to purge
himself thereby, Vid. Coussin Apolog. and determ. Episc. Winton. and Less. de
just. and iur.
be not such an one, as is likely to forswear himself, that is, such as are
known to have formerly perjured themselves. Secondly, that the cause be not
Capital; for in such a case, the Devil, who is the author of perjurie, has
taught Man his frailty, Pellin pro pelle, and quicquid est^viri daturus est pro
seipso, Skin for skin, and all that a man has, he will give for his life, Job
2. Thirdly, that the Crime be not wholly unknown, unless in two Cases; the
one, when it does hinder the execution of an Ecclesiastilall Function, as
Simonie and Irregularitie; the other, when some great scandallior damage will
accrue to the Church or Commonwealth from the concealing of it, as in Heresies
and Treasons; but that in other Cases it be, semiplent cognita; as they say,
half known at the least; and that (as before I told you) either by an
infamous report, or manifest signs, or some such witness which alone is not
sufficient to convince. But where these Impleaders are present, we find the
practice of Moses Law, to warrant the lawfulness of these proceedings; the Man
suspected of stealth, Exodus 22. the Woman of breach of Wedlock, Number. 5. were
both to purge themselves by such an Oath, where if in this, the suspected of
Stealth swear falsely, the atonement by Sacrifice is set down, Leu. 6. and a
Prayer of Salemons for the pardon of it, 1. Kin. 8.31. So then you see let
down, as it were, from Heaven, an Archtriumphant of Justice, whose pieces,
though they seem not of the same making to the eye, yet are they hewed out of
the same Quarrie, and raised upon the same Foundation of mutual impleadings.
It is a sign of a merciful government, which in doubtful matters goes not to
Tortures; of a Prudent, which proceeds not by Lottories; of a Religious, which
heedes not Deuinations, nor tempts God for miraculous Revelations. Where
impleadings fail (as for crimes of higher nature, I leave) for ordinary, let
me say with Saint Austin, Misericorditer corripiat homo quod potest, August.
lib. 3. Cort. Parmen.
quod non potest patienter ferat. Let Man mercifully correct that which he can,
that which he cannot let him patiently bear, until God himself shall either
reform it, or defer it till his rooting up of the Tares, and winnowing the
Chafe from the Wheat. It is an excellent saying of Chrysostomes, in his six
and fortieth Homily, ad populum Antiochenum, God does neither exact punishment
of all men in this life, lest thou should despair of a Resurrection, and
desist to expect a future Judgment; neither does he suffer all men to go
unpunished, lest thou should surmise his providence to be deficient; but he
punishes and does not punish; in that he punishes, he awakens the Sluggard
with lessoning him, that even here he takes notice and account of his
offenses; in that he does not punish, he summons the Insolent to a more
fearful Assizes and strict Judgment to come.

Thus have I detayned you as Soiourners in a strange Land, you have all this
while travailed in the East, where to your eyes have been presented the
Justices and Tribunals of Ephesus. It might be here expected, that having
finished this (as I may well fear) so tedious and irksome a voyage, I should
in the Port where our Ship is now arrived, make some collation and application
of that, which in those remote Countries we have discovered. I must confess,
that the Climate is not the same; the Meridians, diverse; the Cities, many
Degrees distant, the one, sometimes the Metropolis of lesser Asia, the other,
at this time the Light and Pharos of great Brittanie. And truly, amongst other
accidents, wherein I cannot but note a great difference, this is not the least
vnremarkable, that in the same cause which the Towne-clerke and my self have
undertaken to manage, my felicity has surmounted his; in that my Auditors
have not been Demetrius or the Craftsmen in a turbulent Theater, but the
Pillars of peace and quiet, in a Sanctuary of Piety; where, if my weak
oratorie has been deficient, the presence of Justice has (I doubt not)
engrafted that which my Text aims at, with a silent Sermon and real
persuasion of its own. I shall think mine own task sufficiently discharged,
if I have in such wise unfolded the points delivered, that without much
difficulty, your selves may be so far Preachers, as to make the uses and
applications your own; the Time suites, the Occasion suggests, my Text
directs. If Demetrius and the Crafts-men have a matter against any man, the law
is open, and there are Deputies, let them implead one another. To GOD the
Father, GOD the Son, and GOD the Holy Ghost, one essence, and three Persons,
be rendered all Praise, Honor, and Glory; Might, Majesty, and Dominion, from
this time forth for evermore.

Amen.
IVDAHS PREROGATIVES. Delivered In a Sermon at Saint MARY'S in Oxford, upon the
four and twentieth of March, being the day of thanksgiving for his MAJESTY'S
happy and prosperous succession to this his Crown of England, etc. An. 1619.

By EDW. CHALONER, Doctor of of Divinity, and Fellow of ALSOVLES College in
OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY, 1623.

IVDAHS PREROGATIVES.
IVDG. 1. Verse. 1. Now after the death of Joshua, it came to pass, that the
children of Israel asked the Lord, saying, who shall go up for us against the
Canaanites first, to fight against them; and the Lord said, Judah shall go up.


GOD which created Man of the dust of the Earth, has in his School of Nature
framed a discipline, so proper for our weak capacities, and used a method
therein, so suitable and correspondent to our inbred dulnes, that our
meditations which Serpent-like feed upon the dust; or as Narcissus, consume
their very marrow upon that earthly Cottage which they inhabit, should not
want: even there, volumes (I may say) wherein to read most excellent
admonitions of our frailty, as necessary dependence upon him. In every person,
are they engraven in ordinary Characters, and in a lesser print, so the Son
has them to view in the decease of his Father, the Husband in the departure of
his Wife, the Servant in the loss of his Master; but they seem to be written
in Capital letters, in Funerals of Princes; wherein, as in one common book,
the subject reads not oftentimes so much his Princes as his own mortality.
The Tribes of Israel might well hang up their Harpes upon the Willowes, erect
Banners of Sable, and cry, Alas, that Moses; alas, that Joshua, our victorious
Captains are dead, and this they might well do in remembrance of what was
past, but let them reflect an eye upon the state and condition they are now in,
let them from the top of Nebo discover the potencie of their Enemies, whom they
had incensed; the Cities, whose walls mounted to Heaven, which they were to
besiege; the Giants and Monsters of men, whom they were to encounter; and
lastly, their own dis-joynted and confused regiment, being as Sheep without a
Shepherd; and they might now with tears confess, that in out-liuing them,
they suruiued but their own obsequies; and that it had been good, that either
these men had been never borne; or else that being borne, they had never died.
And with this mournful Preface does my Text begin, the sum whereof, is a
passage betwixt the Children of Israel, and GOD: the one, in distress craving;
the other, in mercy adjudging, who should go up for them, in the pursuit of
the wars with the Canaanites. Wherein, for our better proceeding, may it
please you to observe with me, a Petition, and a Grant. In the Petition we
discover,

Viz. First, The ground or motive of it, it was an Interregnum, or a Vacancie,
intimated in the death of Joshua. Now after the death of Joshua, etc.

Viz. Secondly, Whom they petition, the Lord. It came to pass the Children of
Israel asked the Lord, etc.

Viz. Thirdly, What they petition, Who shall go up for us against the
Canaanites first, to fight against them, etc.

The Grant is, Who should go up? Judah. And the Lord said, Judah shall go up.

Thus have I set out before your eyes, the several parts of my Text; I trust
that We, which persuade our selves to be the Israel of God, and even now
iourneying to a Canaan which is above, shall not need arguments to stir up
our attention, to listen to what befell Israel in their passage into Canaan,
whilst I discourse, first, of their Petition, and that of the ground or motive
of it, being an Interregnum or Vacancie, intimated in the death of Joshua, and
comes in the first place to be handled. Now after the death of Joshua, etc.

Civil government under a supreme Magistrate, is so natural to a State, that
the Commonweal which is destitute of it altogether, is like to one of those
misshapen Blemmij, Iul. Solin. cap. 44.
whom ancient Geopraphie has made an headless Nation, and that which is not
linckt, and united in one ouer-topping Scepter; is as a body, each member
whereof lives by a several soul, and is prone (as in the Tale of Menenius
Agrippa) to join in a civil combustion against his fellows. Liu. hist. lib.
2.
And both these prodigies jumped together in the State of the Israclites, after
the death of Joshua; they neither had a man, nor could agree upon a Tribe,
which should go up before them against the Canaanites. This death of Joshua,
had they not in time implored Gods help, had been as ominous to them, as
those speeches in the Judges, comet-like, portending some ill to ensue. In
those days there was no King in Israel (says the Text, chap. 18) and what
follows, but the Danites seizing at once upon the possessions, and Idolatry
of Micha: again, in those days there was no King in Israel (chap. 19.) and
then, alas, the foul action of the Benjamites, and the destruction almost of
their whole Tribe succeeds immediately in order. So that the Israelites having
this motive of Ioshuahs death, to enquire of the Lord for a new Captain, teach
us the necessity of a Ruler, and in how bad a case they be, who neither have a
Judge to determine private contentions at home, nor a Captain to go up before
them against the common enemy abroad.

The first rule which man learneth by experience, is, that he has need to be
ruled and governed by an other, it is sucked in with his Nurses milk, and
dictated unto him in his birth. Other creatures, as if Nature were Tailor unto
them, make their first entrance into the world, appareld; they have weapons, to
defend themselves, sharpened (as one might say) to their hands, and their
estimatiue faculty so instructed, that without any more tuition, they can
skill each kind their proper architecture, their congruent cookerie, their
physic and cherurgerie, and to cross the old saying, nascuntur artifices,
they are born their crafts-masters. But, Man, how step mother-like does Nature
present him to the light, with not a ragge to his back, not a dinner dressed to
his belly, not a cottage to his head, his hands unweaponed, his understanding
like a razed table-booke, wherein nothing is written, as if she bade him in
this real language, Go, seek thee a Protector, and submit thy self to some
one others tuition. To this end and purpose, God has be autified the minds of
men with variety of Arts and Disciplines, to the perfecting whereof many heads
must join together, he has endowed them with speech and language, to inuit
one another to society, he has planted in them the principles of justice and
equity, which cannot be exercised, but in a community; Arist. 1. Polit. cap.
2.
so that Aristotle says, that a man is (...), one of Natures good fellows, a
Creature borne for civil conversation, and that he which lives hermitlike
reclus'd, and flies the company of men, is (...), either a God or a Beast. Now,
if man's nature do require a sociable life, then does it necessarily require
also a government and a Governor. For it is impossible, that a multitude should
long consist, unless some body there be, which has the care of the common
good committed unto him; as in the body of a man, unless there were a soul
which kept the parts in subjection, it could not be, but that the whole
consisting of contrary elements, should dissolve; and therefore the wisdom
of God says, Prou. 14. where no counsel is, the people fall; which the
vulgarrenders, Vbi non est gubernator, populus corruit: to show that the
safety of a Land depends upon the having of a Governor. Hereupon Princes are
termed, Animus vinculum, Senec. 1. de Clement. 4.
and spiritus vitalis reipublicae; and to express it by playner similitudes;
see how necessary a Pilot is to a Ship, or a Leader to an Army; so necessary
and more is a Governor to a Kingdom. For, (...); Chrysostom. tom 6. (...).
says Chrysostom; as, when thou remoouest the Governor of a Ship, thou
sinkest the Vessel; or, if thou singlest the Captain from his Band, thou
do no less, then deliver his Company manacled into the hands of the
Enemy; so take away but them which sit at the Helm of a Commonwealth, and
we shall live a life more irrational then beasts, biting and eating one
another like Canibals; or as Fish in the Sea, the greater feeding upon the
lesser; the rich devouring the poor, the stronger the weaker, and the more
audacious, outswearing the milder out of their patrimony. So that in effect,
if you would know, what is the greatest freedom in the world, it is to serve
under the rule of a Governor; and again, what is the greatest thraldom upon
earth, it is to be exempted from subjection to a Governor.

Here therefore may justly be refuted, that pernicious doctrine of the
Anabaptists and Libertines, which abrogates the use of Magistracy amongst
Christians, and makes no other square of civil commerce, then Fanaticall
inspirations. What miserable effects it brought with it in Germany, under the
patronage of Muncer Fiferus, and particularly in Munster by Leidensis, and
others of his compact, who seemed to no other end to depose lawful
Magistrates, then that they might usurp their places themselves, Sleyden.
Comment. lib. 5. and lib. 10.
I leave to Historians to relate. The greatest grief is, that the Anarchy
which has been held prodigious in a Commonweal, is entertained by some
Enthysiasts as most convenient in a Church, but so ill do they cloak their
ends, that they which cannot brook one Pope in the world, would be glad, were
they of the number, to have ten in a Parish, for mine own part I think some
of them half way at Munster, and fitter to be John of Leydens Chaplains,
then Pastors in a well governed Church, or a civil Commonwealth; and so I
pass from the motive of the Israelites Petition, which was, as I told you, the
Interregnum, or want of a Governor, occasioned by the death of Joshua, unto
the person whom they petition, which succeedes in the second place to be
spoken of, the Lord. Now after the death of Joshua, it came to pass that the
children of Israel asked the Lord, etc.

What? do they ask the Lord? is this warrantable divinity to make him ones
counselor? is not this to tempt God, to try whether he knows or can, or will
do that which is proposed unto him? and howsoever it be done, whether by lots
or by dreams, by Vrim, or by Prophets, it varies not the case, is it not still
tempting? For resolving of which doubt, two things are to be examined, first,
what that tempting is properly, which is forbidden in the Scriptures; and
secondly, upon what grounds the Israelites here used this extraordinary
means, in choosing their Captains Tribe. For the first, the Schoolmen thus
desine tempting of God; tempting of God (says he) is an irreligious action,
Thom. Secunda Secunde q. 9^. art. 1.
whereby through a doubt of some perfection which is in God, either his power,
that he cannot, or his wisdom that he knows not, or his will, that he will
not do something; one does an action for experiment sake, to try whether God
has perfection in him or no. And this (says he) may be done two manner of
ways, either Explicit, expressly doubting, and through that doubting, with a
formal intention experimenting; or Implicit and Interpretatiue; when, though
one doubts not of any perfection in God yet does that which in effect, and in
its own nature is nothing else but an experiment of Gods perfection; and this
happens, when one neglecting the ordinary means constituted by Gods
providence, does some action, expecting the effect thereof from God alone, no
just or necessary cause moving him thereunto. So then, the rules whereby we
are to examine this tempting of God, are chiefly two; First we must look into
the end, and see whether it be too make an experiment of some perfection in
God, whereof we doubt; Secondly, we must examine the Means and Necessity;
whether, though we do it not, as doubting of any perfection in God; ye, we
either neglect therein the own ordinary means afforded us by God, for the
effecting of the same thing, or else have no just and necessary cause, to fly
so to him in such a matter. If we err in the former, it is an express
tempting of God; if in the latter, then is it an implicit and an Interpretiue
(as they term it) tempting of him. Now to bring this home to the Israelites in
my text, and apply their using of this extraordinary means to the question in
hand. First, the end they had in it, was not to tempt God, or to make an assay
either of his power or wisdom, or will toward them, but only to relieve
their own necessities, being now destitute of an Head, and in that of safety.
Now, God is tempted (says Austen) cum signa flagitantur non ad salutem, sed ad
experientiam desiderata, when signs are sought, not for safety, but for
experiments sake; and to speak with Valentia, the enquiring of God in such a
case, Greg. de Valent. Tom. 3. in Thom. disp. 6. q. 14.
is not ex dubitatione de diuina perfectione, from any doubt of Gods
perfection, but only ex dubitatione de obiecto quod terminat diuinam
voluntatem, as if one should say, the doubt was only in the object which
terminated the will of God, they believed that God would deliver the Canaanites
into their hands, but by whom they knew not, this then they ask. Secondly, as
they did it not to a bad end, so neither did they it in a needless case,
without just reason, or neglecting any means which God had left them besides
this. True it is, that in ordinary States, the ordinary means left to decide
such a controversy, as the nomination of a General or Captain, is either
election of men, or succession of nature, but the state of the children of
Israel, both in their passage into Canaan, and in the enjoying of it, was, quid
extraordinarium, an extraordinary thing, of a divine constitution, and
religious signification, and therefore required in both of them a divine
assistance and direction. All things befell them for a figure (says the
Apostle 1. Cor. 10.) their passage through the Sea, their baptism in the
Cloud, their Rook, and Manna, meat and drink were Sacramental. Their
Jerusalem below, a type of that heavenly Jerusalem which is above, Gal. 6.
Their country a shadow of a bettet country, Heb. 11. to be brief, Aug. cont.
Faustum. l. 22.
dico illorum hominum (says Austen) non tantam linguam sed etiam vitam fuisse
propheticam, totumque illud regnum, gentis Hebraeae magnum quendam; quia and
magni cuiusdam fuisse prophetam, it is not only the tongues of those men, but
also the very lives of them were prophetical, and all that Kingdom of the
Jewish nation, was even a great Prophet, because the Prophet of a great one. So
that the land of Canaan, being but a Memento, and a lecture unto them of the
celestial Canaan which we expect, what did they in this asking of God,
concerning the Tribe which should go up for them, but acknowledge first their
own insufficiency, and impossibility of gaining heaven, without the light of
his direction, Secondly, the despair they had, of ever casting out the
Cananitish affections within them, unless he dained them his own grace to
guide and assist them; and lastly, that so excellent a Country could never be
recovered against the encounters, of such vast and Giant-like enemies, the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil, who like the sons of Anake do amaze and
affright us, unless he should bid the Tribe of Judah, or rather the Lion of
that Tribe, Christ Jesus to go up first for them, to fight against them. And
thus we see that this asking of God in my Text, who should go up against the
Canaanites, was not a tempting of God, but rather a consulting with him in an
enterprise of religious use, and holy signification, this extraordinary manner
of inquiry of things of so high a nature, whether by lots, or by Vrim, by
dreams, or Prophets, being permitted to the Church in her infancy, to supply
the obscurity of types, and the paucitie or scarcity of sacred books then
extant, which to us in the new Testament, who have both the one illustrated,
and the other augmented, were no less then a tempting of God, and a running to
extraordinary courses, where ordinary means are plentifully offered.

One use notwithstanding, may Christians make of this asking of the Israelites,
and that is, that in the warfare against our spiritual enemies, and voyage to
the land of Promise, we follow not leaders of man's constitution, but of Gods
ordination. The Israelites had for their direction herein God himself,
speaking in dreams and visions, in the Vrim and Thummim, and in his Prophets;
we have all these included in the written Oracles of God, the old and new
Testament, the revealed mysteries whereof are now published complete, and
promise no second Edition; we are not to enquire, either of the Popes Vrim,
what King; or Friars dreams, what Saint; or Amsterdamian visions, what Teacher
must go up before us: Behold, the Lord has in his Scriptures proclaimed our
Captain, and nominated our General; it is that holy One of the Tribe of
Judah, which is already gone up before us; it is he that has subdued the
Canaanites for us, and has taken possession of the Land in our behoof; the
holy Martyrs, and best of Gods Children march but aloof after, and feast upon
the spoils; the Onset, Combat, and Battle is his, and his alone. Others
being more passive, in putting on of the armor of God, then active; are rather
carried up by his Grace, then go up; and if they go up, yet the victory
being won, it is rather mortificare, then pugnare, to kill, then to fight;
and if to fight, yet their actions being not communicable, it is pro se, for
themselves; not pro nobis, for us; and suppose for us, yet not primi, but
secundi; they fight, not as Firsts, but as Seconds; of Christ only we can
say, who shall go up, and for us, and against the Canaanites first, and that
to fight against them: which is the Israelites Petition in my Text, and comes
next to be handled. Who shall, etc.

Although we cannot allow that which some Papists require, that every thing in
the Scripture may have a quadruple sense, they being diverse applications,
rather then diverse kinds from the other; yet in a good sense some things may
have a transient and ambulatorie Predicate; by reason whereof, they may have a
compounded literal sense, one Subject whereof, may direct and point out unto
the other of greater excellency. And howsoever the request of the Israelites
in so significatiue, and prefiguratiue a subject as the ingresse into Canaan,
and the specification of Judah in the Grant, enforce a speculation of the great
Leader of that Tribe Jesus Christ, who conducts us into the blessed Land,
whereof Canaan was but a shadow; yet is not this the only sense; a maine one
it may be, for the soul of Prophecy seems to breath in it; yet not the
only, for according to the letter also, we cannot deny, but that originally
it was meant of the personal and particular occurrences of those times. The
Canaanites I am sure, found not the war to conclude in tropes, but in blood;
and the swords of the Israelites to cut really, what ere they meant
figuratively. Now, as the letter sounds, there is no small controversy amongst
Interpreters, what the Israelites do here mean or intend in this their
Petition. Some say, that they craved a General or Captain over their whole
Army, in the place and room of Joshua; and of this opinion are most of the
old Popish Commentators, who follow herein the corrupt vulgar Edition, which
renders it, Quis ascendet ante nos, contra Cananaeum, and erit dux belli, that
is, Who shall go up before us against the Canaanite, and shall be Captain of
the war. Others think it was, who should go up first to fight, not for the
common cause, but for his own lot; and these are some of our new Divines,
following the translation of Iunius, Quis ascendet ex nobis contra reliquum
Cananaeum, which of us shall go up against the remainder of the Canaanites.
For mine own part, seeing these diverse interpretations do proceed chiefly
from the diversity of translating, I will walk in the midst, and adhere to
such a sense, as the most authenticke translations shall suggest unto me. Now,
the Septuagint, Hierome, Arias, Pagnine, the Complutensian edition, and our
own correct vulgar, say, (...), nobis, for us, Who shall go up for us? So
that, if we collect the sum of all, we shall have a universal, royal, and
highest dignity, with which the Israelites are not here as importuned,
contented, but as suitors importunate to have conferred on some or other. First,
that it should be an highest or supremest dignity, it is plain; for it was,
who should be first in wars: now, in wars to be first, whether in
battle, or in entry of a City taken, is that highest honor amongst
Soldiers. Secondly, that it should be royal; for it was, who should fight
against the Canaanites. The Land of Canaan, you know, was long before given to
the Israelites; but yet, when one has right, possession must be taken by
order of Law: now, to give possession and dispossess another, is proper only
to the chief Magistrate, and to his Officers; so that the Israelites demanding
who should fight for them, was as much in effect, as, who should exercise that
royal prerogative of putting them in possession, and displacing the
Canaanites. Thirdly, they sue that it may be universal, and that in two
respects; the one, in respect of themselves; it was not, who shall go up for
himself; but, who should go up for us; every bodies part (as it should seem)
lay therein; and this Judah performed as his task; for, besides that he
conquered his own lot, in which he requested the assistance of his brother
Simeon, Verse. 3. he fought also for the rest, as it appears in the 4. Verse
of this Chapter; where is mentioned his taking of Besek, a City in the Tribe
of Joseph, Pelican in locum.
noted by Pelican, as an enlargement of his brethrens portions. Another mark
or token of this universal and extended dignity, consists in the enemies of
the Israelites the Canaanites. Sometimes, I confess, they note a particular
Nation of the People inhabiting those tracts; but here in my Text, they design
all those Countries which the Israelites were to possess. The reason is
evident; for, when they point out some one particular Nation amongst the rest,
bearing that name; then do they intimate those parts which are included within
Phoenicia, or near adjoining unto it; for, First, who should of right more
deservedly bear the name of his father, then the eldest son; now Canaans
eldest son was Sydon, Genesis 10. and Sydon was the chief City of Phoenicia.
Again, all ancient Writers make the Carthaginians to be Phoenicians, and the
Carthaginians, besides the likeness of Speech, Hieron. in Esaias 7.
observed by Hierome, upon that of Esaias, Behold a Virgin shall conceive; where
he notes their congruencie in Almath, a Virgin; and by Austin, upon his
sixteenth Question upon Judges; who there finds their Baal a Lord, and
Baalsemon a Lord of Heaven, to be alike in both Languages. The same Father, in
his Exposition begun upon the Romans, says, that the Country people about
Carthage, being demanded what they were, would answer in the Punike language,
Chytr. in comment. ad locum. Procop. de bell^ Vandalic^.
that they were Canaanites; and Procopius reports, that the People inhabiting
Africa, as Hercules Pillars, used the Semiphoenician Dialect, and that in
Tingis, a City built by them; there were two Pillars extant, with this
inscription in the Phoenician Language, Nos sumus Canaanaei, quos, fuganit
Jesus latro. Lastly, if preservation of a name be authentike proof in a
Pedigree, where meets our Savior in all his Gospel with any of that name, but
in Tyrus and Sydon, Phoenicia's Cities? Then Jesus departed into the Coasts of
Tyrus and Sydon; and, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same Coasts,
Matthew. 15. So that the lot of Judah lying not near unto Canaan, so properly
called; nay, Benjamin, Ephraim, Zabulon, Ishacher, and Nepthali, as Geographers
show, lying between them; by the Canaanite here cannot be meant any particular
portion of the Land so properly called, and destinated for the lot of Judah;
but the whole Country, designed by God for the Territories of all the Children
of Israel, who here do join in one general petition, as in a common cause
concerning them all. Now, let me sum all together, the Israelites ask of
God, who shall go up first for them; therein they allow supreme dignity; they
ask, who shall fight; it was a case of seizure and possession, therein to this
dignity they join a Royal authority. Lastly, they ask, Who shall fight for
them against the Canaanites; therein they add to this authority, an extent
and amplitude of Sovereignty.

What are we then to learn from this request of the Israelites to God, but
that authority, dignity, and sovereignty, come from him, and do depend on
him, as on their Founder and Efficient. By me (says GOD, Pro. 8.) do Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice; by me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all
the Judges of the Earth. Not good Rulers only, but bad also, have this of him,
even persecuting Pilats; Thou could have no power at all against me (says
our Savior, Ioh. 19.) except it were given thee from above. Nay powers, be
they what they will, they are of God; and whosoever resists them, resists
the ordinance of God. Romans 13. Hereupon they are endowed in holy Scripture with
such names as should be memorials of their sacred offspring. They are termed
Gods, not indeed (...), by reason of their Nature; but (...), by reason of
their Office, and that for three respects, as Iustine Martyr notes, (...).
Just. Martyr. quaest. and respons. nd Orthodox quaest. 142.
(...), for their Calling; (...), for their Order and Place; and (...), for
their great Honor and Respect. They were anointed also in the old Testament
with holy and consecrated oil, and that by the high Priest, to represent unto
them in types and figures, the sacred original of their Calling. And though
(speaking humanely) the beginning of Empire may be ascribed to reason and
necessity, yet it was GOD himself that first kindled the light in the minds
of men, whereby they saw that they could not live and be perserued without a
Ruler and Conducter. Even nature it self, which Scaliger terms the ordinary
power of God, and Saint Paul, the Law written in the heart, dictates the same
lesson to all creatures; for, the very Bees have their Prince, the Dear their
Leaders, and the Cranes by order imposed, watch for their own safety.

With what face then can the schoolmen defend Thomas in that paradox of his,
which he broacheth, 2.2. q. 10. art. 10. Dominium and Praelatio introducta sunt
ex jure humano, Rule and preheminencie were brought in by the Law of Man.
Bellarmine, I confess, in his third Book, de Laicis, and sixth chapter,
tempers somewhat the rigor of his Master in this point, and says, that
politic rule considered in general, is by the Law of Nature, and therefore by
the Law of God; but yet considered either in special, as in a Monarchy or
Aristocracie, or any particular person that sustaineth it; so it is only by
the consent of Men and by positive Law. But it seems that Bellarmines Logike
is not the same with ours, for if it were, he could not be ignorant, that quod
praedicatur de genere, praedicatur de specie and indiuiduo, that which is
affirmed of the general, may also be affirmed of the special and particular;
and so, if he makes with Aristotle a Monarchy, Aristocracie, or Democracie,
to be special kinds of a commonwealth, and this or that King to be an
individual Governor, he cannot deny that to these, which he grants to their
genus or common nature. I believe, the Cardinal would not allow of such an
answer as current, from one that should do him wrong; God indeed forbids me
to hurt my Neighbor, but not to hurt thee Bellarmine, it would be scarce safe
to preach at Rome, that Popes are the successors of Peter by the Law of God,
but for Paulus Quinsus, that now is, he is Peter's successor only by the Law
of Man. I am sure, that here in my Text, they come not to God to authorize or
establish a going up against the Canaanite in general, but rather who should
go up for them in special. They acknowledge both from him, and therefore sue
to him for both. I ask one Daniel, that great Counselor of State to two
Monarchies, and a secretis to four Kings, what that Mysterium Imperij should
be, which translates and entailes Crowns to a Family, and he will tell you
that it is God, which meditates not upon Kingdoms, as on Platonike Ideas, or
summa genera in a predicament, but descends to particulars, remooues Kings and
sets up Kings, rules in the Kingdom of men, and appoints over it whomsoever
he will, Chron. 2. and the 5. But here it may be objected, if it be so as we
make it, that Princes and Magistrates are jure diuino, by the Law of God; how
comes it about, that in the 1. Pet. 2. Kings and Governors are styled by no
other name, then the ordinance of man: this seems to kill and cut the throat
of all that which went before. I answer briefly, that a thing may be said to
be an ordinance of man, three manner of ways: first, (...), in respect of its
cause and original. Secondly, (...), in respect of his subject or object: And
thirdly, (...), in respect of its end. Now, Kings and Governors are termed an
humane ordinance, not in regard of their cause and original, as if they were
of man's constitution; for so, as we have declared, they are of God; but in
regard of their object and end, because they are conversant about humane
affairs, and for that their intermediate scope is the government and
preservation of humane society. Much more might be said of this point, it is a
Kingly Theme, and has found ere now a Royal Dictator to discuss it. I
cannot tell, but pressing so near the Court, I fear I have trespassed in the
common fault of it, and suspended you too long in the Petition, I pass to the
Grant, in the which brevity shall make amends: Judah shall go up.

And why should Judah go up? why should he be graced more then all his
brethren, with this Royal and Sovereign execution upon the Canaanites? was it
because he surmounted the rest in number and potencie? But God is not wooed
with these respects, especially, where he means to be seen foremost most in
the battle himself, and to purchase himself renown by his own right Hand,
and proper Chivalry. What then? why, if you please to look back to the
forty nine of Genesis, you shall there find the Kingdom bequeathed by Jacob,
as a Legacy to Judah. Judah, thou art he, whom thy brethren shall praise, thy
fathers children shall bow down unto thee, the Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come. The promises
of God are sure hold, they are, Yea and Amen: yet because they are performed,
not always suddenly and forthwith, but in their due season; therefore it
pleases the divine Providence, so far to compassionate our weakness, and to
apply himself to our infirmities, as to prop up our feeble beliefes, and to
ruin our languishing hopes of things so long to come, by vouchsafing often
glimpses and tastes of them, which should serve as gages and pawnes until the
things themselves be accomplished; so did he often renew his promises to the
Patriarks, for assurance of their enjoying of the Land of Canaan; so did he
deal with the Fathers under the Law, by signs and prophesies ever now and
anon, rowse them up to a firm confidence in the Messiah to come; the same
method he uses with the Tribe of Judah, a Kingdom and Scepter was promised
them, and they had, I doubt not, conceived Royal hopes, but the thing was not
to be performed, until eight hundred years and more after the date of the
promise, where David enjoyed it; yet God all this while lay not as one that
slept, or made no account of his Word, whether it was reckoned upon or no, but
strengthens (as one might say) the weak hammes of Iudahs credency, with
notable and remarkable tokens of his remembrance of them, and seems to
continue their Title and Plea to the Kingdom on foot, by giving them sometimes
sovereign marks and badges of it; and otherwhile putting them into possession
of some parcells of the Prerogatives of it. I pass by that precedence given
them, as the Hebrews affirm, in their passage over the Red Sea, where they
make that Tribe as dux gregis, to lead the way. In the march of the Israelites
through the Deserts of Arabia. What place held the Standard of Judah by the
Lords command, but the first? Numb. 10. Of what Tribe was their first Judge,
he which delivered them from the hand of Cushan Rishathaim, king of
Mesopotamia, but Othniel the son of Kenaz, of the Tribe of Judah, Judge. 3.
When the Israelites ask of God who should go up against the Benjamites, to
administer high justice against them for their enormious fact, whom does the
Lord nominate, but Judah, Iud. 20. and to come home to my Text, Whom does God
prefer in this place to that Kingly office of disposing the Canaanites, but
Judah. Judah shall go up: as if in this nomination he had said, the Kingdom
is Iudahs, it is his by my Gift, by his Fathers Will, and excepting those of
his Brethren whose graceless demeanor lost them their birthright; it is his
by the Law of Nature; Joshua is dead, and do you ask who shall go up first
for you against the Canaanites? why, by a threefold right, who should but
Judah? Behold, in this Royal expedition against the Canaanites; I renew and
confirm my Grant of the Kingdom to him, he shall have this as a Seal and
assurance for the future enjoying of it, Judah shall go up.

Here then does God by his own example warrant that fundamental maxim of
State, observed as a Law of the Medes and Persians, by almost all the renowned
Empires that ever were, which entailes Scepters to Tribes, and Crowns to
Families. It suits not with this place to discuss the reasons of State,
alleged pro and con, by Aristotle, Machiauil, Bodin, Johannes Mariana, and
others, whether were more expedient for a commonwealth, to have their Princely
election or succession; whether in purging and expelling the pestilent humors
of a politic body, it be safer to try the soueraign virtue which recides in
new Slips, or presume upon that which has been by long experience found in
ancient and well proved Stemmes; for mine own part, I should hold it but a
witty impiety, such as has been showed by diverse, in the commendations of
exorbitant subjects, to magnify any policy of man, above the wisdom of God,
who in the kingdom of the Jews, which he made his seat of Majesty upon
earth, and wherein he more visibly reigned, then in any other Empire of the
world, annexed the ensigns of Sovereignty to this one Tribe of Judah, and
excepting the time of the Judges, which were rather Dictators, extraordinarily
stirred up by God, to deliver the people from some special servitude, then
ordinary Magistrates; and one Saul, from whose house God rented the Kingdom
for his disobedience, we find ever after by the express act of God, the
Scepter committed to the sway of one Family in Judah, even the House of David,
and that not without special reasons in Religion; for besides, that the
blessed Race of which the Messiah was to come, became by this means the more
remarkable; the truth also of Gods promises and threats, which he extends even
to the fourth generation of them which love or hate him, is made by so much the
more evident to the eyes of men, by how much the glory of a Family in this
wise continued, makes the fortunes of it the more noted and observed by the
World.

And now have I brought the Israelites to their wished Port, there seemed but
one thing wanting to secure them of their felicity, a Judah to go up before
them, and it is fallen into their bosom. It may be now expected according to
the solemnity of the day, that I should undergo the task of Plutarch; and no
less parallel the fortunes of Englands Inhabitants, and the posterity of
Israel, then he that lives of Greeks and Romans: wherein I must confess the
constant and even hand of God over his distressed Church in all Ages, has made
the burden wherewith I travail, capable of a more facile birth, which there
required the wit and industry of a deep Philosopher. If I would play the
Logician, and begin the affinity and kindred (as one might say) of both
people, a notatione, a likeness might there be found, they come thus near,
Iacobi filij, Iacobi subditi. But I list rather, to build my comparisons on
real then verbal foundations. The people of Israel served miserable
apprentiship of bondage, ere they could be free in the land of Egypt; we in
more then Egyptian darkness, in the Territories of Babylon. They in servitude
to Pharaoh; we to Antichrist. Their manumission and freedom was through the
red Sea; ours through a Sea more red then it, of bloody persecutions. Blessed
were they with the conduct of two most famous and renowned Generals, each of
which was an Army royal in himself; whose Faith fought more for the Camp,
then the Camp for them. Yet Moses the first of them saw not the Land of
Canaan, but from the top of a mountain. He died upon the entry; and truly,
those years in which our cause seemed to breathe, under the first Prince that
wholly shook off the yoke of Antichrist, were so few, Ed. VI.
that in them we might more truly be said to behold our liberty in
speculation, then to enjoy it; to view it, then to use it. Q. Marie.
There followed an inundation of misery upon it; but God, that would not have
us tempted above that we are able, heard our cries; and sent as to the
Israelites, Q. Eliz.
so to us a Joshua to deliver. Then did the walls of Babylon, like those of
Jericho, fall down, not so much by the noise of warlike Music, as by the
blowing of the Levites, the preaching of the Word. Then was the Land divided
amongst the Israel of God, and the Cities of refuge pointed out, even all this
Canaan of ours was a Sechem, and a Ramah, even our City of refuge to all the
persecuted nations of the world. Then did the light of the Gospel, no less
then the lights of Heaven at the prayer of Joshua, stand still in the midst of
our Firmament, until we had subjected our enemies to the obedience of it. But
Joshua's, though their fame and glory be of immortal temper, and therein
they seem to outstrip the condition of man; yet their earthly Tabernacles are
not of so durable metal, as not to suggest unto suruiuing Ages, that they
possess so much of Man in them, as makes them mortal. They are lent unto us
for our sakes, but we must restore them again for their own sakes. And upon
the setting of such Suns, how ever the necessity of Natures law do lessen
the grief of it, yet the succeeding darkness is not therefore awhit the
less; both the sons of Jacob, and we, must acknowledge in it, our selves
subject to the chances and usual misfortunes of the night. It is true indeed,
that the Canaanites, both there and here were much diminished and brought
under, yet were they not wholly as yet cast out, they dwelt still amongst the
people God, and were as a thorn in their sides; and now or never, when the
Joshua's are gone, when the Cloud by day, and Pillar of fire by night, seem to
be vanished, are they in hope, either to expel Israel out of the Land, or at
least, ere a new Sun should arise, to compound for a toleration. And let any
speak, whether in this point also the Children of Israel, and we, shared not
alike in our dangers after the death's of our Joshua's? And if we did, then
doubtless the same reasons must enforce us also, as did them, to seek for
some one or other in our Joshua's rooms to go up before us. But of whom should
we ask? It is thought that the Children of Israel went to the high Priest in
those days; and therefore some would conclude, that we should ask of the
Pope, whom they faigne to succeed Aaron in the high Priests Office. But before
we condescend to this, two things are to be proved unto us; First, that there
is a Vrim and Thummim fixed in his Chair, wherein God does as visibly deliver
his Oracles, as he did in the high Priests breastplate; otherwise the reasons
will not be alike. And secondly, that the Pope is the true successor of Aaron,
and not rather of Adonibezek, against whom we wanted one to go up for us;
for, to whom may more properly be applied that saying of Adonibezek, in the
seventh Verse of this Chapter. Threescore and ten Kings having their thumbs and
their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: Then to the Pope,
whose cutting and paring of the authority of Princes, and treading their
Crowns under his feet, speak no less. We should have also asked him, they
say, who should go up to fight for us; that was indeed expected, his Breues
were ready drawn; but, I wis, he would have served us with one of his Carpet
Kings, that could neither have fought for us, for want of thumbs; nor gone up
before us, for want of toes. Well, if we were not to ask of the Pope of Rome,
should we ask of any other Pope at home, which some make to be the people.
But, alas, amidst so many Canaanites they lurked and whispered seditions in
every corner; what abstract Statist could bow the hearts of so many thousands,
as it had been the heart of one man; and if some such were to be found, yet
Crowns and Scepters (as we have showed) are more then of a humane mold, or a
Goldsmiths composition; they are of God. Then to God were we to go, and as
the Israelites to some extraordinary revelation, so we to the ordinary course
which he has established amongst us, for the knowing, of who should go up
before us. Truly, it was no small thing, that we were to ask of God in this
case. It was, First, who should go up to fight; therein is intimated, the
behoof of military skill. Secondly, against the Canaanites, therein is
specified, genus belli, the kind of war, which was to be undertaken, against
the Canaanites of the Israelites; it was to be performed, ore gladij, with the
edge of the sword; but against ours, whom Christ is to destroy with the power
of his Word; it is rather to be acted, gladio oris, with the sword of the
mouth, not Mart, but Mercurio; not basta but calamo. Thirdly, it was, who
should go up for us, not pro se, for himself only, or but for his own lot,
as who should fight only in questions of supremacy; but pro nobis, for us
also, in the common cause, and drive out the Canaanile, as well out of the
Country, as the Court; and the Suburbs, as the City. And Lastly, it was, who
should go up to fight against the Canaanites; first, that is in the forefront
of the battle, and in the first rank, and be able not only to be directed by
others, but learned also to act himself, and that inter primos primus, chief
amongst the chief; and for such a man, God, and none but God, has answered,
that we should have him in Judah, in the Tribe of the Kings, in the seminary
selected by him for the furnishing of Leaders. It was neither the combination
of Inferiors, nor the plot of Superiors, nor the well-wishes of Forreiners,
that shapes us our answer; but it was the Lord that appointed us a Captain,
and such a one as was able to go up, and expertagainst the Canaanites, and
willing to be for us, and most worthy to be first, and all this in domo
lacobi, in our Judah, that beautiful Garden, wherein for so many Ages, the
sovereignty of this I Will has taken root.

O Lord, it is thine own right hand that has planted it, water it with thy
dew from above; and blow upon it, that the Spices thereof may flow out, that
there never fail of that Stock a Judah to go up before us, until the full
and perfect fruition of that Canaan which thou have appointed for us. This
grant for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with thee and the Holy Ghost, be
rendered all praise, honor, and glory, might, majesty, and dominion, from this
time forth for evermore.

Amen.
THE GENTILES CREED, OR THE NATVRALL KNOWLEDGE OF GOD.

Delivered in a Sermon, by EDWARD CHALONER, Doctor of Divinity, and Fellow of
ALLSOVLES College in OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY, 1623.

THE GENTILES CREED.
ACT. 14. v. 17. Nevertheless he left not himself without witness in that
he did good, and gave us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our
hearts with food and gladness.


THe use of miracles in the Apostles time, Caiet. Tom. 2. opusc. tract. 1. de
conceptione Virginis. cap. 5.
as Caietan shows out of Gregory, if not only yet specially in respect of
Infidels, served to make the mysteries of God seem credible to such, as were
otherwise auerse from them; for whereas the things then taught, were new,
strange and incredible to natural ears; how should the Gentiles be induced
to believe them? how should so great a portion of mankind emancipated, as it
were to Satan, be brought from their fathers traditions or diabolical oracles
to rely upon them, had not the strange works that followed their publishers
made them think, that those things were credible which were accompanied with
so strange attendants. Thus far Saint Paul and Barnabas had proceeded, when
by a miracle wrought in Lystria, Verse. 7.
by restoring strength and straightness to an impotent cripple, the Lycoanians
were roused up to conceive, that something more then flesh and blood was
preached unto them; that surely some Ambassadors were come from heaven amongst
them. But see the malignitie of Satan, he is already confined to the deep,
if this Miracle lose not its true use, and by depriving the Author of the
work, the honor be transferred upon the instruments. The Apostles before had
a task to teach the Gentiles that Jupiter was nothing, Cor 8.4.1. Plaut.
Amphit.
and Mercury nothing, and now as if Amphitruo were to be re-acted, they must
begin a new with them, and hardly make good that Paul is Paul, and not
Mercury, that Barnabas is Barnabas, and not Jupiter, Happy Lystrians had they
but attended to what was preached, and not too fondly ouervalued them which
preached it; but I would to God, that Lystria only might be branded with this
folly, and that it might have there dyed where it first began in Lyconia, then
should these blessed Apostles be no more dishonored with adoration, nor so
many deluded souls in these our days, be forced now again to offer incense
unto them. V. 14. and 15.
The Apostles themselves, I am sure, were molded of an other temper; whether I
should present them to your view, renting there clothes or running amongst the
people, or crying with might and maine; O men, why do you these things, one
cannot but conceive how these Apostles being dis-robed of their flesh, and with
that, of their fleshly desires, are now affected, when as being yet clothed, as
it were, with temptation it self, they so greatly distasted their own
worship. I were more then an Orator, could I fuller express my Apostles
Oration, and it would argue no small presumption, should I think with any
paraphrase upon their Rethorike to affect your tender ears, when the substance
thereof proceeding from so divine subjects as were these Ambassadors of Christ,
could scarcely appease or restrain a ruder Auditorie. The force of their
Arguments is powerful enough to supply what is wanting: That themselves were
not those Gods they took them for, they make good by two irrefragable
arguments, the one taken from their nature, by which they profess themselves
to be Men, Verse 15.
subiest to the like passions that the Lystrians were, and therefore could be
no Gods and impatible deities: the other drawn from their office and function,
which was so far from giving them authority to accept of any such worship,
that on the contrary side, they declare the end and scope of their coming, to
be, to Preach unto them, that they should turn, (...), as the text says, from
those vain things, from those Idols unto the living God: But that God was the
Lord, that he was that Ceres which filled their garners with Corn, he that
Zeus which viuificated and made nature fertile, he that Aeolus which brideled
and kept the impetuous winds in subjection, might seem a point of more
difficulty to make good; surely, the Gentiles might plead ignorance for their
excuse, whom for a long time God had suffered to walk in their own ways, and
Philosophers themselves might complain they saw but through a mist, and that
his mysteries were not so plainly divulged to them as to the Jews, yet this
one argument which the Apostles here urge, is sufficient to convince them of
this, that he left not himself to them also without witness, that he was the
only and everliving God, in that he did good, and gave them rain from heaven
and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness.

The sum is a prolepsis, or taking away of all such pretenses for their
ignorance, as the Gentiles might allege in their own defense, in which they
proceed by two gadations.

Viz. First, by an Aphaeresis, or removing of the false opinion upon which they
grounded, and laying down the truth; Nevertheless, he left not himself
without witness.

Viz. Secondly, by an Epicurosis, or confirmation of that truth which they laid
down, which likewise they prosecute by two Mediums, to wit, by Gods benefits,
pointed out,

Viz. Either in 1. General, in that he did good. 2. Special, in that he gave
them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food
and gladness.


The error which is here removed, may seem to have some dependencie upon that
question of Aristotle's, Aristot: Ethic. 3.
An ignorantia excuset peccatum, whether ignorance does excuse a fault; it is
not expressly set down in the story, but tacitly employed, in that it is
refuted (...) nevertheless, being an Aduersatiue particle, and here used as
Destructive, so, that whereas these Gentiles would perhaps have pleaded
ignorance to excuse their Idolatry, the Apostle shows them that their
ignorance was crassa and affectata, gross and affected, such as the Pope now a
days enioynes his subjects, and such as by the tenures of Philosophy, does
augment rather then diminish an offense. For though the Gentiles knew not God
absolute absolutely, Bellar. de great. and lib. arbit. c. 2.
as Bellarmine in his fourth Book, De gratia and lib. arbitr. seems to
intimate, yet limitate with some limitation and restriction, they did; si non
simpliciter verum Deum, tamen aliquid very Dei, if not simply the true God, yet
something of the true God; The light of Nature served in gross, to show them
that there was a God, that this God was one only, that he was to be worshipped,
to be served and adored, though fully who this God was, Nature debilitate
ascended not to know, humane frailty could not penitrate: much like was their
knowledge to that of Oedipus in the Poets, Senec. Traged.
who knew in general that he had a Father, but not who was his Father, only
(to see his misfortune) whom he so carefully sought, he unwillingly slew, or as
children (says Aristotle) Quosuis viros appellant patres, Aristot. 1. Phys.
and faeminas matres, call all men their fathers, and all women their mothers;
so this purblind progeny of Adam, being able to discern no cleerer the
Godhead, then he in the Gospel, which saw Men walking like Trees, took
oftentimes the Shadow for the Substance, calling every Creature a Creator, and
mistaking a corruptible Man for an incorruptible God. But for our cleerer
proceeding, and easier access to our Apostles sense and meaning, when they
say, God left not himself without witness, we must note, that the witness
which is here understood, is the witness of Nature, and the thing witnessed,
is God displayed by his works of nature, the main doubt concerns the extent
of this knowledge, quantum Deitatis, how much of the Godhead may be known of
us by this witness of Nature. To decide this controversy, we must observe
that the knowledge of God is twofold; either of him, as he is considered in
himself, or as he is considered in his works; as in himself, so either of
his essence, or of his persons: as in his works, so likewise it is either of
his works of Creation, or his works of Redemption. As for him considered in
his persons, or in his works of Redemption, I take, that the witness which is
here implied, (in as much as it confines it self to the light of Nature)
extends not further, then to yield limilies to illustrate them; Tho. part. 1.
q. 32. art. 1.
or as Thomas says of these points, sufficit probare non esse impossible quod
sides praedicat, it is enough, if we can prove that those things are not
impossible which Faith preaches: For first, concerning the works of
Redemption, almost all Divines do assent and agree in this, that Quamuis homo
norit Deum esse, Morn. de verit. relig. c. 27.
and esse optimum maximum, non norit tamen patrem in filio reconciliatum,
though Man by nature knows that there is a God, and that this God is goodness
it self; yet the Father reconciled in the Son, he knows not. It was a
wonder unto the blessed Angels, much more is it a mystery unto natural men.
And touching the doctrine of the three Persons, Thomas in the place above
cited, resolves us plainly, that, per rationem naturalem cognosci possint de
Deo ea tantum quae pertinent ad vnitatem essentiae, non autem ea quae pertinent
ad distinctionem personarum, by the light of nature, only those things may be
known of God, which concern the unity of his essence, not those which
concern the distinction of persons. Many, I confess, have ransackt Nature for
Mediums to persuade this doctrine of the Trinity, Morn. de verit. relig. c. 5.
one tells us, that a Spring begets a River, and that from both are derived
smaller Brooks, all which yet make but one Water; another shows a Root, from
which rises a Body, and from thence Branches, and yet all make but one Tree:
some more subtle Philosophers produce a Man, which in one Soul has three
faculties; and yet all these, if we believe the Scotists, do differ but
formally from the Soul, no not at all, if we believe the Nominals. But this
makes not any thing, to deny the defects of this witness of Nature in respect
of this high mystery; for who knows not that Natural reason is one thing as
it is nuda, bare and naked in it self, an other thing as it is vestita,
adorned and clothed with higher gifts; one thing, being considered sine
indumento, without the ornaments and perfections which the knowledge of God out
of the Scripture gives unto it; another thing, as it is considered cum
indumento, being invested with that light which the Word written, like the Sun
darting his beams upon the Moon, reflect upon it, before it can shine toward
us. The former way Natures resemblances of the Trinity are not of such power
and force, as that by them a man in puris naturalibus constitutus, being left
to the light of Nature only, should be able to come to the knowledge of that
incomprehensible depth, no more (says Philip Mornay in his fifth Chapter, De
veritate Religionis) then cyphering Characters can show him the sum they
import, which was never instructed in their use, though being considered cum
indumento, with their perfections and additions which they receive from the
light of the Scripture, they make easy that doctrine, being to that purpose
invented by those (says one) qui prius crediderunt quam intellexerunt, who did
first believe before they understood. But though these mysteries of the
Trinity and of our Redemption, wrought by that incarnate Son of God Christ
Jesus, are so remote from this witness of Nature, yet in points concerning the
essence of God in general, or his works of Creation, not illustrations only
or a bare fame may be had from the light of Nature, as Socinus, Ostorodius, and
the like, Samosatenian Atheists in Polonie do affirm, but also demonstrations
and direct conclusions may be deduced. The doctrine therefore which our
Apostles in my Text do insinuate unto us, when they say, that God left not
himself to the Gentiles without witness, must needs be this.

That so much may be known of God by the witness of Nature, as is sufficient
to confirm unto us, though not his Persons, or works of Redemption, yet his
Godhead, and also his handie-worke in creating and governing of the World.

God is in himself invisible, and yet The invisible things of him (says the
Apostle, Romans 1.20.) that is, his eternal Power and Godhead are seen by the
creation of the World, being considered in his works. To resolve the members
of which Verse, were to propose unto you a whole systeme of natural Divinity,
each part being a scale (says Beza) which whosoever will ascend, Beza in
annot. ad loc:
may by it attain to the knowledge of Gods eternal Power and Divinity. O
God, when I consider the works of thine hands, the Sun and the Moon which
thou have created, and that all things which are comprised within the
circumference of them, do receive their being and perfection from thee alone,
how can I choose but assent that thou thy self art most perfect, most
essential? when I confess that thou art the prime cause, and first moouer of
all things, reason were no reason, if from hence it concluded not, that there
is nothing left which can move thee, or make thee mutable; when thou alone
made the fabrike of the World by thy mighty power, and do now sway each
iota thereof by the Scepter of thy Word, it were sacrilege, should I say, thou
were not a Spirit, and that for time, eternal; for place, every where; for
power, omnipotent. Now when in Nature there can be but one most perfect, one
immutable, one infinite and omnipotent Essence; let it not be presumption, if I
go a little farther and infer, that thou, O God, and none but thou, which
do these things, art that one most perfect, immutable, infinite, and
omnipotent Essence. Thus you may perceive what wings Nature has yet affoorded
Man to soar aloft, if he would but prye into that glorious Cabinet of
heavenly treasure: if we look into the four last Chapters of Job, we shall
see God himself, as it were reading a lecture of these works of Nature, that
by them he might demonstrate his wisdom, and by them his power and providence
might be conceived. The old Testament is copious likewise in this subject,
there you may see how the devout Saints, Psalm. 148.
that they might provoke themselves and others to sing praises unto God,
invited breathless creatures to praise him* and feigned them voices and
tongues to set forth his power and glory. But the Apostle goes something
farther, and says, not only the invisible things of God are seen by his
works, but he adds moreover, that they are so far seen, as to make the
Gentiles without excuse. And indeed it was the very scope of Saint Paul and
Barnabas, in my Text, to teach the Lystrians thus much, that howsoever God left
not such witness of himself unto them as was sufficient to save them; yet
that by his works of Nature he left them such a witness, as that they
dishonouring his sacred person by Idolatry, did take from themselves al matter
which might excuse them. For what if Nature condemned them not quoad totum, yet
it did quoad tantum; say, Nature reached not to the knowledge of the Trinity,
or of Christ the Redeemer, yet in that they went not so far in acknowledging
God as Creator or Governor of all things, as Nature could have directed them,
we may well judge them inexcusable: They might thus far have played the
Logicians, and that to good purpose; that God is a Spirit which every where
swayes the world by his mighty Word, may be confirmed by Reason, and
therefore our Idolatry is vicious, by which we adore him in bodily and humane
representations; that there is but one God, may be proved by natural
deductions, and therefore our Poetical fictions of many gods is vain and
ridiculous; that this God was before the World which he made, and that he is
justice and goodness it self, which is the Judge of good and bad, is evident
by the light of Nature, erroneous therefore are our narrations of the gods
parentages and of their actions, which were so prodigious, that only they
deserved (as Euripides says) to be banished out of Heaven, Clemens in
protreptic. ad Gent.
but unworthy also they were to live amongst mortal men. Thus you see how
Nature it self past upon these Gentiles, and found them guilty of wilful
ignorance; what might they here say for themselves? should they plead, they had
no ears to hear the truth, when as brute creatures with more then a Trumpets
voice did every where proclaim it? Should they urge, they could not see the
way which leads to the School of knowledge, when as blind creatures, and such
as have no eyes at all did point it out and show it unto them? Shall they
object, the feebleness of their understandings, where stocks and stones, and
things without understanding become masters? O ignorance intolerable, O
blindness more then gross, not to see, or seeing, not to discern when the
Sun it self lodges in his Zenith; Interroga iumenta (says Job) and
docebunt te, Job 12.8.
volatilia coeli and indicabunt tibi, loquere terrae and respondebit tibi, and
narrabunt pisces maris; Ask the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the
fowls of the air, and they shall tell thee; speak to the earth, and it shall
show thee; or the fishes of the sea, and they shall declare unto thee, who is
ignorant of all these, but that the hand of the Lord has made them? Romans 1.19.
That which may be known of God, therefore is manifest in them (says the
Apostle) for God has showed it unto them; (...). tom. 6.
true (ayth Chrysostom) but by what means? what Prophet did he send unto
them? what Evangelist? what Doctor? Why he tells us, (...). The invisible
things of him are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made;
All creatures are Regij professores, professors of that great King, all are his
witnesses, all his preachers, and if I may say it, they are all but real
postils of his Diumitie. Writers contend in expressing this point with variety
of similies. God may be contemplated in his creatures as in a Glass, 1. Cor.
13.12. Basil. hom. 11. Hexam. Aug. de Genesis Athan. orat. cont. idola. Aug. 55.
sermon. de verb. Dom.
so Saint Paul; read as in a Book, so Basil; heard as in an harp, so Austin;
viewed as in a Picture, so Athanasius. The Apostle says not therefore, (as
Saint Austin well notes) eos veritatis ignaros, that the Gentiles were ignorant
of the truth, sed quod veritatem iniquitate detinuerint, but that they held the
truth in unrighteousness; it seems, they either squinted upon the object,
and could not discern the nat^ue colors, or else, when they turned over
Natures Text, they interpreted it by the Devils comment.

But I will stand no longer upon the proof of a point so evident, I will now
come to apply it to our selves. Since it has pleased God to give such
evidence and witness of himself, by his works of Nature, we should show our
selves triuants in his school, should we with less attentive ears then is
meet, observe their dictates of the God head. Men are happy (says
Chrysostom) which have so dextrous and perspicuous Teachers, Chrysostom. in
Psalm. 19.
for had this testimonial of Nature been written in paper or parchment, the
learned indeed might have read it, but the ignorant could have received no
benefit from it; the rich might have bought it, but the poor would have wanted
it: again, they which understand the language, would have reaped some profit
from it, but the Scythian, and Barbarian, and Indian, and Egyptian, whose
Tongues it was not written in, would have made no use of it. And indeed,
Chrysostom then thought this was enough to argue the happiness we have, in
that it is not liable to the discommodities of pen and ink; but had that good
Father lived in our days, he would have added to these far more
inconveniences worse then the former. Alas (beloved) if Guttenbergius which
invented printing, had but committed this testimonial of Nature to the press,
I omit how Critics would have transposed whole elements, not of Grammar only,
but of the World, at their pleasure; think you that in what Nature it self,
so mainely oppugneth Popish transubstantiation, the Council of Trent would not
have condemned it as a prohibited book, at the least not have permitted it to
pass in the vulgar Tongue amongst the Laiks? But thanks be to God, which has
spread this book of Nature open to every man's view. Nor are we to imagine, the
Characters of the Godhead to be imprinted in the more noble Creatures only, and
not in others. S. Austin tells us that having gone through all creatures, Aug.
Soliloquijs. c. 31.
and seriously have inquired of them for God, not one or two, but every one
made him this answer, with an audible voice, Non sum ego, sed per ipsum sum
ego quem quaeris in me; I am not he, but by him I am whom thou seek in me.
And Hugo de S. vict. affirms, Hug. de Sancto Victore, lib. 2. dearca. c. 3.
that every thing speaks these three words unto a man, Accipe, read, fuge;
take, restore, flee. The first is, vox famulantis, the voice of a servant,
accipe benesicium, receive a benefit of God. The second is, vox admonentis, the
voice of a monitor, read, o homo, debitum Deo officium, render, O man, the
duty thou owe to God, for giving us unto thee. The third is, vox
comminantis, the voice of a threatner, fuge, o homo, supplicium, flee, Oman,
the punishment which even we shall inflict upon thee, if thou be not
grateful for receiving us. We may not be so rigid Philosophers, as to make
our natural Philosophy merely speculatiue, a Christian must ring it further,
and convert it to a practical use. In the book of Nature we must think no
page unwritten on, we must suppose every creature, even the basest to speak
unto us; the stars of the firmament to cry out, and by their light to inuit
us to that eternal light which is above; the winds in the aerie regions to
cry out, and admonish us of the Spirit of the Lord which dwells in all
things; the floods and streams of running water to cry out, and summon us to
that crystal river and fountain of living water which is in heaven; the earth
when it trembles, and when its massy frame is shaken, to cry out, and put us
in mind of the ruin and dissolution of the world. And for as much as God in
this world can be discerned by us but in his hinder parts, that is, in his
works and his effects, him, lest they which he has now left unto us as
witnesses to inform us, he one day produce against us, as witnesses to
condemn us. And so I pass from the Aphaeresis to the Epicurosis, from the
Assertion to the Confirmation, which comes in the next place to be handled.
In that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons,
silling our hearts with food and gladness.

The benefits of God, which the Apostles do here produce to confirm the
former position, are pointed out by them (as before I showed you) either in
general, or in particular. In general, in that he did good; in particular, in
that he gave them rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their
hearts with food and gladness. As for the general, we are to note, that our
Apostles proceed not here with Aristotle, Arist. 8. Phys.
a motu ad primum motorem, from motion to conclude a first mouer; nor yet with
Patricius, Patrici. Pan. aug. lib. 1.
a lumine ad lucis luminis patrem, from light to prove the author and father of
it; but here they use a strain of Christian Rhetoric, and to gain the
benevolence of their auditors, what arguments are most subject to sense, and
greatliest do affect the heart of man, those they propose to allure them to
acknowledge the true God, to wit, in that he did good. For howsoever we
understand things as they are true, or delight in them because they are fair;
yet whatsoever we affect, we palpably feel it either good in it self, or good
for us. What the Philosopher therefore pronounced in a solemn axiom, as it is
undoubted in seculation, so it is daily experimented in action, bonum est quod
omnia appetunt, Arislot. Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 1.
goodness is that which all things affect. But although goodness be so
desirable, yet that goodness which is here meant in my Text, is not the
goodness that is in God; but that goodness, which is from God; not goodness
in the subject, but in the object; not that which is tanquam lux in lucido, but
that which is tanquam lumen in diaphano. From this good which is done, our
Apostles draw an argument to the Author which does it: for it cannot be, but
that so divine an offspring, must argue a divine Sire, and that so generous an
issue must insinuate unto us somewhat the image and pourtraiture of its noble
Parent. But how proceeds the argument? can the truth of it be discerned by
those only which are purified from offenses, and are right believers? Because
of Israel it is said, he has not done so to any Nation, therefore powers he
his treasures upon none, but such as in sincere effectual and thirsty hearts
seek for him? No, no, (beloved) his goodness no less extends her sphere
then his omnipotency her might; what man ever lived and enjoyed not the heat
and light of this visible Sun; and who ever lived or continued life, but by
the beams of his invisible goodness? they were not Jews but Gentiles, which
our Apostles here deal with; not worshippers of the true God, but a nation
possessed with ignorance, and adorers of foul spirits which they contend with:
yet they obiecting Gods doing good, as a forceable argument to convince even
them of their blind superstition, and gross idolatry, do direct us to this
plain but most profitable observation.

That there are none, if they duly considered it, to whom God exhibites not
evident tokens of his goodness.

Besides the special goodness, wherewith God seems in a more especial
manner to endue his elect, the general goodness which he conferres to all his
creatures, consists in twofold kind, to wit, creando and sustentando, in
creating, and in sustayning them being created. The goodness which he endowes
them withal in their creation, is either absolute, or as the Metaphysickes
terms it, transcendentall, by which, things are good in themselves, as it is
said, God saw every thing that he had made, and behold, it was very good, Genesis
1.3. or else it is respective, by which things are good, and useful in respect
of others. Not that every thing is bonum universal, universally good for all
things (as the Schools well distinguish) but that at least it is bonum
particulare and contractum, every thing is good for something: Hie^on. de ^ed
^is in Thom. p. 1. q. 23. art 3.
Vult Deus omnibus bonum, sed non vult omnibus omne bonum. Whence it comes to
pass, that that which stands in an antipathie with one thing, sympathiseth
with another; and what is poison to one creature, is wholesome food and
nourishment to another. For God composed the order and series of things, like a
verse of Antithetaes, that so by contrary the same ornaments might be in
things which are in words. The not observing of which, gave an advantage to a
Manichie, to persuade an ignorant man (as Saint Austin, Aug. l. 5. de cruit.
Dei, cap. 18.
de Genesi contra Manichcos relates it) to believe, because flies molested him,
quod diabolus fecit muscas, that the Devil made them. The like do the
Manichies of our days, I mean the inconsiderate valuers of Gods benefits,
conceiving that whatsoever squares not with their humors, is not good. But
what says Saint Austin to this? If (says he) an ignorant man chance to enter
the shop of a cunning Artificer, he sees there many instruments whose use he
knows not, and if by chance he falls into a furnace, or cuts himself with a
sharp tool through mishandling it, no doubt but he will judge many things
there to be pernicious, and perhaps superfluous; but the Artificer himself,
because he is his Craftsmaster, and is dextrous in using them, scofs at the
others folly, and contemnes his censure. Now, shall men be so sottish, that in
a Tradesmans shop they may not dispraise what they are ignorant of, but judge
all things they see to be necessary and instituted to some good purpose, and
yet in the world whose Maker and Gonernour is God himself, shall they presume
to censure the things whose causes they know not, and seem to vilify the
instruments of so omnipotent an Artificer? Ego vere (adds the Father) fateor
me nescire quare mures and ranae creata sunt aut muscae, aut vermiculae, video
tamen omnia suo genere pulchra esse, qu^muis ob peccata nostra, multa nobis
videantur aduersa. I confess, I know not why Mice, or Frogs, or Flies, or
Worms were created, but I see that they are all good in their kind, although
for our sins some seem adverse and pernicious unto us. Thus you see, how God
communicates his goodness to al things creando, by creating them, making them
good both absolutely in themselves, and respectively in relation to others; now
how he seconds it, Sustentando, by sustayning them, as every creature is a
witness thereof unto it self, so does the Scripture, as an impartial Judge,
promulge it unto us all. For do we conceive his goodness to extend to the
godly only, and not to the wicked? our Savior will tell us, that he makes
his Sun to rise upon the evil and the good, on the just and on the unjust,
Matt. 5.45. or imagine we his bounty to be confined to men only, and that it
dilates not it self to dumb creatures also and brute beasts? Harken then to
those words of King David, Psalm. 14.5. The eyes of allwait upon thee, O Lord,
and thou give them their meat in due season; thou openest thy hand, and
fillest all things living with plenteousnesse. A true Lover of God therefore
(says Bernard) which way soever he turns himself, has a familiar
admonition of his Creator, he uses al things as a Glass, and from the
Creatures to the Creator, thus musing, he is elevated, Si ista bona dulcia and
pulchra videntur, quae creata cum tempore mutantur, quid bonitatis and
dulcedinis habebit author eorum Deus. If those things seem good and
beautiful, which being made of nothing, are changed with Time; what goodness
and sweetness may we conceive has he, which is Maker and Author of them.

A just reprehension (beloved) for these stupid and senseless times of ours,
wherein most men are so corrupt by nature, so possessed with Ethnicisme, that
more blind then these idolatrous Lystrians, they can be content to let God
every day shower down his goodness in plenty, and yet they will be fresh
Sophisters still, and from sound Premises infer none but indirect
Conclusions. If their affairs go well, they have but their due; if ill, they
will quarrel with Gods goodness. Certainly, should Saint Paul and Barnabas
produce Gods goodness, to induce the Worldlings of our days, to yield Assent
to any Assertion, it would be thought to be but Book learning, and they would
be held to argue a non concessis; For, to say the truth, when commonly men
convert Gods benefits to their own hurt, when from his bounty grows their
impenitencie, from his forbearance their hardness, from his long suffering and
goodness it comes to pass, that they treasure unto themselves (as the Apostle
says) wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
Judgment of God; with what Nails or Goades, think you, do they fasten this
Doctrine to their consciences? How do they heartily acknowledge God to do any
good, when they know no other use of that good, then to convert it to ill? And
yet (beloved) when God left not himself without witness, a thousand ways to
make proof of his Godhead, the Apostles you see in my Text, as if they would
cul out that which was most profitable to be viewed by us, propose only his
doing good, on which to fix our Meditations. I cannot tell what to pronounce
of Solomon, the Scriptures say this of him, 1. King. 3.12.
that there was none such before him, nor any such after him; and yet I know
not, wherein the Lillies of the field excelled him not: Luc. 12.27.
For in all his glory he was not arrayed like one of them; were it not in
this, that he was sensible and apprehensiue of Gods goodness, the other were
not. But what should a Christian look abroad, let him look but within
himself, and from thence he may take a plentiful Theme of Gods goodness;
he needs not talk of transitory benefits, those alone which he feels in his
breast, are enough to detain his cogitations. Basil. in regulis contractiaribus
quest. 15.
Si miserationum Dei multitudo numerari and magnitudo mensurari poterit, says
Basil, if the multitude of Gods mercies might be numbered, and their greatness
measured, then should we but cast our eyes upon the multitude and greatness
of our sins, we might chance to despair; but seeing our sins may be
numbered, and yet his mercies not measured, we may take courage to our selves,
because he ouer-comes our evil with his own goodness. August. Meditat. c. 2.
Not only being offended he strikes not, but to those also which provoke him,
he becomes the Horn of salvation: unhappy as we are, we sin, and he
forbeares to punish: we transgress, and yet he suffers; if we repent, he
spares us; if we return, he receives us; if we linger, he preuents us.

But some will object, how may it be said that God exhibits such evident tokens
of his goodness to all men, when many feel his rod of correction, and in this
life are afflicted with sundry and diverse calamities? I answer (beloved) and
confess, that some times God seems to frown upon us, and to menace us with
utter destruction, but yet when others like drones do gather honey but from
the Hiue, a true Believer should gather it even from Thistles, and when weaker
Vessels bear sail only in a Calm; a true Vessel of Christ's should sail
best to his wished Port in a storm. To say the truth, it is so appointed from
the beginning of the World, that afflictions and fiery trials should always
attend the Church, whilst it wanders in this desert of Sin, but so far are
they from eclipsing the splendour of Gods goodness toward it, that rather they
do the more illustrate it. For whereas all other things by vexation and
oppression do wane and decay, the Church like the Moon when the Sun of
righteousness seems to be most in opposition with it, gives ever the most
light and is at the fullest. It is usual with the Fathers, to compare the
Church of the Arc, August. l. 5. de Baptismo cap. vlt.
because as none were saved from the Deluge, but such as were in the Arc; so
none are delivered from eternal death, but such as are really existing in the
Church; but the similitude holds as well in respect of the Storms and Tempests
that always do accompany it; the more the Floods of afflictions do
increase, the more it is elevated and lifted up toward Heaven. And as it fares
with the Church in general, so does it with each member thereof in particular;
we are all wounded, and need the good Samaritan to refresh us; from the sole
of the foot even to the crown of the head, there is no soundness in us, but
wounds, and bruises, Esaias 1.
and putrefying sores; if therefore we would be healed, we must commit our
selves to our Cherurgeon Christ Jesus, whither he will lance, or sear, or
teint us to the quick, we are to think it tends to our recovery; and if we
may not prescribe an ordinary Physician, by what physic he shall remove the
disease of our body; how may we be so hardy as to prescribe our heavenly
Physician, how he shall deal in the cure of our souls? To think that we
need no Cauteries, no bitter Potions, is to think that we have shook off
that hereditarie disease, which our first Father derived to all his Posterity;
and are we indeed so blind, as to crave Gods mercy, to be freed from the
true Conductors and Guides to our heavenly habitations? Must we with our hearts
look back again toward Egypt, from whence we are freed, because we cannot
attain unto the Land of Canaan, unless we pass through the sandy and
penurious deserts of Arabia? The vulgar, I know, is so mad and inconsiderate,
that when it beholds any of Fortunes Minions, or the Worlds Darlings, it uses
to say, How greatly is this man bound unto God, how good has God been unto
him; for they do measure felicity by those things which are seen by their
bodily eyes, but should we look with the eyes of Faith unto Gods secret
judgments, we should see, that that poor man, that Lazer, that wretch, that
abject and despised creature owes more unto Gods goodness, then the other; for
though all that, which the common sort of men count wretched, were accumulated
upon one man, yet compare but the endless and unspeakable happiness which that
man shall enjoy, and that perhaps by means of these afflictions, with the
momentarie and sophisticate felicity, which others do now possess; and who
would deem that poor man wise, if he should change states upon so hard
conditions, when the rich can hardly part with his wealth, but he must give
the Devil to boot, and his fair Lordships have oftentimes so sore
encumbrances annexed to their tenure, as hell flames. But besides, say that
Gods goodness shined not thus unto us through the mists of afflictions, yet
me thinks, the reward which one day we shall receive for them, if with patience
we abide them, may well persuade us, that it is no Paradoxt to affirm all
crosses, which we endure in this life, to be no less then tokens of Gods
goodness. Does any win the Prize, that strives not for the Masterie? or is
any graced with Conquest, which is loath to enter into the Field? If there were
no Foes to combat with, where were the triumphant Palms of them which follow
the Lamb? if no persecutions, where were the Crown of Martyrdom? if no
toyling in the Vineyard, nor sustayning the brunt of the Day, where were the
Penny at night? I will conclude therefore this Point, with that of the Apostle,
Romans 8.28. We know that all things work together for good, to them that love
God, to them that are called according to his purpose. Vita mihi Christus and
mors lucrum (says S. Paul) to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. If
things go well with us, we will say with the Psalmist, Quam bonus Deus
Israeli; truly, God is good unto Israel; if ill, we will yet Iubilat unto him,
Quoniam bonus, and take up this song in our miseries: It is good for us that
we are afflicted. And so, I pass from Gods benefits in general, in that he
did good, to them here specified in particular (which follow in the last place
to be handled) in that he gave us rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness.

Many of the ancient Copies (says Beza) have not (...), Bez. Annot.
nobis, to us, but (...), vobis, to you; and the Syriake and Arabian
translation imply (...) or (...), ijs, to them: but later translations for the
most part, either omit the pronoune wholly, as the vulgar, or else agree with
ours, and render it dans nobis, giving us rain from Heaven and fruitful
seasons, as Beza and Arias Montanus. Howsoever, the matter is not great, all
concurring in this, that the Lystrians or Gentiles are here to be understood,
and therefore no marvel, if our Apostles by a usual Prosopopaea, speak as it
were, in their own persons, what concerned the persons, of them with whom they
now argued the matter. Many good observations might from hence be gathered; as
first, that seeing God was so bountiful, in conferring such fruitful seasons
and blessed showers from Heaven upon the Gentiles, whom with patience and long
suffering, he permitted to go awry in the way of salvation, and to be
polluted with idolatry, and all sensual conversation; that neither temporal
felicity can be a note of the true Church, as Bellarmine in his fourth Book,
de notis Ecclesiae and eighteenth Chapter, would feign have it; nor yet
plenty, or scarcity, can any way argue the truth or falsehood of a Religion;
which notwithstanding we find suggested in this Kingdom to simple and
ignorant Papists, as an argument of no small consequence. That Argument which
the Jews took up against Jeremiah, chap. 44. verse. 18. Since we left off to
burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto
her, we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by
the famine; the same use many deluded souls against us. All things (say they)
were more plentiful and cheaper, when the old Religion was professed in this
Kingdom, then they are now; we may well retort against them, therefore, that
same Argument, which the Apostles here in my Text press the Lystrians withal.
God, in times past, suffered them to walk in their own ways, to crave
succor of Saints, and implore the aid of Idols and carved Images;
nevertheless, he left not himself without witness, that it was he which did
good, he which gave them rain and fruitful seasons, he which filled their
hearts with food and gladness; he strayned courtesies, as you see, with them, if
possibly he might, by them, turn them from those vanities unto him alone,
which made Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all things that are therein. But
because they make England, as before it masked under Popery, to be such a
pattern of a happy Church. I demand one question, Wherein consisted that
plenty which they so talk of? certainly, so wealthy it was not when the Pope
termed it puteum inexhastum, Matthew. Paris, page 683 423.626.
, a Well never drawn dry, and yet (says Matthew Paris) full often almost
emptied to the bottom by his Procurations, Provisions and Taxes upon the
Clergy and Laytie. To be brief therefore, plenty or cheapnesse can no way
prove their Religion; and I cannot but herein condemn them of an oversight, to
make cheapnesse in the Market, or things out of the Church, to be a note of the
true Religion, and yet to require no cheapnes in things in the Church, there,
Pardons, Dispensations, Masses, Dirges, Absolutions, every thing shall be set
at a rack Rent by his Holiness, and the Church must be feign to borrow its
mark from the Market. Be not deceived (beloved) though we may contend with
any Nation for these out ward blessings, yet we may not obtrude these to our
Adversaries, but purity in Doctrine, and sanctity in life. It was not our
Saviors turning stones into Bread, but urging the Word written, Matthew. 4.
which subdued Satan in the wilderness; plenty and want are common both to good
and bad; and Saint Austin in his Book, de ciuitate Dei, 8. chap. gives the
reason; Vt nec bona cupidius appetuntur, quae mali quoque habere cernuntur, nec
mala turpiter euitentur, quibus and boni plerunque afficiuntur: that neither
these earthly goods should be greedily affected, which we see even wicked men
to possess, nor any evil upon earth to be basely avoided, wherewith we see
even the godliest full often to be afflicted. But of this I spoke somewhat in
the former Part, my purpose is to insist at this time, especially upon the
^^ings mentioned in my Text, the first whereof is, as it were, a general
cause, effecting the rest which follow, but yet exists without a man, he gives
us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons; the rest are effects of the
former, but yet exist within a man; the one touching the body, he fills our
hearts with food; the other concerning the mind, he fills our hearts with
gladness. Seeing therefore, God witnesses himself unto us, both by giving us
things, which belong to us internally and externally, to our bodies and to our
minds, we may well infer this observation.

That whatsoever concerns the happiness or felicity of a man in this life,
is wholly derived from God.

I will prosecute them as they lie in order in my Text: first therefore for
outward blessings, which here are pointed out by the most eminent species of
them, rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons; Paraphrastes Hierosolymitanus
says, Paraphrast. Hieros. in c. 30. Genesis
they are one of the Keys which God delivers neither to Angel nor to
Seraphin: how God effects them, the Schools much labor; I list not to dispute
with Fonseca and Suarez in their Metaphysics, Fonsec. l. 5: Metaph. c. 2. q.
9. Suarez Tom. 1. pisp. 22.
whether the action whereby God produces rain and fruitful seasons, be the
same in number with the action of the Heavens, and other secundarie causes; it
is sufficient, that Gods providence has a hand in all things: we attribute
unto it notwithstanding the ordinary course of nature, effection, direction,
cohibition: in a word, God works not by second causes, as Magistrates govern
their Common wealths by inferior Officers; for they so govern by them, that
they do nothing or very little themselves, and peradventure never know what is
done; God gouernes not the World so, but in every particular work has his
particular stroke. The Heavens indeed are the ordinary instruments whereby he
effects these things, but yet we must remember that they are but second Agents;
concerning which it is a memorable saying of the Philosopher, in the second of
his Metaphys. and second chapter. Omnia secunda agentia it a essentialiter
subijciuntur primo agenti, Aris^ot. 2. Metaph. 2.
vt primum agens in eorum action magis agat, quam ipsa agant; all secundarie
agents are so essentially subordinated to the first Agent, that the first Agent
does more in their action then they themselves. The chief end wherefore God
ordained the heavens, was not for their own sakes, but for man's use; as
therefore they conduce to execute his Decrees toward man, so he either binds
the sweet influences of the Pleyades, or looses the bands of Orion. Job 38.31.
It were long to recount, how often the Lord promises in the Prophets, to
declare his favor toward men, by watering their Fields with dew and rain
from Heaven; and again to testify his indignation, by making the Heavens to
wax hard like Iron and yield no rain, as it did in the time of Ahab; 1. King.
17.
but one thing in the Law and Prophets is worth our observing; when God
fore-tells either rain, fruitful seasons, or times of scarcity; he looks
not upon the stars above, but upon our sins; he gives us to understand,
that the best Almanac, which we should rely upon, is our obedience to him,
our love toward our Neighbors, and our care of our selves. He tells us not of
the conjunctions and oppositions of the Stars, nor the Eclipses of the
greater Lights; but what says he? If thou shall hearken diligently unto the
voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his Commandments, the
heavens shall give the rain into thy land in his season; but if thou will not
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his
commandments and his statutes, the heaven that is over thy head shall be
brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron, the Lord shall make the
rain of thy land powder, and dust, from heaven shall it come down upon thee
until thou be destroyed. Deuteron. 28. O foolish Astrologers, how is it, that
you look upwards toward heaven, to descrie the seasons of succeeding years?
you should look downwards into your selves, the constellations are on earth
which produce these effects; We are those wandering Stars which decline from
the true Ecliptike of Gods Word; We those more earthly Globes which stand in
opposition, or at least, eclipse the light of the Sun of righteousness; We
those irregular Planets which are stationarie, or rather retrograde in the
Sphere of Christianity. There is not Scorpio above, nor Saturn with his
maleuolent influence, believe it, they are below; here are Lions, and Bears,
and Dragons, and Serpents, and Serpentarius's, and Hydraes, and Dog-starres,
and I am almost of Copernicus his opinion, that the Sun stands still in the
Center, and we moving in a Lunatike Orb with the Moon, are the causes of such
direful and menacing aspects, as are above.

The latter benefits that are here specified in my Text, concern man more
inwardly; the first whereof touches his Body, when it is said, He fills his
heart with food, the heart being by a Synecdoche of a part for the whole, taken
for the whole man: because as food is the principal staff of man's life, so
the heart has a principal operation in man's food; for it is Officina
sanguificationis, the very shop, as Aristotle tells us, where our food is
converted into blood. But how far God extends his favor of not only giving,
but also filling (as my Text has it) our hearts with food, may well be
questioned? Abraham is termed just, Genesis 12.10.
in the holy Scripture, and yet we read how he was constrained to change his
habitation for famine; and Saint Paul, who bids us be followers of him, as he
was of Christ, gave yet this testimony of himself, 2. Cor. 11.27.
Often was I in hunger and thirst, in cold and nakedness. Now, if God so deal
with his elect and chosen vessels, which he loves, how may it be said, that he
witnesses his Godhead even unto the Gentiles, a wild Olive which he loves
not, by such ample blessings, as filling their hearts with food? The sum of
that which Interpreters have, for the deciding of this doubt, is this; God is
open handed to all Nations, he fills all things living with his plenteousnesse;
but yet so, that these three rules be observed: The first is, that this filling
be not always understood of an immoderate filling, according to the
insatiable desires of the flesh, this, God oftentimes debarres his own
servants of; but of such a filling, as is sufficient to content our weak
natures withal. The second is, that we perform the condition which God
requires at our hands, that is, that we labor and take pains in a lawful
vocation. The third, that this exception be inserted, quatenus scil. expedire
Deus nouerit, so far God will fill us, as he shall see it to be profitable
and expedient for us.

The last benefit of God, mentioned in my Text, concerns the mind, in that he
fills our hearts with gladness: and here the Heart is likewise taken for the
whole Man: for as the heart has a principal function in converting our food
to our substance, so has it no less a place in exciting and stirring up the
affection of gladness. Philosophy tells us, that as when a man apprehends any
distastefull object, the heart contracts it self, and so the outward members,
wanting the spirits which the heart was wont to send forth, tremble, and wax
pale and wan, and the whole man becomes straight affected with some untunable
passion, so when one conceiues a pleasing object, the heart dilates it self,
and sends forth spirits into the outward parts to prosecute the thing it
likes, whereby the whole man becomes more lively and gladsome then before, in
which respect it may be said, that God which gives content and joy unto a man,
does fill likewise his heart with gladness. Now, there is a double gladness,
the one arising from things temporal; the other, from things eternal; both
come from God, and therefore neither simply to be disproued; but I chiefly
commend to your best endeavors the latter, because without a relation unto it,
the former is neither good nor solid. For if our true gladness were founded
upon things temporal, then (me thinks) wealth, and honor, or authority
should have the principal place in effecting it; if Wealth, then should rich
men never be sad; if Honor and Authority, then should Princes and Monarchs
never be pensive or disquieted; but, O these mortal wights, they fix not
their thoughts so strongly upon the bags they have, as upon those they would
have, or have had and have not; and lo, their gladness is now turned into
sorrow and vexation of spirit. A Princes temples are not so compassed with a
Crown, as his mind besieged with cares, nor is he so lifted up with the
splendor of his train, as cast down with the multitude of his fears. The
heart of man therefore (as some wittily note) is made of the form of a
triangle, but the world is round, implying, that if the heart of man should
contain the whole world within it, yet as a circle comprehended within a
triangle, cannot fill the triangle so completely, but that always there will
be left void spaces in the angles or corners for more to be put in; so can it
not be, that the heart should be so filled or satisfied with the world, but
that always it would crave something above it, and something beyond it. Now,
if it be true which Mathematicians teach us, that numbers in Arithmeticke do
bear a proportion to figures in Geometry, this small triangle of man, the
Heart, must be filled by the fruition of that glorious Trinity which created
it. Transitory blessings may indeed a little content it; but yet they leave
corners for sorrows, and troubles, and anguishes to harbor in: the sacred
Trinity fills all the rooms, leaves no chinke for distractions to creep in;
of all the men therefore, that I know, he only which contemplates that
Majesty, is filled with true gladness; for, how can any spark of discontent
seize upon that breast, where there is Fountain of living water, and where God
has founded a whole Ocean of joy to extinguish it.

To come to my conclusion: You have seen Natures testimonial of the Godhead,
and how she has described him, and pourtraited him out in his Robes of
goodness: you have beheld him opening the windows of Heaven, to give you
rain, and fruitful seasons; and stretching forth his hand, to give you food:
you have viewed him filling your Cellers with Wine, to glad your hearts; and
your Cruzes with Oil, to give you cheerful countenances: what remaynes, but
(what was the Apostles counsel to the Lystrians in this place) that with
thankfulness and gratefulness we should turn unto him, who has by so many
benefits witnessed himself unto us. Be not deceived (beloved) I mind not to
dissuade you, either from worshipping, or adoring those gods which the Apostles
with such zeal dissuaded the Lystrians from: thanks be to God, you have not
so learned Christ, as to want Instructers in this matter. But, alas, these
times of ours, are more dangerous and difficult to correct, then those of old;
by forgetting the true Author of all these worldly blessings, how many do
assume the glory thereof to themselves, and take themselves, as it were, for
that Image fallen down from Jupiter? We complain not with Micha, Judge. 18.2.
You have taken away the gods which I made, and what have I more, but you adore
not that God which I am; we do not, as Hermes writes of himself, call spirits
by Art Magic into Statues, nor allure them by direful spells into the
Images of deceased Heroes: August. de ciu^tate Dei lib. 8. and 26.
no, we are apt enough to conceive them in our own brains, to dress Altars,
and erect Shrines to our own Genius's. Does our stock multiply and increase,
or are our fields fatted with dew and rain from Heaven, we think not upon the
Cause above, but our own providence or industry here beneath, these are the
gods (O Israel) which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. Exodus 32.8.
Are our Garners stored with food, or our hearts through any earthly promotion
filled with gladness, we go no further; what though Saturn be dejected from
his Throne, Plutus be confined to Hell, Phehus resign his Chariot, the world
yet shall want no gods to worship, We our selves will be Jupiters and
Mercuries, Act. 14.
come down in the likeness of men. A shame it is for us Christians, amongst
whom God should be all in all, that we can be content to attribute the most to
our selves, the rest to fortune: Is it so, that we so lately abandoned Rome,
and rescued our selves from the worship of the Beast, and are we now relapsed
again so suddenly to a new Idolatry? Do we think much to invoke and adore
those glorious Stars of the Empyriall Heaven, the Saints and Angels, and
shall we be so sordid, as to give divine worship to dust and ashes? Where is
the zeal of the Apostles in these our days? Whither is the godly indignation
of those patterns of true humility proscribed? I wish you not (beloved) as
they did, to rent your clothes; they are but superfluities in our times; rent
you your hearts. I desire you not to run amongst the people, or to contend with
a headie multitude; take a shorter journey, run but to your selves, cry out
but to your selves, and be the first that shall witness to your own souls,
That it is God only, which has done you good, and gave you rain from heaven,
and fruitful seasons, and filled your hearts with food and gladness: tell me,
whosoever thou be, that make an Idol of thy self; has God left himself
without witness, to prove, in despite of pride, that thou owe him for
whatsoever good thing thou possessest? tell me, if thou be so stupid, as not
to feel the testimony of thine own conscience, which should be a thousand
witnesses unto thee, whether yet thou can avoid the clamorous cries even of
tonguelesse creatures? God has been bountiful unto many Nations; France may
boast her fertility; Spain, her wealth; Italy, her beauty and magnificence:
but England has had an happy and peaceable State, of long continuance, under
most gracious and virtuous Princes; and these will tell thee, that God has not
witnessed himself so to any Nation, in doing good. But good may many ways be
enjoyed, there may be peace at home, and war abroad; plenty of gold and
silver, enough to lend unto our neighbors, and yet we may have a famine upon
our Land, lightnings and hailestones to consume the fruits of the earth, as it
was in Egypt, but the blessed times which we have enjoyed will tell thee, that
he has not left himself without witness likewise, in giving us rain, and
fruitful seasons: But say, we have fruitful seasons, yet inter pocula
extremaque labra multa cadunt, intestine commotions may bereave us of our
harvest, foreign invasions may make us turn our Mattockes into Spears, and
our Sythes into Swords, but God has affoorded us hitherto this testimonial of
his bounty, that he left not himself without witness, in filling our hearts
with food also. But when we have our desire satisfied in all these, that God
witnesses himself unto us, in doing good many ways, in giving us rain, and
fruitful seasons, and filling our hearts with food; yet for all this, our
Harp may be turned into mourning, and our Organ into the voice of them that
weep; there may be subtle whisperings, rebellious doctrines, Iudaslike
practices, traitorous attempts upon the pillars both of Church and
Commonwealth; but he which keeps Israel, neither slumbreth nor sleeps;
the wicked he has made to fall into the pits they invented for others, and
this generation may tell it unto another, that God has not left himself
without witness unto us, in filling our hearts with gladness also. To him
therefore, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, one God, and three
Persons, be rendered all Praise, Honor, and Glory, Might, Majesty, and
Dominion, both now and for evermore.

Amen.
PAVLS PEREGRINATIONS, OR THE TRAVELERS GVIDE. Delivered in a Sermon at Paul's
Cross. Anno 1617.

BY EDWARD CHALONER, Doctor of Divinity, and Fellow of ALLSOVLES College in
OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed by W. STANSBY, 1623.

PAVLS Peregrinations, OR The Travelers Guide.
ACT. 17. VERSE. 23. For as I passed by, and beheld your devotions, I found an
Altar with this inscription, to the unknown God.


I Know not, how the Pens of Heathen writers have so bewitched the judgments
of many men, that even amongst Christians themselves, they have found not a few
Patrons. To omit Viues and Erasmus, who having made their Lines their Consorts
and Companions in this pilgrimage on earth, pronounce with no small touch of
affection, that one day they shall enjoy likewise their sweet company and
society in Heaven. Petrarch in the third of his Inuectiues, goes thus far,
Se non credere aliquem de Philosophis aut Poetis idola coluisse, that it cannot
sink into his thoughts, that any either of the Poets or Philosophers
worshipped Idols. And certainly, I was almost persuaded, that divine
Philosophy would have preserved her Professors from vulgar infections, or at
least have wrought her Disciples to a more ready acceptance of higher
mysteries, till I found her Royallest Palace, renowned Athens, so defiled with
Idols, and Saint Paul himself so banded and oppugned by a rout of Epicures and
Stoikes. How it should come to pass, that humane learning, forgetting as it
were, that divine Original it had, should unnaturally bend it self against
Gods Divinity; whether, because like the Sunnebeames lighting upon gross and
earthy subjects, it does recoile back again upon the Fountain and Efficient;
or that aspiring to discover the secrets of the Godhead, and wanting the light
of the Gospel to direct it, the farther it wades, the farther it draws the
mind of man from the mark, and makes its return the more tedious; or that
God, to confound the wise in their wisdom, and the prudent in their prudencie,
does oftentimes conceal that knowledge from the Learned, which he reueales to
Babes and Sucklings, I stand not now to discuss: In no place can we have a
more notorious instance to confute that old opinion, that Arts and Disciplines
have no Enemies but the Ignorant, then here, where we see the noblest of Arts
of Disciplines, even Divinity it self, assaulted by two most famous Sects of
Philosophy. Every where did Saint Paul find (...), Tit. 1.12. Act. 20.29.
evil Beasts; (...), and grievous Wolves, and yet I know not which seemed more
difficult unto him, whether that, when he fought with Beasts at Ephesus, after
the manner of men, or this, when he is encountered by Philosophers at Athens,
after the manner of Beasts. That we may allow the Epicures deboistnesse and
rudeness, which yet Epicurus himself (if we may believe Seneca) would not
have brookt in his Scholars; Senec. de vita beata, c. 13.
yet then, where was that composed gravity of the Stoiks? where that modesty
and civility, Lips. Manuduct. ad Stoic. Philos. l. 1. d. 10.
which Zeno and Chrysippus taught in their Schools? the Theme they argue, no
less then the salvation of their souls, and yet with less seriousness
discussed by them then Problemes in Sophistry; Lips. ib. lib. 3 dissert. 7.
the Agents against Paul, such as proclaimed passions to be vices in Nature,
and incompatible with the temper of a wise man; and yet see, who more vainly
breaks out now (as if morality consisted merely in speculation) into terms
of passion, then these? (...); What will this Babbler say? But their fury
stays not here; I see that Arts and Sciences do not always mollify the
rough inclinations of men, one would think that Philosophy her self grew
cruel, to see such a troup of her followers lay violent hands upon Saint Paul,
and to dragge him from the place where he disputed as a Doctor in the Schools,
to a Tribunal, where he must change his Forms, and plead his Cause as a
Prisoner at the Bar. To say little of the judgment place, where you may
suppose our Apostle now standing, it was the famous Senate of the Areopage, a
noble Court, a more noble Cause; much might we conceive of the Plea of this
blessed Prisoner, which was both party accused and Advocate to himself; no
Demosthenes was entertained to power forth his streams of eloquence in his
Cause; no thundering Pericles was found, to open his mouth in his defense; for
what? that dabitur in illa hora, which Christ bequeathed to his Disciples, was
that, which could make Paul a perfect Orator, and an Orator powerful; he
needed no penned Oration to affect the minds of his Auditors, for he at whose
voice the depths and foundations of the Earth are shaken, did speak in him;
But I must remember where it was that Saint Paul pleaded his Cause. It was not
in the Forum at Rome, Vlpian, in Orat. Demosth. de falsa legate.
where the 12 Accuser had but six hours allotted him to accuse, and the Guilty
nine hours to make his answer; but it was in the Areopage at Athens, where
the Adversary might freely accuse, but the Defendant only speak to what was
objected, and Laconike-breuitie had been Leeger in that Court so long, that
Proems themselves (says Sigonius) were proscribed the Verse, Sigon. de Repub.
Athen. lib. 3.
and disvsed by the Orators of that City. To frame therefore, any long
Preface, in handling our Apostles Cause, especially before another Areopage,
might seem both improper and impertinent. Wherefore, to come to the words
themselves; the whole Oration is but to convince the Athenians of idolatry and
superstition, my Text is an instance by way of induction, to confirm his
Thesis or Position in that Point; the sum whereof, if we should consider it
in it self, is a relation of his Topographicall observations in his abode at
Athens, whilst he walked the streets, not like that Cynick, to find an honest
man at noone, by the light of a candle, but to discover the traps and
machinations of Satan, at a midnight of ignorance by the light of the Gospel.
The things therein contained, according to the Apostles terms, are two: first,
(...), what he beheld: and secondly, (...), in beholding what he had found:
the one subordinate to the other. In the things he is said to behold, we may
consider, first, the things themselves, their devotions: and secondly, the
prudencie and cautelousnesse which he used in beholding them, as he passed by.
In the things he found, we are likewise to note, what it was, it was an Altar;
and the title it had, An inscription to the unknown God. Of these in order, as
God shall enable me, and your Christian patience permit me: and first, for the
things he beheld, and the prudencie which he used in beholding them; which
for the better explaning of either, I shall handle together in the first place.
As I passed by, I beheld your denotions, etc.

Whether it be lawful or no, to view and behold the superstitious Rites of
Idolators, is much controuerted, both by the Fathers, Aug lib. de Haeres. c.
70. Euseh. lib. 6. hist c 28. Adri n. 4. Seul. q. 1.
Schoolmen, and modern Writers. The Priscillianists and Elcesaites, thought
it lawful in any case to dissemble ones faith, and for the outward act to
join ones self to Idolators. Adrianus, upon the fourth of the Sentences,
agrees with them, so it be when Gods honor is not dimi^ished thereby, nor our
Neighbors eduication subtracted, who indeed in this could not be so much
blamed, were it not that he supposes some outward act of idolatry may be
committed, and yet neither Gods honor thereby impared, nor weak ones
offended. The most therefore hold the negative part to them, so far as it
touches any joining or communicating with them in their actions, but yet for
naked inspection, or mere presence, they hold the affirmative and positive
with some limitations. These words of Saint Paul contain the whole state of
the question, should we but narrowly look into them. The Position is plainly
proved, in that he says, I beheld your devotions; the original has it,
(...), which Vatablus and Erasmus turn, culturas vestras, your worshippings;
the vulgar, simulachra vestra, your Images; but both somewhat scantling the
extent of the word, as Beza notes, Beza Annot. ad loc.
for neither does (...) imply the Image alone, or alone the worshipping of it,
but rather both, so that Saint Paul seems not to limit himself in this place,
from beholding either the one or the other. The limitations are found,
contained in the former words, As I passed by, etc.

Where we may observe First, The manner of his seeing. It was so that he might
give no offense nor scandal to any; it was (...), as he passed by, etc.

Where we may observe Secondly, The Person, who beheld. It was not a weak
Brother, which was in danger to receive infection, either for lack of knowledge
or courage, it was the Apostle; As I passed by, etc.

Where we may observe Thirdly, The occasion of his looking on. It was not any
idolatrous motion, but his way or passing by, As I passed by, etc.

So then, you see, with what cautions the Apostle, and by his example, every
good Christian may take a view of the ceremonies of other Religions, it must be
for the manner without offense, for the Person without danger of perverting,
and for the occasion, it must be a civil respect and not any idolatrous
purpose; but first for the Position.

The Position seems to sound, that to be present at idolatrous ceremonies, or
to view and take a full sight of their superstitions, is a thing in it self
not wholly unlawful. But the easier it will appear, if we make a comparison
between what Saint Paul did now at Athens, and what the Scriptures do
testify, has been done by the Saints at other times. To omit therefore
violent coaction, when by constraint or force a man is compelled to be present
at such superstitions, of which there is no question; do we not read how a
Prophet of the Lords, was sent to tell his errand to Jeroboam, as he stood by
the Altar, sacrificing to his Calves, 1. King. 13. how Eliah beheld the
Baalites offering incense unto their Baal, and that from early morning to
noone-tide, and that without disturbing them, 1. King. 18. how Moses refused
not to be present at the enchantments of the Egyptian Sorcerers, Exodus 7. nor
the three Children at the adoration of the golden Image, Dan. 3. I press not
this (beloved) as if I maintained any semblance or show of idolatry in any
man, or the least badge of dissimulation in a Christian, it is the Doctrine of
lies (says Saint Austin, in his Book de Mendacio) asserere quod liceat
diaboli culium mentiri in corpore, quando Dei cultus seruatur in cord, to
affirm that it is lawful, to counterfeit the Devils worship in the body,
when we cloister up the worship of God as a reclused Votarie in the soul. Let
such juggling be the badge of Equivo^^tors and mental Reseruers. Yet let me
say, that he is no discreet Captain, which plods only upon his own rank,
and reflects not his eye sometimes upon his Enemies order and disposure. Saint
Paul knew well, that he was to rescue Athens, not from Romes jurisdiction, but
from the Devils tyranny; he understood, how that he was to subdue the
Gentiles to Christ, and to captiuate their minds to the obedience of the Faith,
and therefore as a politic General, he pryes into the weaknesses of the
Adversary; he looks about him, to see what quarter the Devil had left
unfortified with the strength of seeming Arguments, what Tower he might batter
down upon the Enemies head. Here the Devil had erected an Altar, and see,
Saint Paul puts him to flight with the stones thereof, on which he had espied
an inscription, To the unknown God.

Thus then may you perceive the liberty which Saint Paul assumed, in beholding
these devotions of the Athenians. But this were to give the reins to all
licentious impiety, should we here rest. The limitations therefore or
cautions used by him, are to be considered. The first whereof (as before I
showed you) concerns the manner; it was so that he might give no offense to
the weak Ones, neither to the Jew nor to the Gentile: He well knew, what his
new Conuerts might object unto him; thou teach us to fly idolatry, and
lo, thou thy self art become a worshipper of Idols; he was not ignorant what
Peter might have cast in his teeth, Thou withstoodsts me to the face at
Antioch, for playing the Jew with the Jew, and the Gentile with the Gentile;
why do thou now become an outward Professor of Gentilisme? he viewes these
things therefore only, tanquam aliud agens, as if he minded nothing less then
to give any observance unto the Idol; no man could say, Paul, thou art out of
thy way; what he beheld, was (...), as he passed by. Neither was Saint Paul
more rigid or scrupulous, in this case of conscience, then his fellow Saints:
for when the Prophet came to the Altar of Jeroboam, what else did he then
declaime against it; or Eliah, then mock and deride the Baalites; or Moses,
then contend with the Egyptians; or the three Children, then by refusing to
worship the Idol, profess against it? Nor was the Case much differing with S.
Paul, Act. 28. when he passed the Seas in that Ship, called the Castor and
Pollux; no doubt, the Gentiles coming aboard, omitted not according to the
Heathen custom, to implore the propitious conduct of those gods, and though
Saint Paul's behavior be in that place silenced by the Evangelist, yet we
need not think but that he observed, what once he had given in Lesson to the
Corinthians, that they should take heed, 1. Cor. 8.9, 10, 11.
lest by any means their liberty should become a stumbling block to them
that are weak, or that through their knowledge, should the weak Brother
perish, for whom Christ dyed. Sometimes indeed, that Rule of Gregory's and
Beda's concerning scandalls, may hold plea, Greg. hom. 7 in Ezech. Bed. in cap.
9. Ma^c.
that vtilius scandalum nasci permittitur, quam veritas relinquatur, it is more
profitable that a scandal should be permitted, then a truth forsaken: but we
must here distinguish (say the Schoolmen) first, between scandalum
pusillorum, Thom. 2.2. q. 43. art. 7. Catet. and Greg. de Valent. ib. Alex. ab
Ales, part. 2. q. 169.
a scandal of weak ones, and scandalum phariseorum, a scandal given to
perverse and obstinate refragants. Secondly, between things necessary and
things indifferent. In respect of the malicious and wilful Pharisie, he gives
the scandal, which to please him, will make things indifferent to be
necessary, or necessary indifferent; but in respect of the weak ones or
children in the Faith, which had need (as the Apostle has it) of Milk, and
not strong meats, we must relinquish and omit, though not any necessary
duty, yet any indifferent action. In a word, to avoid a scandal (says
Hierome) we must forsake any thing that may be omitted, Alex. ab Ales ibid:
Gloss. interlin in 15. Matthew.
salua triplici veritate, a threefold truth, being not endamaged thereby, to
wit, Vita, Institia, and Doctrina, of Life, Justice, or Doctrine.

So then, you see the manner of his beholding, it was without offense; would
you see the person which beheld; it was a stout and hardy Champion of our
Faith, which had the whole Armor of Christ complete upon him, it was Saint Paul
himself; As I beheld. It had need be a pure ray of that Sun of
Righteousness, which should insinuate it self into the filth of things
sublunarie, and yet receive no pollution from them, no taintment. These senses
of ours are well termed the cinq Ports of the Soul, at which Death lands all
her Agents, Pleasure, Profit, Splendour, Ease, and yet of all others we may say,
Mors intrat per fen^stras, when the rest of the senses are slower in receiving
these Guests, the Sight, as being quickest in apprehending, admits them within
the Haven ere the Soul have warning, or be in a readiness, to resist them. If
Platoes assertion had been true philosophy, Plato in Timaee.
that visus fit extramittendo, our seeing is made by darting out the visiue
instruments to the object, there might perhaps have been some hope left, that
the things we see and behold, should have no hurtful operation upon our
faculties, but seeing our sight exercises it self intramittendo, Arist. lib.
2. de Anim. c. 7.
by suffering those Basiliskes to enter into us, and sease upon us, and leave
their poisonous impressions within us; I appeal, if that complaint of the
Poets may not justly too often be taken up, Cur aliquid vidi, cur noxia lumina
feci? Ovid.
But who then, will you ask, may be a competent spectator of these things; I
answer, he which with Paul has a sufficient gratia, a courageous heart, and a
discerning eye; no man can see the Beam in his Brothers eye, whilst a Beam
remaynes in his own; we read in latter Astronomers, that in the most glorious
of the Planets some spots appear, by the help of perspectiue instruments,
which the dullness of our sight cannot attain unto; and may we not well
conclude, that in the mists of superstition, far more spots and blemishes may
lie hid, which the blindness of many men's understandings conceales from them.
We could not enough deride the folly of him, which would encounter his Foe
without Armor, drink poison without Antidotes, enter a Pesthouse without
preservatives; and shall we deem them better advised, which expose their
souls to the blows, drugs, and infectious breaths of Idol worshippers
without sufficient safeguard? and yet me thinks a greater folly is here
committed when men altogether blind, undertake to judge of colors, and so are
many in these days, inpoints of difference, so easy to be deluded; the mark
oftentimes lies quite contrary to their aim, and yet they doubt not but to
hit it: much like blind Catullus, in the Poet,

Nemo magis rhombum stupuit, Iuuenal.
nam plurima dixit,
In laeuum conuersus, at illidextra iacebat, -- Bellua.
But let us come then, in the last place, to sift the occasion which brought
our Apostle to come where these devotions of the Athenians were done: he
intimates that his way lay by them, they stood, as it were, in his passage, so
that, the occasion of his approach thither was not idolatrous, to worship; but
rather civil, to see them; or rather, to dispatch his affairs. This seems to
have been the case of Naaman the Syrian, when he besought Elisha to beseech
the Lord for him, if when he entered the house of Rimmon, and he (not to
worship the Idol) but only to perform his civil function, which was, to
sustain his master walking or kneeling, did bow himself when his master bowed
before the Idol; without which action (says Abulensis) Non poterat sustentare
dominum flectentem genua, Toslat. in 4. Reg. 6.5.
he could not have borne his master up, when he bended his knee; that then the
Lord would be merciful unto him in that one thing. This was the doubt, moved
(as Sleidan, in the seventh of his comment. has it) by a Duke of Saxony to
the Protestant Divines, when according to his place, he was cited by Charles
the Fifth, to bear the Sword before him going to Mass, and it was thus
resolved, that he might lawfully do it, quod ad suum officium esset enocatus,
non ad Missam velut ad culium druinum, because he was cited to be present at
the Mass, only to perform his office, and not to commit any divine worship.
And to this purpose is that which Teriullian concludes, Tertull lib. de ido
olat.
where handling the question, whether it were lawful to be present at the
inuestitures of Heathens with the virill Gown, as also at their Sponsals and
Nuptials, because Sacrifices were wont to be offered at such solemnities; That
for so much as Idolatry had environed the world with evils, Licebit (says
he) adesse inquibusdam quae nos homini non Idolo officiosos habent, si propter
sacrificium vocatus adsistam, ero particeps idololatriae, si me alia causa
coniungit sacrificanti, ero tantum spectator sacrificij, it is lawful to be
present in some things which import an officious respect to the man, and not to
the Idol, if being called to the Sacrifice it self, I come, I am partaker of
the Idolatry; if some other cause ioynes me to him which sacrifices, I shall
be only a spectator of the Sacrifice. The like judgment he gives of
Servants, Children, and Subjects, which perform civil duties to their Lords
and Parents at such ceremonies, Tostat. lot^ sup. cit.
and no less thinks Tostatus, and Peter Martyr of captive Maids, whose office
is, Pet. Martyr in 2. Regum 6.5.
to bear up their Mistresses trains to the Temples of Idols, so that no sign
or token be given by them of the least respect or reverence to the Idol.

Hitherto we have traced Saint Paul, as he walked the streets of Athens, we
have observed his gestures, carriage, and demeanor. I would to God, that whom
men presume to follow in seeing these novelties, they could as well imitate in
his prudent and cautelous seeing of them, Non omnes Pauli sumus, all have not
Paul's constancy, nor his knowledge, at quot sunt Petri, how many are there
which have Peter's timiditie? How many which like Balam, ask counsel of God in
things they know forbidden by him? It was a noble answer of Cyprians, which
Austin relates of him, Aug. sermon. in natali Cypriani. com. 10.
when the Proconsul put it to his choice, whether he would renounce his Faith,
at least in words, or sustain death, in re tam iusta nulia est consultatio, in
so just a cause there is no place left for consultation. What, no place for
consultation? why then, a Nicodemite of our Age would reply, that
Christianity seems of all Sects the cruellest, which will bear no corriuals,
nor allow her professors any guard but naked Truth, for preservation of their
lives and liberty? But these observe not the magnificencie and bounty of
their Mistress; they aim at the society of men, she tells them of the
company of Angels; they meditate upon these rotten and decaying tenements upon
Earth; she wishes them rather those firm mansion houses in Heaven, they would
content themselves with vnder-offices, she shows them the dominion over ten
Cities; they plead for their Provinces, she Kingdoms; they desire a life which
leads unto death, she counsels rather to accept of that death which assures
them of life. But this counsel fits them best whom necessary occasions
detain in Athens, as for those which to satisfy their vnsatiat appetites in
curiosities, intrude themselves voluntarily into such perils, Cyprians sermon.
de lapsis.
that of Cyprians suits more fitly, He may complain of torments which is
overcome of torments, and pretend pain for his excuse, whom pain has
vanquished, sed hic non fides congressa cecidit, sed congressionem perfidia
praeuenit, nec excusat oppressum necessitas criminis, vbi crimen est
voluntatis: but here Faith fayles not being encountered, but the encounter
perfidiousnesse prevented, nor does necessity excuse the guilty, where the
fault is voluntary. But they dissemble (they will pretend) to discover the
mysteries of iniquity. Weak impiety, thou see them perhaps commit folly,
but in the mean time, see not that thou thy self committest greater
villainy: thou may observe them woshipping, like these Athenians, a god whom
they know not; but alas, thou obseruest not that thou denyest a God which thou
know: thou may perhaps discrie in them some treachery to thy state, and
yet discriest not that thou thy self art more treacherous to thy God: thou
may be proud that thy papers are replenished with vanities of others, and
lo, thy heart more black then thy ink is dyed with perfidiousnesse of thine
own. In a word, when thou art returned home; thou have a few sheets to show of
their absurdities; and whole volumes, were they written, of thine own
impieties. Mistake me not (beloved) I intend not by this discourse, to condemn
traveling; but to propose Saint Paul, Ortel. pereg. D. Pauli.
whose peregrinations have filled a Map of more then half the inhabired
World, to be a pattern to travelers. Ambroslib 1. Epist. ep. 6.
Ambrose upon those words of Esaias, Vae ijs qui descendunt in Aegyptum, Woe be
to those which go down into Egypt: Non vtique (says he) transire in
Aegyptum criminosum est; sed transire in mores Egyptiorum, transire in little
persidiam, escae cupiditatem, luxuriae defor mitatem, qui eo transit,
descendit; and qui descendit, cadit. I English it. It is not criminous or
unlawful to go into Egypt; but, to go into the manners of the Egyptians, to
go into their perfidiousnesse, to lust after their Pepins and Onions, he
which so goes thither, does descend; Vid. Calvin. opusc.
and who descends, falls. I am not ignorant how far Divines allow a
Traveler, to suit and conform himself to the fashions of Idolaters; as
first, in civil things, which are common to their Nation, not notes of their
Idolatry: Tertull. lib. de idololat.
such as Tertullian terms, Natiuitatis insignia, non pietatis; generis, non
honoris; ordinis, non superstitionis: Distinctions of their births or families,
not of any idolatrous honor or authority; and marks of their order, not of
superstition. Secondly, in things which though they be necessarily imposed upon
the conscience, yet in themselves are indifferent, as abstayning from certain
meats, or observing of certain days, which the Apostle mentions in the 1. Corinthians. so that we give no sign of agreement in subiecting the conscience to
them; but in these we must go ad aras vsque, till our Faith interposeth her
right, when that is touched or questioned, no man may be still or silent; he
which has a tongue to speak, he must speak; he which has ears to hear,
he must hear; he that has hands to lift up, he must lift them up; neither
action, voice, nor gesture may be deficient in a cause which so nearly
concerns our Lord and Master. Tertul. ibid.
Quid refert (says Tertullian) Deos nationum dicendo Deos an audiendo
confirms. What matters it, whether thou confirmest the Gods of the Nations by
speaking or by hearing. The Lord might have commanded his people, as Baruch
has it, when ye see in Babylon gods of silver, and of gold, and of wood,
borne upon men's shoulders, which cause the Nations to fear; say ye in your
hearts, O Lord, we must worship thee. Ier. 10.11.
But Jeremiah in his tenth Chapter and the eleventh Verse, tells the remnant of
Judah, this must not serve the turn; it is not enough that the heart speak,
but the tongue also must tell Babels Inhabitants. The gods that have not made
the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from
under these heavens. In which words, one thing is worth the observing, that
whereas all the rest of Jeremy is written in Hebrew, this Verse alone is
written in the Chaldaicke Tongue; Calvin. in loc.
to note, (say Interpreters) that though the Israelites were now in captivity
and bondage under the Babylonians, yet the profession of their Faith should be
free and ingenuous still, and they should boldly defy the Babylonians Idols,
even in the language of Babel, that these Idolaters might understand it. If
therefore we would (as Saint Paul here in my Text did) walk up and down
Athens, I mean any place given to Idolatry, if we would as freely as he,
take an inventory of their superstitions, let us make his constancy,
knowledge, and prudencie, companions to us in our travels; the former, lest we
hurt our selves; the later, lest we offend our brethren; Tertul. ib.
What Tertullian spoke of Heathens, Licet conuiuere cum Ethnicis, commori non
licet; I may say of any Idolaters, it is lawful to live with them, not to die
with them. Let us live with all men, and rejoice with them in the community of
Nature, not of Superstition, pares anima sumus non disciplina, compossessores
mundi, non erroris, we are alike in soul, not in discipline or doctrine,
joint possessors of the world, but not of error. And so I come from the things
he beheld, their devotions, to what in beholding he found, an Altar with an
inscription to the unknown god; but first of the thing it self, the Altar,
and afterward of the Title. I found an Altar, etc.

That it was lawful for the Gentiles to erect Altars, and offer sacrifices
needs no proving, for before the L^uitical law were these in practice amongst
the Patriarchs. Abel and Cain, before the Flood, are mentioned to have
sacrificed though Altars are not there expressed; but since the Flood, Noah is
said to have offered sacrifices, and also to have built an Altar, Genesis 8. Now,
though Altars and Sacrifices were of such antiquity and generality amongst
the Nations, yet as Tostatus notes, Tostat. in 16. Leuit.
the case between the Jews and the Gentiles, in offering them was differing;
for the Gentiles might sacrifice; first, where they would: secondly, with what
living Creatures they listed, so as clean: thirdly, with what ceremonies they
pleased, so as decent; whereas the Jews were limited and restrained for the
Place, to the Sanctuary; for the Oblations, to certain Creatures; and for
Rites, to such as were prescribed in the Mount. The main doubt is, how the
Gentiles, which were ignorant of that immaculate sacrifice, Christ Jesus, of
whose cross the Altar was but a type and shadow, should light and jumpe upon
so fit a ceremony. I am not ignorant, that many men are of diverse minds and
opinions concerning it, but I take that the sum of all in brief spoken by
them, may be this. Partly, they might use them by Tradition, from those which
had been the first planters of Colonies in the World, after the confusion of
Babel, and had themselves seen them observed by Noah and other Patriarchs
which then lived: partly, they might creep in by the Devils cunning, who the
sooner to cloak his devices, and to paint them over with fair colors, turns
oftentimes Gods Ape, and imitates him in his best actions: partly, they might
be entertained by men's policy, which the better to keep the people in awe,
and to knit them the more firmly together, did invent certain rites and
ceremonies for that purpose, amongst which these of Altars and Sacrifices,
seemed to work more impression in men's minds, then the rest: Vt quos ratio non
posset, eos adofficium religio duceret (says the Orator) that whom reason
could not persuade, those Religion might master: partly, they might receive
much furtherance from men's consciences, which being guilty of rebellion to
God, did questionless, promote and advance these Altars, as who should say,
that by a Sacrifice on an Altar, must the Maker of Heaven and Earth be
reconciled unto his creatures. But natural reason could not direct them the
way, to find out the true scope and buit, at which all the Sacrifices and
Altars did tend, Quamuis homo norit Deum esse, and esse optimum maximum, non
norit tamen patrem in filio reconciliatum (say Divines) though man by the light
of nature knows that there is a God, and that this God is Goodness it self,
yet the Father reconciled in the Son, he knows not. No man knows the Father
but the Son, nor the Son, but he to whom he has revealed him. These
things were wonders to the blessed Angels, much more are they mysteries unto
natural men. Nature rather showed the necessity of a Sacrifice; then what
that Sacrifice should be, it read, as it were, a Lecture unto man of his
wretchedness, but bade him go to the Schools of the Prophets to learn the
remedy; so that in conclusion of all, it brought him unto death, something
must die for him, but there left him. Whereupon it was, that the Gentiles, in
this thick mist of ignorance, being not able to see the mark at which their
Altars did aim, fell foully short and wide in applying them; first, in
attributing to the Sacrifices, which they offered upon the Altar, a virtue,
somewhat resembling the Papists opus operatum, to pacify the indignation of
God; Thure Deum placa, appease God with Frankincense (says the Poet) they
considered not, that from us to God the way is impassable, if God himself be
not our way, whereby to come thither. Secondly, they failed in the end, in not
respecting in all these things the death of Christ: the Poets question should
have been better canuassed by them, Cum sis ipse nocens moritur cur victima
pro te, seeing that thou art guilty; tell me why the Beast dies for thee?
this indeed should have been their protestation, That whereas the silly
innocent Beasts did suffer death, it was they themselves which deserved it both
in body and soul, and therefore without a further reference, then the shedding
of the blood of a Beast; well might Lucian deride Jupiter for delighting in the
smell of carcasses: and it was truly said of Hierocles, that their Sacrifices
were to the fire but a feeding thereof with fuel and vapors, and to the
Priests a superfluous maintenance of butcherie, I will add, and to their
Altars an institution but of a new shambles.

Thus have you briefly seen the lawfulnes of Altars amongst the Gentiles,
their original, and withal the abuse of them: let us now travel from Athens
into England, from the World under the Law, to the World under the Gospel, and
consider what it is, wherein we are to imitate these Gentiles; concerning their
Altars, and what it is wherein we must leave and forsake them. Altars, as they
are properly so taken, for those on which the typical or supposed real
Sacrifices were offered, are now ceased and taken away. Our Savior, when he
was lifted up upon the Cross, bad Altars to be beaten downs; when he rent
the veil of the Temple, the Earthquake shook their foundation; when he died,
their parts were acted and went out. The Papists, that they may scrue the Pope
farther into the mystery of iniquity, will have him maintayn one Lesson,
which themselves confess to be a note of Antichrist, and that is, that Jewish
ceremonies are not yet ceased, at the least in matters of Sacrifices and
Altars. But perhaps they had rather be beholding to the Gentiles for them. For
if we would believe Cardinal Baronius, Baron. Annal. ad ann. Dom. 44.
we may see their lustrall water, and sprinkling of Sepulchers, in Iuuenals
sixth Satyr; Lights in Sepulchers, in Suetonius's Octauius; Lamps lighted on
Saturday, in Seneca's 96. Epist. Distribution of Tapers amongst the people, in
Macrobius his Saturnals. But more lively may we see it in their Altars; first,
in multiplying the number of them in every Church; God allows but two Altars
to the Temple, and Bruschius reckons 51. Bruschius de Monast Germa^o, fol 129.
Virgil.
in one Church in Vlmes, taking their pattern belike from Venus temple, of
which the Poet, Vbi templum illi centumque Sabeo thure calent arae: but God
teaches no such Arithmeticke, as to multiply Altars, Because Ephraim (says
he) has made many Altars to sin, Altars shall be unto him to sin, Hos. 8.
Secondly, they imitate the Gentiles in dedicating their Altars to such as it is
unknown, or at the least uncertain, if ever any such were in the World, as to
Saint George, Saint Katharine, and Saint Christopher, doing no otherwise then
did the Romans, August. de Ciuit Dei, l. 3. c. 12.
who consecrated Altars, Dijs incertis, to their uncertain gods, or these
Athenians, who built them Deo ignoto, to their unknown god. But we need not
much seek to know whom they follow in these devotions, when as it is a main
Argument urged by Bellarmine, Bell. lib. 1. de M^ssa. c. 20.
that Altars and Sacrifices were used by the Gentiles, therefore they must
still be retained by Christians: I know not what antiquity they pretend, nor
what they can find in the Primitive Church, to prove the lawfulness of them;
we deny not, but that the Fathers might term the Table of the Lords Supper an
Altar; and that, first, in respect of the similitude it has to the Altars of
the old Testament, for that on it are placed the Sacraments of Christ's Body,
which before was figuratively offered up by the Priest upon the Altar.
Secondly, because on it were laid the Oblations and Offerings, which well
disposed people were wont to bestow upon the Poor; and this we will grant
them; but that there were any such Altars in use in the Primitive Church, as
they pretend, we absolutely deny. We have an high Priest (says the Author to
the Hebrews) who needs not daily as those Priests to offer sacrifice, Heb.
9.25.
nor that he should offer himself often as the high Priest enters into the
holy place, every year with the blood of others, for then must he often have
suffered since the foundation of the World, but now once in the end of the
World, has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Chap.
9. v. 25, 28.

Well then, Altars of stone and metals are now banished the Christian World, by
the decree of our Lord Christ Jesus, and herein we must observe that Precept
of our Savior to his Disciples; Go not into the way of the Gentiles, Matt.
10.5.
in these things imitate them not: but what, do we therefore altogether shun
Altars, and Images, and Temples? it was an old imputation indeed, of Celsus
and others, against Christians in the Primitive Church, as it is now of the
Romans against us, that we abandon these Ceremonies, and relinquish them; to
which, my answer at this time shall be no other then what Origin gave Celsus;
Origin contra Celsum lib. 8.
Celsus affirms (says he) that we shun Altars and Images, because he takes
it to be the belief of that invisible and inexplicable Communion we
maintain; when in the mean time he perceiues not, that to us the minds of
the just are for Altars and Temples; from which doubtless, are sent forth
those most sweet odours of Incense, Vows I mean and Prayers from a pure
Conscience: We are not therefore ambitious in mounting Altars, or framing
Images, which heretofore have been the Tabernacles of Devils, and Cages of
unclean Spirits; but rather embrace such living Altars, as one whom we see to
burn the true fire of Zeal, kindled not by vestall Virgins, but by the Spirit
of God. Let any man (adds that Father) make an inquiry into those Altars
which we expound, and compare them with those which Celsus (I Will say which the
Pope would bring in) or the Images which are fixed in the minds of them which
worship God, with Phydias's or Policletus's, or whomsoever men list to select
of cunning Artificers, and he shall plainly see, that these inanimate and
senseless Colossos's, shall decay and corrupt with time, whereas those living
Sanctuaries shall be immortal, and continue for ever. Shall we fear
(Beloved) lest Altars and Images be taken away, or Churches loose somewhat of
their Grace and Ornament? I must tell you with Saint Ambrose, Ambros. lib. 2.
de offic. c. 28.
that neither our Prayers nor Sacrifices stand in need of such trimming,
Ornatus Sacramentorum redemptio captiuorum est, the best adorning of
Sacraments, is not Tissues and Silk, or embroidered Canopies, or spangled
Crucifixes, or painted Poppets, or any the like facings, wherewith Popery sets
forth her Altars, more like Pageants then places which savor of Christ's
simplicity, but the redeeming of Captives. Let others therefore (says Hierom)
cloathe the walls with Marble, Hieron. ad Demetriadem.
let others bring in vast and mountainous Columns into Temples, and beguild
the heads of them, which yet are not sensible of their ornature; let them
interlace their Portices with silver and Iuorie, and beset their Tables with
Pearls and Diamonds: truly, set superstition apart, I reprehend it not, I
dissuade it not, every man abounds in his own sense, and it is a great deal
better to do this, then to suffer ones gold to canker and rust in his Coffers
(nay, I am constrained to say, that our times need spurs and pricks to rouse
men up to be more mindful of Gods House then they are) but yet you must
think of another thing too; Cloathe Christ in the poor, visit him in the
sick, feed him in the hungry, entertain him in the destitute, instruct him
in the ignorant, offend him not in the weak; then shall thou raise up Altars
unto Christ, not of stone, which moulter and decay with age, but living Altars,
which shall send up sweet Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, both for
themselves and thee. I would have no man to object the Temple of Jerusalem,
wherein were placed the Table and Cherubins, and Censer, and Arc of pure gold;
then, were these allowed of the Lord, when the Priests did offer sacrifices,
and when the blood of Beasts made the atonement for their sins, although all
things were but then in a figure, and written for our instructions, on whom the
ends of the World are come, but now what should we admire those Altars, whose
covering our Savior Christ pronounced to be but unrighteous Mammon, or those
Censers whose metal Saint Peter was not ashamed to confess that he had none
of; cry not therefore, Templum Domini, templum Domini, the Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, as did sometimes the Jews, Ier. 7.
Ier. 7. He is the temple of the Lord in whom true faith dwells, who is
clothed with Justice as with the veil of the Tabernacle, in whom not
Temperance alone, or Abstinence sing their parts, but in whom the whole set of
Virtues make a complete Quire; would thou therefore, like the Gentiles, build
an Altar, and yet not as did these Athenians to the unknown god? why, see
matter and stuff prepared to thine hand, the Prophets and Apostles for the
foundation, Christ himself for the chief corner Stone. Would thou lay it
over with pure and refined metal? why, see the Word of God; it is like gold
seven times purified in the fire. Would have a Beast to slay? mortify and
kill thy beastly affections, which otherwise would kill thee. Want thou a
Knife to kill them; take the Sword of Preaching, not into thine hand, but into
thy heart, that is it which is sharper then a two edged sword, and cutteth to
the dividing and separating of soul and spirit. Are all these things prepared,
and lackest thou yet fire to consume them? why, Zeal must be that fire,
without which, all these will profit thee nothing. O Beloved, if these were the
Sacrifices of the Romanists, or these the Altars of Papisme, I would change my
speech, and most heartily request you to ioyn hands with them, and let the
seamelesse coat of Christ to suffer rupture and division no more between us:
no longer should thy blessed Name (sweet Jesus) bear reproach among the
uncircumcised Infidells for our separation; but if their Altars be but the
Popes Exchequers, and the Priests but like the Publicans, which sit there at
the receipt of custom, Exite e Babylone, Go out of Babylon, let us treat no
longer with her upon Articles of agreement. Erasin. in annot. ad Hieron.
Epitaph. Paul. Bernard. in Auolog. ad Gul elmum Abbatem.
What Erasmus says of the Altars of our time, the same verdict S. Bernard
gives of the Altars of his time: by the sight of such sumptuous and wonderful
vanities (says he) men are more incited to offer then to adore. Thus riches
are swallowed up by riches, thus money draws in money, because I know not by
what means (but so it is) where men see most, there are they most willing to
give. On Altars therefore, is presented the beautiful portraicture of some
Saint, and it is thought so much the more holy, by how much the more
beautiful. Men run to kiss it, they are invited to enrich it, and more are
astonished at things curious then inclined to adore things religious; O vanity
of vanities, and yet not greater vanity then madness, the Church abounds in
the walls, and wants in her poor; she clothes her stones with gold, and
leaves her sons naked, to the cold; the maintenance of the poor, serves to
satisfy the eyes of the rich, the curious find matter to delight them, the
distressed find no bread to sustain them. But are these the devotions which
Rome so vaunteth of? August. in Psalm. 41. and Psalm. 49.
Well might Saint Austin then wish those of his time to forbear, Sacrificing,
and Altars, if this be all the fruit of them. Alas, he shows himself far
from allowing such impostures; Si habes Taurum pinguem (says he) occide
pauperibus, If thou have a fat Bull, reserve him not for the Altar, as if
Jewish or Gentilish Sacrifices were in use, but kill him for the poor, though
they cannot drink the blood of Goats, yet they can eat the flesh of Bulls,
and he which said unto thee, If I hunger, I will not tell it thee, will then
tell thee I was hungry, and thou gave me to eat. But what Altar then would
he have us to erect to God? what Sacrifices thinks he, ascend best pleasing in
his sight? why, he turns us to the Psalmist, Offer unto the Lord, the
Sacrifice of praise, an humble and a contrite heart shall thou not despise: So
then would thou build an Altar? why, the loftiest Altar thou can build, is
a lowly heart: would thou have something to offer; see an oblation, passing
the blood of Goats and Calves, a Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. Well
might we fear, lest God should have required something without us, something
in the house that the Moths had corrupted; something in the Garner, which the
Mice or Vermin had consumed; something in the field, which the Fox or Wolf
had devoured: but he sends us to our selves, and to our inmost Closet, which
none but God can unlock. Ara tua conscientia tua, (says Austen) thine Altar
is thy conscience, offer thereon the Sacrifice of praise. We are secure, we
go not into Arabia for Frankincense, neither do we rippe up the bowels of
the earth for stones, to beautify our Altar, if Paul could find an Altar
abroad; know, Christians have it at home, within their own breasts, and thus I
come from the thing found by our Apostle, an altar to the Title thereof, An
inscription to the unknown God.

Here does the Apostle warrant that commendable use among Controversy Writers,
of confuting the Adversary by testimonies drawn from their own writings. It
was Elephas's Logic against the vain Boaster; thine own mouth condemns
thee, Job 15. Saint Paul's against Heretics, that such are condemned of
themselves, Tit. 3. to say the truth, seldom has falsehood proved true
Liege-man to it self, but in some circumstance or other has been its own
enemy, and borne witness against it self. Isidore therefore, that I may use
his words, terms the argumentation of the Apostle in this place, (...),
inexpugnable and beyond all contradiction, taking lies in ambushment, and
weakening error by setting it at variance within its own doors. It casts out
Devils through Belsebub the Prince of the Devils, M^t. 12.25.
and a Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand. The ground of these
consequences, is that Maxim in Philosophy, that there is but one truth, which
never disagreeth with it self. Hence was it, that the ancient Fathers,
Clemens, Iustine Martyr, Origin, Austen, Hierom, refuted the Gentiles, Hieron.
Epist. 84.
by the writings of the Gentiles, by Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Trismegistus,
and the like; that Julian the Apostata cried out, proprijs pennis configimur,
We are wounded with our own Quills, out of our books they take weapons,
which in fight they use against us. Hence it is, that in imitation of their
warfare, we assault Romes Gates with her own Legions, that we discrie
mutinies amongst her Captains, dissentions in her Cohorts, whisperings within
her Camps, and bring them into the field the one against the other; Schoole-man
against Schole-man, Jesuit against Jesuit, Cardinal against Cardinal,
Consistory against Consistory, Pope against Pope; and yet, if we would go
further, we may chance to meet with (...), as Saint James terms him a double
soul'd man, Bellarmine Antibellarmine, in the same Author. In a word, should a
Council of all their Writers, both ancient and later, be called, and should
some one or other be questioned for any Tenent in Divinity, he should need to
use but S. Paul's policy in the council at Jerusalem. Men and Brethren I am a
Pharisie, the son of a Pharisie, of the hope and resurrection of the dead, I am
called in question, or rather, I am a poor Catholic, I hold not the Popes
universal authority, nor his jurisdiction in the temporal affairs of
Princes; I am not of opinion that men have free Will, or that the Works of any
can be meritorious; he should see straight a dissension would arise and a
combustion, which all the holy Water in Rome could not quench; How many would
say, Act. 23.
We find no evil in this man, if a Spirit or an Angel has spoken unto him,
let us not fight against God. Thus would the multitude, like those Pharisees
and Saduces, be divided. But I leave this task to those, who have displayed to
the World sufficiently the Papal wars, and intestine dissentions of Rome in
just Volumes; it is the method of Bellarmine, observed by him almost in every
question; first, to set down the sundry opinions of the Doctors of his
Church, before he relates his own, and therefore I refer the learned and
judicious thither. The principal Lesson I would commend unto you hence, is the
citation of Heathenish inscriptions or writings in divine matters. What will
some say? is Saint Paul now come to quote inscriptions? why, he has taught us
that the Scriptures are sufficient to teach, 2. Tim. 3.
to instruct, to convince, to reprove, that the man of God may be perfect in
every good work; how is it then, that he flies at this time to the
inscriptions of the Gentiles, and dedications of unhallowed Altars? Nay, he
which professed his coming, not to be in the wisdom of men, in so short a
space as one short Oration, twice seeks he to strengthen his cause by citing
the hand-writings of the Gentiles? first, an inscription; and see, scarce three
verses between, and another dictate of one of their Poets, (...), we also are
his generation. Verse. 28.
But the Fathers do note on these places, the prudencie of our Apostle, which
amongst profane men uses the testimony of profane authorities; giving them
as it were, their food in due season, and applying physic to the temper of
his Patients; becoming all things unto all men, unto the Jew a Jew, unto the
Gentile a Gentile, that he might win them unto Christ. For what more
cleernesse can there be, then to make men themselves parties in the proof,
Judges in their own case, and witnesses against themselves. How can one better
confute the Jews, then by their Paraphrasts dispersed, as well in their Cabals
as in their Talmud? how should a man reason better against the Epicure and
Atheist, then by bringing the world and creatures therein for witnesses; for
those are the Records which they love best, and most believe, and from which
they are loathest to depart? how can one soundlier confound the Naturalist,
then by the things that every man reads in his own nature, which he finds
inscribed in his heart, and have been uttered by natural men? Thus God himself
does oftentimes suit his manner of calling men to their condition of life. The
wisemen which were Astronomers, he called by a star; Peter a Fisherman,
Matthew. 2. Ioh. 21. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 8. Basil. Orat. ad Adolescent. Ambros.
Epist. 25. ad Eccles. Vercell.
by a draught of fishes; Iustine, sometimes a Philosopher, by a sentence of
Plato's, as himself confesses, and Dionysius Areopagita, of the sect of
Stoikes or Epicures (as Ambrose supposes) by these poems and poesies of
natural wise men. Certainly, seeing it has pleased our Apostle to quote the
authority of natures Secretaries, I mean, the Inscriptions and Sentences of
Philosophers, in points of so great moment, as the Divinity of Christ, and
Man's Creation, and since we see the Spirit of God to have sweetened the waters
of cursed Jericho, 2. King. 2.
and made wholesome drink of it for the children of the Prophets, as also to
have quickened and made fertile these wild stocks, and caused them to bud and
bring forth fruits of righteousness and faith, Vide Lorin. in Act.
in so noble a person as was Dionysius, a Judge of the Areopage, as likewise in
Damaris, and others with them; I cannot, by the way, but condemn those, which
either think the study or citing of humane Writers in divine exercises to be
altogether unlawful. The maine prejudice against these citations happens from
a wilful blindness of a perverse generation, which has not after so many
years tutering, learned to distinguish between the lawful use, and the abuse
of a thing. I confess, as it was more in practice in the primitive Church,
then now it is, to cite such Authors, so was there then another reason for the
same, then now there is. The Fathers were then to deal with Ethnickes, and
sometimes with judicious and learned Philosophers (as was the case of Saint
Paul now at Athens) where it would not have booted to have urged the Prophets
or Apostles, which were in no credit with them, and therefore the example of
those men can yield no sufficient pretense to any man now a-dayes, to make
preaching the Gospel to be a rapsodie or medley of Greek and Latin Poets;
Barnard. in Cant. sermon. 9.
Bernard says truly, that humane erudition, too much of it, is but Vinum
inebrians, Wine that makes a man drunk, implens, non nutriens; inflans, non
aedificans; rather glutting then nourishing, and puffing up then edifying; and
to such as make their Auditors surfeit upon such raw and immature fruit, we may
say with Hierome, Hieron. ad Eustach.
Quid cum Psalterio Horatius, cum Euangelistis Maro, cum Apostolis Cicero, What
makes Horace with the Psalter, what Virgil with the Evangelists, what Cicero
with the Apostles? Nay, we all know how unseemly a thing it is, for a Subject
to sit upon the same Throne with his Prince, or an Handmaid to bear equal
rule in the house with her Mistress, or the Dogs, as our Savior terms these
forrainers, Mat. 15.26
to possess the room and place of the Children; yet let me say thus much,
that the Subject may make way for his Prince, the Servant attend his Master,
and the Hand-maide her Mistress. There is yet an Atheist in the world, which
says in his heart, there is no God; to him we may send Cicero, Cicer. 1. l de
not. deor. and 1. Tuscul.
a man as ignorant of the Scripture as he incredulous of them, which shall
certify him of the consent of all Nations, in acknowledging a Divine power.
There are yet of the Sect of the Epicures, which bid us eat, and drink, and
sport; for after death there is neither Heaven nor Hell: to these we may
oppose, Homer, if blind, Homer. Iliad. 1. in princip.
yet seeing farther perhaps then they into the state of men deceased. There are
of the Stoickes still remaining, which mind not the providence of God, but
refer things to destiny; to these the Orator, Cic. l. 2. de not. deor. Plat.
in Timaeo and lib. 10. and 11. de repub.
or Plato that Atticke Moses will reply, that Gods providence extends it self
unto all things, and that there is nothing is so base, which yet he does not
mind or order. Is this now to make the Pulpit a Philosophers School, or rather
the Philosophers School a footstool unto the Pulpit, and an handmaid unto
Divinity, that it may the better proceed in the necessary work. I know not
what others may conceive, but me thinks, this meditation should spring up in
the heart of every good Christian. Good God, are those perilous times to ensue
in our days, which thou foretoldst by thy Apostle, or are the minds of men
decayed with the whole fabric of the world, that thus Hethens should profess
what Christians do not practice, and the Disciples of Nature prove greater
Masters then the Scholars of the Gospel? Mat. 12.41.
Believe it (beloved) these are those Ninevites which will rise up in judgment
against us, Mat. 12.42
these those Queens of the South which will condemn us, for they had not
those lights that we have, and yet saw far more then many of us do; Truly
does S. Hierome observe upon Dan. 1. that if you turn over the books of the
Philosophers, you shall find part of the vessels of the house of God there, in
Plato, that God was the maker of the world; in Zeno the Prince of the Stoickes,
you may discover Hell, and the immortality of the Soul; although they yoaking
the truth with falsehood, may be said with Nabuchadnezzer King of Babylon, to
have taken, not all the vessels of Gods house, but some only, and those not
whole neither, but cracked and broken. Something you may find in Plato that is
borrowed from Moses, whom he means always, as some guess; by this phrase,
(...), Aretius loc. commun. page ^54.
as the old ancient speech has it; something in Homer, that he might be
beholding to the same for, especially that in his fourth Iliad. Parents are to
be honored that we may be long lived; where he relisheth of the fifth
Commandment, Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in
the land that the Lord thy God gives thee. Nay, David Chytreus affirms the
writings of Philosophers touching manners, Chyt. prolegom. in Genesis
to be as it were, a certain Commentary upon the five former Commandments of
the latter Table. Now, tell me I beseech you, why after the great captivity
that Iaphets posterity has suffered under Satan, God having sent his
Apostles, and us their Successors, in preaching the Word, to build an house
unto him amongst the Gentiles, why I say, we may not lawfully use those
instruments which once were dedicated to the Tabernacle, or restore those
things to the Temple which once were stolen from the Temple, or burn those
lamps in our Sanctuary which were lighted at the Altar; and have all this
while lain unprofitably in the treasure-house of the God of the King of
Babylon. I am not ignorant that this course has found inuayers in all Ages.
Hieron. Epist. 103.
It is related that Hierome was whipped in his sleep by an Angel for too much
addicting himself unto Ciceroes works: Hieron. in Epist. ad Magnum.
I am sure, that waking, Magnus scourged him, quasi candorem Ecclesiae
Ethnicorum sordibus pollueret, as if he polluted the candor of the Church with
the filth of the Ethniks. The Fathers therefore, not one or two, took in hand
this subject, and were constrained to clear themselves of those aspersions,
which the ignorant and unlearned cast on them.

To be brief, I find, that they deny not the use of humane learning to be
lawfully used in Divine and Ecelesiasticall exercises, so that these four
conditions be observed. The first concerns the end, that it be produced either
to illustrate and confirm our own doctrine, or to convince the Heathenish
opposers of it; for, Philosophers if they have spoken any thing consonant to
our belief, we are not only not to be afraid to meddle with it, Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 2. c. 40.
sed etiam ab ijs tanquam ab iniustis possessoribus vindicandum, but also, we
are to challenge it (says Austin) as being detayned by unjust possessors. We
are not to shun learning, because they say, Mercury was the first inuenter of
letters, neither are we to reject virtue and justice, because the Gentiles
dedicated Temples to the worship of them. Nay rather, whosoever is a good
Christian will acknowledge the truth to be his Masters wheresoever he finds
it, and think it no villainy, so long as it benefits his Lords work, either
to go down to the Philistines to sharpen his Axe, 1. Sam. 13.20. Ex^d. 12.35.
or to borrow of the Egyptians gold and silver for the building of the
Tabernacle. Julian the Apostata (says Hierome) in the Parthian war, Hieron.
Ep. ad Magnum.
wrote six Books against Christ, and according to that of the Poets, wounded
himself with his own sword. Si contra hunc scribere tentauero (says he)
puto interdices mihi ne rabidum canem Philosophorum and Stoicorum doctrinis, id
est, Herculis claua repercutiam? If I should attempt to write against him,
would thou forbid me to strike this mad Dog, with the doctrines of the
Stoickes and Philosophers, that is, with Hercules's Club? To omit the practice
of the ancient Fathers in the primitive Church, Apollinarius, Dionysius,
Tatianus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, and others, which
Hierome names to have defended, during the persecutions, the Christian Faith
out of the Dictates of natural men, latter ages have afforded examples of like
industry, Aquinas's four books against the Gentiles, Lullies demonstrations
of the twelve Articles of the Creed, out of the book of nature, Marneyes
trueness of Religion, maintained by sentences of Philosophers and Poets
against Atheists, Epicures, Pagans, Jews, Mahumetans, and other Infidels: but
what do we stand upon humane testimonies, when we see the victorious Orator
S. Paul, who as Origin says, Orig. hom. 31. in Luc.
Sanctificabat prophana and faciebat Ecclesiastica, did sanctify profane
writings, and make them Ecclesiastical, not once or twice draw natures
Poignard against the Gentiles, and like warlike David smite off Goliahs head
with his own sword. The Athenians he presses with Aratus testimony, the
Corinthians with Menanders, the Cretans with Epimenides, one of their own
Poets, (...), the Creets are always liars, evil beasts, slow bellies, and as
if this were not enough, see how he wrests in this Chapter an inscription,
which he spyed by chance upon an Altar, and conuerts it to an argument of Faith.

The second condition is, that the profaneness or Ethnicisme in them be
castrated, not so much in the Press, as in the mouth; for by this means we
gather the Rose (says Theodoret) and yet leave the Bryar; Theod de affect.
Graecor.
we take the gold, and let the dross go; we are to deal in these cases
(says Hierom) as God commanded the Israelites, Hieron. Ep. ad Magnu^.
Deuteronomy. 21. If they saw amongst the captives a beautiful woman, and had a
desire unto her, and would make her their wife, they were to shave her head,
and pare her nails, and put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and
then they might marry her. So, if we be enamoured upon secular wisdom, and
for the beauty and decency thereof, do desire of a captive Maid, to make it
an Israelite, Quidquid in ea mortuum est idolatriae, voluptatis, erroris,
libidinum, vel vraecide, vel rade, whatsoever is dead in it, whether it be
idolatry, or wantonness, or error, or lasciuiousnes, we must either pare or
shave, and then we lawfully beget of her household servants unto the Lord God of
Sabbath. Neither need she distaste her because she is an alien; for Osee, as
we read, took a wife of whordoms, Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, yet lo, of
that Harlot is born unto him Iezrael, that is, the seed of God.

The third condition is, that we always so use humane learning, that we ever
give the Scriptures the upper hand: we are to remember (says Austen) that as
much difference as was between the riches that Solomon had to build the Temple,
Aug. lib. 2. de Doct. Christ.
and those which the Israelites borrowed of the Egyptians to build the
Tabernacle, so much and more, is between the testimony, which Nature gives to
the Godhead, and that which the Scriptures bring to it: which being well
considered, the contention (as the Fathers observe) between Hagar and Sarah,
may be composed, Ambros. 2. de Abraham, c. 10.
if Hagar flout not Sarah, as if she were barren; nor Sarah exclude Hagar, as
being her handmaid.

The last condition is that, which Rethoricians do give in the like case, that
humane learning be used in Ecclesiastical exercises, Non vt esculentis sed vt
condimentis, not as meat but as sauce. It were a madness, because lace sets
out a garment, therefore to make a garment of lace only, or because tapestrie
and hangings do grace the house, therefore to omit timber and stones, the more
substantial stuff in building. Poets and Orators are not the solid meats
which must nourish, but the junkers which do provoke the appetite, (...) (says
Pindarus) sub finem coenae dulcis est placenta, Pindar.
whereupon, as Gratian observes, Gregory blames not those Bishops, Great.
decret. did. 37.
which studied and applied these things, Sed qui contra Episcopale officium pro
lege Euangelica grammaticam populo exponebant, but those which contrary to the
office of a Bishop, in stead of expounding the Gospel read a Grammar Lecture
unto the people, such as for wholesome food proposed Pepons and Onions, and I
know not what old ends of rotten rags to digest; as if he were no body which
compiled not an whole Homers Cent^ns, or a Virgils Centons, and vented them al
at once to his Auditorie. Otherwise, who can deny, that in these things, an
intelligent hearer may get some profit by hearing, as well as an other by
reading; as for those of the opposite opinion, I could wish them more charity
then to grudge that other men see with two eyes, because they can see but with
one, and will leave them with that counsel of Hierome to Magnus, Ne vescentium
dentibus edentuli inuideant, Hieron. in Epist. ad Mag.
and oculos caprarum talpae contemnant, that if they want teeth, they would not
envy those which eat with them, nor contemn the eyes of Goats, if themselves
be Wants and stark blind. And so I come from the formale of the Title, the
inscription, to the materiale or substance of it, to the unknown God. I found
an Altar with this inscription, to the unknown God.

In diverse Authors, I find a diverse reading of this Inscription, Pausanias in
his Atticks, Pausan. l. 1.
remembers such a writing, upon an Altar in Athens, but he puts it in the
plural number (...), of the unknown gods. The greek Scholiast relates it
otherwise: (...), to the Gods of Asia, and Europe, and Lybia, to the unknown
and foreign god. And to this, most of the Latin Interpreters do cleave, yet it
follows not, which Hierome from hence would infer, Hieron. in Tit. c. 1.
that S. Paul quoted but part only of this Inscription, to circumuent the
Athenians therewith, whereas the former part mentioned more gods then one; for
how could they but take him tripping, if with fraud as the Jesuits use the
Fathers, Matthew. 4.
or the Devil the Psalms to Christ, he had mis-repeated a writing so ready at
the point of every man's tongue. But this seems to have been his scope; The
Athenians, more like God Almighties then men, made or imagined whole armies and
bands of Gods; now amongst all those many whom they knew (and, alas, how could
they know any that were not) there was one (and he the only one indeed) whom
they knew not; him therefore the Apostle urges by himself, because they
pretended, that him alone they ignorantly did worship, presuming of some
knowledge of the rest. Conc erning the occasion which moved the Athenians to
frame such an inscription, Writers do not less differ then upon the words;
Chrysostom. ad locum. and in Ep. ad Tit. hom. 3.
Chrysostom thinks that they erected this Altar, lest when they had admitted
a number of foreign gods, there might be yet some left out that might take
it ill or unkindly at their hands, whom they know not. Laert. lib. 1. in Epimen.
Laertius in the life of Epimenides, gives this reason of it. When the
Athenians (says he) were afflicted with a sore pestilence, Pythia gave them
this answer, that they should expiate the City, and appease the indignation of
some higher powers against it; whereupon they rig'd up a ship, and sent it by
Nicias the son of Niceratus into Creete, to fetch Epimenides, who coming unto
them in the 46. Olympiad, expiated the City, and caused the pestilence to
cease, by this means. First, he brought white and black Sheep into the
Areopage, and suffering them to stray which way they listed, gave in charge to
those which followed them, that wheresoever any of them rested of his own
accord, they should there sacrifice it to the unknown God: and he reupon (they
say) the plague ceased, and the custom began amongst the Athenians of
consecrating Altars with this Title. Howsoever, I can see no probability,
Lorin. in Act. c. 17.
for Lorinus's dream of God hidden in the flesh, or concealed in Sacramental
species; and as small for Baronius's conceit, Baron. Annal. Tom. 1.
that the Athenians by unknown, meant invisible, imperceptible, or vnessable;
the Apostle, especially in the former Verse, noting ignorance in them, of the
Godhead, rather then such knowledge, by branding them in the forehead, with a
mark of too much superstition for their pains. Many good observations may
from hence be gathered; as first, from the worshippers themselves, we may
collect the malice and cunning of Satan, that always would draw us as near
his confines of darkness as he can; for better considers then we do, how
that the will wills no more then the understanding understands, that ignoti
nulla cupido, the less we know God, the less we love him; the farther he is
from the reach of our apprehension, the farther from the affection of desiring;
the more out of sight, the more out of mind: besides, he knows by
experience, that ignorance, the mother of blind devotion, is the stepmother to
all Religion; that on the contrary side, the sunshine of the Godhead dispels
the mists of superstition, that God is so sweet and infinitely full of delight,
that whosoever knows him, cannot choose but affect him: Lastly, that knowing is
the light of the soul, the enemy to fraud, the tamer of the affections, the
bridle of perturbations, the rule of zeal, and the Star which must conduct
us to our heavenly Jerusalem; so that the whole powers of hell, seemed to have
had a finger in this deuillish stratageme, that when the Gentiles should know
their Jupiter, and Mars, and Diana, and Neptune, which were no Gods, but Devils
in Hell, the true God which was the maker and governor of all things, he
should not have so much as a name afforded him, he should pass among them,
for the unknown God. Note but the form of our Apostles arguing, I perceive
(says he) that in all things you are too superstitious, there is the
question, or (...), the conclusion, his proof lies in the Verse following,
for, as I passed by and beheld your devotions, I found an Altar with an
inscription to the unknown God; see an argument drawn a proprio, from a
proper adjunct of superstition, which is ignorance of the true God. All
implying as much as this, that devotion which is practiced without the
knowledge of God, or presupposing God as unknown, the same devotion is
superstitious. A perfect Touchstone, in my mind, whereby a Christian may
without much labor and difficulty, make trial of his Religion, and give
judgment of the faith he professes. And, alas, what shall we then say of the
Roman Religion? will it, think you, endure the touch of this stone, and not
discover it self to be counterfeit? Greg. in Mat cont. Celsum.
The Scripture which Origin compares to Jacobs Well, where not only Jacob and
his sons, that is, the learned, but also the Cattle and the Sheep, that is,
the rude and ignorant do drink, and refresh themselves, the Pope locking them
up in a tongue unknown, that the people may not understand them, does he not
what lies in him, make God to be to the Laity and common sort unknown?
Prayers, which are the Masters of request to our heavenly Sovereign, when the
Pope restraines them to Latin, and commands them to be uttered in a strange
tongue, is not this to parlie with God, as with a foreign Prince, and to
present our supplications to him, as to a God unknown? Disputations, whereby
the falsehood is winnowed from the Truth, like Chafe from Wheat, and the great
cause of man's salvation, cleeres it self before the face of the world, of
false imputations; the Pope, by forbidding it to the Laytie, under pain of
Excommunication, what does he but leave men in suspense and doubtfulnesse of
the truth, and as far as disputes can satisfy, make God in many most
needful cases unknown? Faith, the hand which lays hold upon the heavenly
promises, and is the very foundation of things hoped for, the Pope extolling
the implicit or unfolded belief of the ignorant, what does he but by this
course settle our confidence, and trust, and devotions upon the apprehension of
God unknown? Much more might I add to the same purpose; but this ignorance of
God is so foul a fault, that if a man excelled Solomon in all the wisdom of
the world besides, it would profit him little; nay, I may boldly say, that in
the maynest points of his knowledge, the simplest Christian which knows God,
would be able to tuter him, and be his Teacher: and therefore, by these few
instances of Popish blindness, I hope you may see how little reputation our
adversaries do gain by nourishing ignorance and blind devotion in the minds
of poor Christians. Not to travel far for examples, let us consider the
Athenians of whom my Apostle speaks, in my Text, famous for their wisdom and
policy, having had the most flourishing Empire of all Greece; famous for their
justice and equity, having the renowned Areopage, a Court to which Aristides
attributed no less force in delivering Justice, then to the Oracles in
foretelling things to come; famous for their profound knowledge in
Philosophy, amongst whom, Socrates, Plato and Aristotle, those great lights of
Europe were admired and extolled; how shallow yet they were in their
professions, how little they waded in many most necessary points of
Philosophy, and all because of this unknown God. The Moralist wasted many a
tedious night in the discussion of this one point, what was summum bonum, the
chief good and felicity of a man in this life; Varro numbers in his time,
288. several opinions of Philosophers, touching this one thing, and yet scarce
any of them which stumbled not at the very Threshold of his Art, and all
because that this God was unknown. The Naturalists disputed as much,
concerning the subject of his science, the World, what might be the first cause
of it, and yet after all their debatements, and unreconcilable contradictions,
hardly was any found which attained unto it, and all, for that this God was to
them unknown. The Astronomers, which gaze upon the Stars, slumber at the
first moouer of the Spheres, they which could foretell the Eclipses of the Sun
and Moon to come; saw not their own Eclipse which was present, and that
because God was as then unknown. The Statists and Politicians (it were much to
recount the several opinions they broached, about the conuersions and period of
Empires, whether they were caused by numbers or destiny, or conjunctions of
the higher Planets, or an excentricall motion of the Earth, or Comets, or
Eclipses) few or none archieued unto the truth herein, the reason whereof can
be no other then this, that this God was to them unknown. But lets leave
Philosophy awhile, and consider the Art of Arts, Christianity, how God stands
there in the forefront of the School, and bids us learn him first, before we
turn over a new leaf, if we would be perfect Scholars in other Precepts: he
is the rule whereby we are to order and conceive of all things tending to his
worship; so far is a man a good Divine as he knows him; other subtilities
are but hedges to fence the truth from the assaults of Heretics, they may
scratch and tear both sides in handling, but that vnum necessarium, that one
thing needful, needful for thee Martha and every good Christian, is the
knowledge of this God: we may take a taste, if we listed, in those Religions
which have swarued from the truth; whence is it, that most of their errors have
proceeded, if not from the not knowing, as they should do, this God? Did the
Schoolmen consider the power of God uprightly, they would never attribute
unto him the working of contradictions in the Sacrament, which argue an
impotencie rather then a power in the Divine Majesty: did the Jesuits truly
estimate his truth and verity, they would not be so impudent, as to make him
the Patron of equivocations and mental reseruations, did the Popish Doctors
weigh but in right scales his jealousy, they would not make Saints compartners
with him in adoration, or in the work of our redemption, nor if they knew his
Providence, would they, many of them, in the salvation of men's souls, allow
him a mere prescience only or foreknowledge: Nay, we our selves would not do
many things as we do, if God were not to us as he was to these Athenians, yet
unknown: we run to unlawful succors in our adversities; is not this
because we know him not to be Omnipotent? we play the Hypocrites and
double-dealers in his employments, is not this because we know him not to be
simple? we set our hearts upon vain pleasures, and decaying treasures, is not
this because we know him not to be the sovereign good? we live in sin
securely without any repentance, is not this because we know him not to be a
just Judge? we doubt of his promises, is not this because we know him not to
be true? why, if we were but as learned as to know him, we would admire him
for his infiniteness and perfection, adore him for his unmeasurableness,
unchangeableness and eternity, seek understanding from his understanding,
submit our selves to his will, love him for his love, trust to him for his
truth, fear him for his power, reverence him for his holiness, praise him for
his blessedness; so that in fine, hence grows our coldness in Religion,
hence our backslidings in piety, hence our benumb'dnes in Christianity, in
that our devotions are, as it were, still directed to the unknown God.

Now, he which concealed the truth of his Godhead from the Prophets and Wise
of the world, and has revealed the same unto the simple, grant that we, using
the light aright, walk not still as children of the darkness, and by turning
away from him, the only God whom we know, settle our hearts and affections
upon false gods whom we know not, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom, with
the Father and the Holy Ghost, be rendered all Praise, Honor and Glory, Might,
Majesty and Dominion, both now and for ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

