The Execution of Justice in England for maintenance of public and Christian
peace, against certain stirrers of sedition, and adherents to the traitors and
enemies of the Realm, without any persecution of them for questions of
Religion, as is falsely reported and published by the fautors and fosterers of
their treasons. xvii. December. 1583.

Imprinted at London. 1583.

The Execution of Justice in England, for maintenance of public and Christian
peace, etc.
IT has been in all ages and in all countries, All offenders cover their
faults with contrary causes.
a common usage of all offenders for the most part, both great and small, to
make defense of their lewd and unlawful facts by untruths and by coloring
and covering their deeds (were they never so vile) with pretenses of some
other causes of contrary operations or effects: to the intent not only to
avoid punishment or shame, but to continue, uphold and prosecute their wicked
attempts, to ye full satisfaction of their disordered and malicious appetites.
And though such has been the use of all offenders, Rebels do most dangerously
cover their faults.
yet of none with more danger then of Rebels and traitors to their lawful
Princes, Kings and countries. Of which sort of late years, are specially to be
noted certain persons naturally borne subjects in the Realm of England and
Ireland, who having for some good time professed outwardly their obedience to
their sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, Rebellion in England, and Ireland.
have nevertheless afterward been stirred up and seduced by wicked spirits,
first in England sundry years past, and secondly and of later time in Ireland,
to enter into open rebellion, taking arms and coming into the field against
her Majesty and her Lieutenants, with their forces under banners displayed,
inducing by notable untruths many simple people to follow and assist them in
their traitorous actions. And though it is very well known, that both their
intentions and manifest actions were bent, to have deposed the Queens Majesty
from her Crown, and to have traitorously set in her place some other whom they
liked, whereby if they had not been speedily resisted, they would have
committed great bloodsheddes and slaughters of her Majesty's faithful
subjects, and ruined their native country. Yet by Gods power given unto her
Majesty, The rebels vanquished by the Q. power.
they were so speedily vanquished, as some few of them suffered by order of
Law according to their deserts, many and the greatest part upon confession of
their faults were pardoned, ye rest (but they not many) of the principal,
Some of the Rebels fled into foreign countries.
escaped into foreign countries, and there because in none or few places
rebels and traitors to their natural Princes and countries dare for their
treasons challenge at their first muster open comfort or succor, these notable
traitors and rebels, have falsely informed many Kings, Princes and States, and
specially the Bishop of Rome, commonly called the Pope, (from whom they all
had secretly their first comfort to rebel) that the cause of their fleeing
from their countries was for the religion of Rome, Rebels pretend religion for
their defense.
and for maintenance of the said Popes authority. Whereas diverse of them
before their rebellion lived so notoriously, the most part of their lives, out
of all good rule, either for honest manners, or for any sense in religion, as
they might have been rather familiar with Catalyn, or favorers to
Sardanapalus, then accounted good subjects under any Christian Princes. As for
some examples of the heads of these rebellions, out of England fled Charles
Neuill Earl of Westmerland, a person utterly wasted by looseness of life, and
by Gods punishment even in the time of his rebellion bereaved of his children
that should have succeeded him in the Earldom, and how his body is now
eaten with ulcers of lewd causes, all his companions do see, that no enemy he
had can wish him a viler punishment. And out of Ireland ran away one Thomas
Stukeley, a defamed person almost through all Christendom, and a faithless
beast rather then a man, fleeing first out of England for notable piracies, and
out of Ireland for trecheries not pardonable, which two were the first
ringleaders of the rest of the rebels, Ringleaders of Rebels, Charles Neuill
Earl of Westmerland, and Thomas Stukeley.
the one for England, the other for Ireland. But notwithstanding the notorious
evil and wicked lives of these and others their confederates, void of all
Christian religion, it liked the Bishop of Rome, as in favor of their
treasons, not to color their offenses as themselves openly pretend to do, for
avoiding of common shame of the world, but flatly to animate them to continue
their former wicked purposes, that is, to take arms against their lawful
Queen, to invade her realm with foreign forces, to pursue al her good
subjects and their native countries with fire and sword: for maintenance
whereof there had some years before, at sundry times, proceeded in a thundering
sort, Bulls, excommunications and other public writings, The effect of ye
popes but against ye Queen of England.
denouncing her Majesty being the lawful Queen, and Gods anointed servant,
not to be the Queen of the realm, charging and upon pains of excommunication
commanding all her subjects, to depart from their natural alleageances, whereto
by birth and by oath they were bound. Provoking also and authorizing all
persons of al degrees within both the realms to rebel, and upon this
antichristian warrant, being contrary to all the Laws of God and man, and
nothing agreeable to a pasturall officer, not only all the rabble of the
foresaid traitors that were before fled, but also all other persons that had
forsaken their native countries, being of diverse conditions and qualities, some
not able to live at home but in beggerie, some discontented for lack of
preferments, which they gaped for unworthily in Universities and other places,
some banckerupt Merchants, some in a sort learned to contentions, being not
contented to learn to obey the Laws of the land, have many years running up
and down, from Country to country, practiced some in one corner, The
practices of the traitors, Rebels, and fugitives to execute the Bull.
some in an other, some with seeking to gather forces and money for forces,
some with instigation of Princes by untruths to make war upon their natural
country, some with inward practices to murder the GREATEST, some with
seditious writings, and very many of late with public infamous libels, full of
despitefull vile terms and poisoned lies, altogether to uphold the foresaid
antichristian and tyrannous warrant of the Popes Bull. And yet also by some
other means, to further these intentions, because they could not readily
prevail by way of force, finding foreign Princes of better consideration and
not readily inclined to their wicked purposes, Seminaries erected to nurse
seditious fugitives.
it was devised to erect up certain schools which they called Seminaries, to
nourish and bring up persons disposed naturally to sedition, to continue their
race and trade, and to become seedmen in their tillage of sedition, and them to
send secretly into these the Q. Majesty's realms of England and Ireland under
secret Maskes, some of Priesthood, some of other inferior orders, with titles
of Seminaries for some of the meaner sort, and of Jesuits for the stagers and
ranker sort and such like, but yet so warely they crept into the land, as none
brought the marks of their priesthood with them, but in diverse corners of her
Majesty's Dominions these Seminaries or seedemen and Jesuits, bringing with
them certain Romish trash, as of their hallowed Wax, their Agnus dei, The
Seminary fugitives come secretly into the realm to induce the people to obey
the Popes Bull.
many kind of Beads, and such like, have as tillage men labored secretly to
persuade the people to allow of the Popes foresaid Bulls and warrantes, and
of his absolute authority over all Princes and Countries, and striking many
with pricks of conscience to obey the same, whereby in process of small time,
if this wicked and dangerous, traitorous and crafty course had not been by
Gods goodness espied and stayed, there had followed imminent danger of horrible
vprores in the realms, and a manifest blooddy destruction of great multitudes
of Christians. For it cannot be denied but that so many as should have been
induced and thoroughly persuaded to have obeyed that wicked warrant of the
Popes, and the contents thereof, should have been forthwith in their hearts and
consciences secret traitors, and for to be in deed errant and open traitors,
there should have wanted nothing but opportunity to feel their strength and
to assemble themselves in such nombers with Armor and weapons, as they might
have presumed to have been the greater part, and so by open civil war, to
have come to their wicked purposes. But Gods goodness by whom Kings do rule,
and by whose blast traitors are commonly wasted and confounded, has otherwise
given to her Majesty as to his handmayde and dear servant, ruling under him,
the spirit of wisdom and power, Sowers of sedition taken, conue^ted, and
executed for treason.
whereby she has caused some of these sedicious seedemen and sowers of
rebellion, to be discovered for all their secret lurkings, and to be taken and
charged with these former points of high treason, not being dealt withal upon
questions of religion, but justly condemned as traitors. At which times,
notwithstanding al manner gentle ways of persuasions used, to move them to
desist from such manifest traitorous courses and opinions, yet was the canker
of their rebellious humors so deeply entered and graven into the hearts of
many of them, as they would not be removed from their traitorous
determinations. And therefore as manifest traitors in maintayning and
adhearing to the capital enemy of her Majesty and her Crown, who has not
only been the cause of two rebellions already passed in England and Ireland,
but in that of Ireland did manifestly wage and maintain his own people
Captains and Soldiers under the Banner of Rome, against her Majesty (so as
no enemy could do more:) These I say have justly suffered death not by force
or form of any new laws established, either for religion or against the
Popes supremacy, as the slanderous libellers would have it seem to be, but
by the ancient temporal laws of the realm, The seditious traitors condemned
by the ancient laws of the realm, made 200. years past.
and namely by the laws of Parliament made in King Edward the thirds time,
about the year of our Lord.1330. which is above 200. years and more past, when
the Bishops of Rome and Popes were suffered to have their authority
Ecclesiastical in this realm as they had in many other countries. But yet of
this kind of offenders, as many of them, as after their condemnations were
contented to renounce their former traitorous assertions, Persons condemned,
spared from execution, upon refusal of their treasonable opinions.
so many were spared from execution, and do live still at this day, such was
the unwillingness in her Majesty to have any blood spilt, without this very
urgent just and necessary cause, proceeding from themselves. And yet
nevertheless, such of the rest of the traitors as remain in forreyne parts,
continuing still their rebellious minds, and craftily keeping them selves
aloof off from dangers, cease not to provoke sundry other inferior seditious
persons, The foreign Traitors continue sending of persons to move sedition in
the realm.
newly to steal secretly into the realm, to revive the former seditious
practices, to the execution of the Popes foresaid bulls against her Majesty
and the Realm, pretending when they are apprehended, that they came only into
the realm by the commandment of their superiors, the heads of the Jesuits,
to whom they are bound (as they say) by oath against either king or country,
and here to inform or reform men's consciences from errors in some points of
religion, as they shall think meet: but yet in very truth the whole scope of
their secret labors is manifestly proved, to be secretly to win all people,
with whom they dare deal, so to allow of the Popes said bulls, and of his
authority without exception, as in obeying thereof, they take themselves fully
discharged of their allegiance, and obedience to their lawful Prince and
country, yea, and to be well warranted to take arms to rebel against her
Majesty when they shall be thereunto called, and to be ready secretly to
join with any foreign force that can be procured to invade the realm,
whereof also they have a long time given, and yet do for their advantage, The
seditious fugitives labor to bring the Realm into a war external and
domestical.
no small comfort of success: and so consequently the effect of their labors
is to bring the Realm not only into a dangerous war against the forces of
strangers (from which it has been free above xxiii. or xxiiii. years, a case
very memorable and hard to be matched with an example of the like:) but into a
war domestical and civil, wherein no blood is usually spared, nor mercy
yielded, and wherein neither the vanqueror nor the vanquished, have cause of
triumph.

And forasmuch as these are ye most evident perils that necessarily should
follow, if these kind of vermin were suffered to creep by stealth into the
Realm, and to spread their poison within the same, howsoever when they are
taken, like hipocrites, they couloure and counterfeit the same with profession
of devotion in religion: The duty of ye Queen and all her governors to God
and their country, is to repel practices of rebellion.
it is of all persons to be yielded in reason, that her Majesty and all her
governors and magistrates of Justice, having care to mantaine the peace of the
Realm (which God has given in her time, to continue longer then ever in any
time of her progenitors) ought of duty to almighty God the author of peace,
and according to the natural love and charge due to their country, and for
avoiding of the floods of blood, which in Civil wars are seen to run and
flow, by all lawful means possible, as well by the Sword as by Law, in their
several seasons to impeache and repel, these so manifest and dangerous
coulourable practices, and works of sedition and rebellion. And though there
are many subjects known in the realm, that differ in some opinions of
religion from the Church of England, and that do also not forbear to profess
the same, yet in that they do also profess loyalty and obedience to her
Majesty* None charged with capital crimes, being of a cu^^^arte religion, and
professing to withstand forreyne forces
and offer readily in her Majesty's defense to impugn and resist any foreign
force, though it should come or be procured from ye Pope himself, none of these
sort are for their contrary opinions in religion prosecuted or charged with any
crimes or pains of treason, nor yet willingly searched in their consciences
for their contrary opinions, that favor not of treason. And of these sorts,
there are a number of persons, not of such base and vulgar note as those were
which of late have been executed, as in particular, some by name are well
known, and not unfit to be remembered. The first and chiefest by office was D.
Heth, that was Archbishop of York, and lord Chaunceler of England in Queen
Mary's time, who at the first coming of her Majesty to ye Crown, showing
himself a faithful and quiet subject, continued in both the said offices,
though in religion then manifestly differing, and yet was he not restrained of
his liberty, nor deprived of his proper lands and goods, but leaving willingly
both his offices, lived in his own house, and inioyed all his purchased lands
during all his natural life, until by very age he departed this world, and
then left his house and living to his friends: an example of gentleness never
matched in Queen Mary's time. The like did one D. Poole that had been Bishop
of Peterborough, an ancient grave person, and a very quiet subject. There
were also others that had been Bishops and in great estimation, Names of
diverse Ecclesiastical persons professing contrary religion, never charged with
capital crunes.
as D. Tunstall Bishop of Duresme, a person also of very quiet behavior. There
were also other, D. White and D. Oglethorpe, one of Winchester, the other of
Carlisle, Bishops: and D. Thurleby, and D. Watson yet living, one of Ely, the
other of Lincoln, Bishops: not pressed with any capital pain, though they
maintained the Popes authority against the laws of the realm: and some
Abbots, as M. Fecknam yet living, a person also of quiet and courteous
behavior for a great time. Some also were Deanes, as D. Boxall Deane of
Windsore, a person of great modesty and knowledge: D. Cole Deane of Paul's, a
person more earnest then wise: D. Reinolds Deane of Exceter, and many such
others having borne office and dignities in the Church, and had made profession
against the Pope, which they began in Queen Mary's time to change, yet were
they never to this day burdened with capital peanes, nor yet deprived of any
their goods or proper liueloods, but only removed from their Ecclesiastical
offices, which they would not exercise according to the Laws. And most of them
for a great time were retained in Bishops houses in very civil and courteous
manner, without charge to themselves or their friends, until the time that the
Pope began by his Bulls and messages, to offer trouble to the realm by stirring
of rebellion: about which time only, some of these aforenamed being found
busier in matters of state tending to stir troubles, then was meet for the
common quiet of the Realm, were removed to other more private places, where
such other wanderers as were men known to move sedition, might be restrained
from common resorting to them to increase trouble, as the Popes Bull gave
manifest occasion: and yet without charging them in their consciences or
otherwise, by any inquisition to bring them into danger of any capital law, so
as no one was called to any capital or bloody question upon matters of
religion, but have all inioyed their life as the course of nature would: and
such of them as yet remain, may, if they will not be authors or instruments of
rebellion or sedition, inioye the time that GOD and nature shall yield them
without danger of life or member. And yet it is worthy to be well marked, (...)
s^r^^s o^^ same, (...) and writings.
that the chiefest of all these and the most of them, had in the time of King
Henry the eight and King Edward the sixth, either by preaching, writing,
reading or arguing, taught all people to condemn and abhor the authority of
the Pope: yea they had many times given their oaths publicly, against the
Popes authority, and had also yielded to both the said Kings the title of
supreme head of the Church of England next under Christ, which title the
adversaries do most falsely write and affirm, that the Queens Majesty does
now use: a manifest lie and untruth. And for proof that these foresaid
Bishops and learned men had so long time disauowed the Popes authority, many
of their books and sermons against the Popes authority remain printed to be
seen in these times, to their great shame and reproof to change so often, and
specially in persecuting such as themselves have taught and stablished to hold
the contrary.

A great number of lay persons of liuelood, being of a contrary religion, never
charged with capital crime.
There were also and yet be a great number of others, being lay men of good
possessions and lands, men of good credit in their countries, manifestly of
late time seduced to hold contrary opinions in religion for the Popes
authority, and yet none of them have been sought hitherto to be impeached in
any point or quarrel of treason, or of loss of life, member or inheritance, so
as it may plainly appear, that it is not, nor has been for contrarious
opinions in religion, or for the Popes authority, as the adversaries do
boldly and falsely publish, that any persons have suffered death since her
Majesty's reign, and yet some of these sort are well known to hold opinion,
that the Pope ought by authority of Gods word to be supreme and only head of
the Catholic Church, and only to rule in all causes Ecclesiastical, and
that the Queens Majesty ought not to be the governor over all her subjects
in her realm being persons Ecclesiastical: which opinions are nevertheless
in some part by the laws of the realm punishable in some degrees, and yet for
none of these points have any persons been prosecuted with the charge of
treason, No person charged with capital crime for the only in^^^^enance of ye
Popes supremacy.
or in danger of life. And if the^ it be inquired, for what cause these others
have of late suffered death, it is truly to be answered as before is often
remembered, that none at all are impeached for treason to the danger of their
life, but such as do obstinately maintain the contents of the Popes Bull before
mentioned, which do import, that her Majesty is not the lawful Queen of
England, the first and highest point of treason: Such condemned only for
treason, as maintain the effects of ye Popes bull against her Majesty and the
realm.
and that al her subjects are discharged of their oaths and obedience, mother
high point of treason: and all warranted to disobey her and her laws, a third
and a very large point of treason. And thereto is to be added a fourth point
most manifest, in that they would not disalow the Popes hostile proceedings in
open wars against her Majesty in her realm of Ireland, where one of their
company D. Sanders, a lewd scholar and subject of England, a fugitive and a
principal companion and conspirator with the traitors and rebels at Rome, was
by the Popes special commission a commander, as in form of a Legate, and
sometime a treasorer or paymaster for those wars, which D. Sanders in his
book of his Church monarchy, D. Sa^ders maintenance of the Popes Bull.
did before his passing into Ireland openly by writing, gloriously auowe the
foresaid Bull of Pius Quintus against her Majesty, to be lawful, and
affirms that by virtue thereof one D. Mooreton, an old English fugitive and
conspirator, was sent from Rome into the North parts of England, to stir up
the first rebellion there, whereof Charles Neuill the late Earl of Westmerland
was a head captain. And thereby it may manifestly appear to all men, how
this Bull was the ground of the rebellions both in England and Ireland, and
how for maintenance thereof, and for sowing of sedition by warrant and
allowance of the same, these persons were justly condemned of treason, The
persons that suffered death, were condemned for Treason and not for Religion.
and lawfully executed by the ancient laws temporal of the Realm, without
any other matter then for their practizes and conspiracies both abroad and at
home against the Queen and the realm, and for maintaining of the Popes
foresaid authority and Bull, published to deprive her Majesty of her crown,
and for withdrawing and reconciling of her subjects from their natural
allegeaunce due to her Majesty and to their country, and for moving them to
sedition: and for no other causes or questions of religion were these persons
condemned, although true it is, that when they were charged and convinced of
these points of conspiracies and treasons, they would still in their answers
colourably pretend their actions to have been for religion: but in deed and
truth they were manifest for the procurement and maintenance of the
rebellions and wars against her Majesty and her realm.

And herein is now the manifest diversity to be seen and well considered
betwixt the truth of her Majesty's actions, and the falsehood of the
blasphemous adversaries: that where the factious party of the Pope the
principal author of the invasions of her Majesty's dominions, do falsely
allege, that a number of persons, whom they term as Martyrs, have dyed for
defense of the catholic religion, the same in very truth may manifestly
appear to have died (if they so will have it) as martyrs for the Pope, and
traitors against their sovereign and Queen in adhering to him, A full full
proof that the mainteiners of the bull are directly guilty of treason.
being the notable and only open hostile enemy in all actions of war
against her Majesty, her kingdoms and people: and that this is the meaning of
all these that have so obstinately maintained the authority and contents of
this Bull, the very words of the Bull do declare in this sort, as D. Sanders
reports them.

Plus Quintus Pontifex Maximus, de Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine,
declarauit Elizabetham praetenso Regni iure, necnon omni and quocunque dominio,
dignitate, priuilegioque priuatam: Itemque Proceres, subditos and populos dicti
regni, ac caeteros omnes qui illi quomodocunque iurauerunt, a iuramento
huiusmodi ac omni fidelitatis debito, perpetuo absolutos: That is to say, Pius
Quintus the greatest Bishop, of the fullness of the Apostolic power, declared
Elizabeth to be bereued or deprived of her pretended right of her kingdom, and
also of all and whatsoever dominion, dignity and privilege: and also the
Nobles, subjects and people of the said kingdom, and all others which had
sworn to her any manner of ways, to be absolved for ever from such oath and
from all debt or duty of fealty, and so forth, with many threatening
cursings, to all that durst obey her or her laws. And for execution hereof, to
prove, that the effect of the Popes bull and message was a flat rebellion, it is
not amiss to hear what D. Sanders the Popes firebra^d in Ireland also writes
in his visible Church Monarchy, which is thus. Pius Quintus Pontifex Maximus,
D. Morto^s secret Embassage from Rome to stir ye rebellion in the North.
Anno D. 1569. reuerendum praesbyterum Nicolaum Mortonum Anglum in Angliam
misit, vt certis illustribus viris authoritate Apostolica denunciaret,
Elizabetham quae tunc rerum potiebatur, haereticam esse: ob eamque causam, omni
Dominio and potestate excedisse, impuneque ab illis velut ethnicam haberi
posse, nec eos illius legibus aut mandatis deinceps obedire cogi: That is to
say, Pius Quintus ye greatest Bishop, in the year of our Lord 1569. sent the
reverend priest Nicolas Morto an Englishma^ into England, yt he should denou^ce
or declare by ye Apostolic authority to certain noble men, Elizabeth, who
the^ was in possession, to be an heretic: and for ye cause, to have fallen
from al dominion and power, and that she may be had or reputed of the^ as an
Ethnike, and that they are not to be compelled to obey her laws or
commandments, etc.

Thus you see an Ambassade of rebellion from the Popes holiness, the Ambassador
an old doting English Priest a fugitive and conspirator, sent as he says to
some noble men, and those were the two Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, heads of the rebellion.

And after this, he follows to declare ye success thereof which I dare say
he was sorry it was so evil, with these words.

Qua denuntiatione multinobiles viri adducti sunt, vt de fratribus liberandis
cogitare auderent, ac sperabant illi quidem Catholicos omnes summis viribus
affuturos esse: verum etsialiter quam illi expectabant res euenit, quia
Catholici omnes nondum probe cognouerant, Elizabetham hereticam esse
declaratam, tamen laudanda illorum Nobilium consilia erant: that is, By which
denuntiation, many noble men were induced or led, that they were boldened to
think of the freeing of their brethren, and they hoped certainly that all the
Catholics would have assisted them with all their strength: but although the
matter happened otherwise then they hoped for, because all the Catholics
knew not that Elizabeth was declared to be an heritike, yet the counsels and
intentes of those noble men were to be praised. A rebellion and a vanquishing
of rebels very smoothly described.

This noble fact here mentioned was the rebellion in the North: the noble me^
were the Earls of Westmerland and Northumberland: the lack of the event or
success was that the traitors were vanquished, and the Queens Majesty and
her subjects had by Gods ordinance the victory: and the cause why the rebels
prevailed not, was because all the Catholics had not been duly informed that
the Queens Majesty was declared to be (as they term it) an heretic: which
want of information, to the intent to make the rebels mightier in number and
power, was diligently and cunningly supplied by the sending into the realm of
a great multitude of the Seminaries and Jesuits, whose special charge was to
inform the people thereof, as by their actions has manifestly appeared.

And though D. Sanders has thus written, yet it may be said by such as
favored the two notable Jesuits, one named Robert Persons (who yet hides
himself in corners to continue his Traiterous practice) the other named Edmond
Campion (that was found out being disguised like a roister and suffered for his
Treasons) that D. Sanders treason is his proper treason in allowing of the
said bull, but not to be imputed to Persons and Campion. Persons and Campion
are offenders as D. Sanders is, for allowance of the Bull.
Therefore to make it plain yt these two by special authority had charge to
execute the sentence of this bull, these acts in writing following shall make
manifest, which are not feigned or imagined, but are the very writings taken
about one of their complyces, immediately after Campions death.

Facultates concessae pp. Roberto Personio and Edmundo Campiano, pro Anglia,
die 14. Aprilis. 1580.
PEtatur a summo Domino nostro, explicatio Bullae declaratoriae per Pium
Quintum contra Elizabetham and ei adhaerentes, quam catholici cupiunt intelligi
hoc modo, vt obliget semper illam et haereticos, catholicos vero nullo modo
obliget rebus sic stantibus, sed tum demum quando publica eiusdem bullae
executio fieri poterit. Then followed many other petitions of faculties for
their further authorities, which are not needful for this purpose to be
recited: but in the end follows this sentence as an answer of the Popes, Has
praedictas gratias concessit Summus pontifex patri Roberto Personio, and
Edmundo Campiano in Angliam profecturis, die 14. Aprilis. 1580. Praesente patre
Oliuerio Manarco assistente. The english of which latten sentences is, as
follows.

Faculties granted to the two fathers Robert Persons and Edmond Campion for
England, the 14. day of April. 1580.
Faculties granted to Persons and Campio^ by Pope Gregory 13. anno 1580.
LEt it be asked or required of our most holy Lord, the explication or meaning
of the bull declaratory made by Pius the fifth against Elizabeth, and such as
do adheare or obey her, which bull the catholics desire to be understand in
this manner, that the same bull shall always bind her and the heritikes, but
the Catholics it shall by noe means bind, as matters or things do now
stand or be, but hereafter, when the public execution of that bull may be
had or made.

Then in the end the conclusion was thus added.

The highest Pontiffe or Bishop, granted these foresaid graces to father
Robert Persons and Edmonde Campion, who are now to take their Iourneyes into
England, the fourteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord. 1580. Being
present, the father Oliuerius Manarke assistant.

Hereby is it manifest, what authority Campion had to impart the contents of
the Bull against the Queens Majesty, howsoever he himself denied the same.

And though it be manifest that these two Jesuits, Persons and Campion, not
only required to have the Popes mind declared for the Bull, but also in their
own petitions, showed how they and other Catholics did desire to have the
said Bull to be understand against the Queen of England: yet to make the
matter more plain how all other Jesuits and Seminaries, yea how al Papists
naming themselves Catholics, do and are warranted to interpret the said
Bull against her Majesty and her good subjects, you shall see what one of
their fellows, named Heart, who was condemned with Campion, did amongst many
other things declare his knowledge thereof the last of December in the same
year.1580. in these words following.

The Bull of Pius Quintus (for so much as it is against the Queen) is holden
among the English Catholics for a lawful sentence, Hearts confession of the
interpretation of the Bull of Pius Quintus.
and a sufficient discharge of her subjects fidelity, and so remains in
force, but in some points touching the subjects, it is altered by the present
Pope. For where in that Bull all her subjects are commanded not to obey her,
and she being excommunicate and deposed, all that do obey her are likewise
innodate and accursed, which point is perilous to the Catholics: for if they
obey her, they be in the Popes curse, and they disobey her, they are in the
Queens danger: therefore the present Pope to relieve them has altered that
part of the Bull, and dispensed with them to obey and serve her, without peril
of excommunication: which dispensation is to endure but till it please the Pope
otherwise to determine.

Wherefore to make some conclusion of the matters before mentioned, A
conclusion that all the infamous books against the Queen and the realm, are
false.
al persons both within the realm and abroad, may plainly perceive that all
the infamous libels lately published abroad in sundry languages, and the
slanderous reports made in other Princes courts of a multitude of persons, to
have been of late put to torments and death only for profession of the
Catholic religion, and not for matters of state against the Queens Majesty,
are false and shameless, and published to the maintenance of traitors and
rebels. And to make the matter seem more horrible or lamentable, they recite
ye particular names of all the persons, which by their own Catalogue exceed
not for these twenty five years space, above the number of iii. score,
Difference of the small numbers that have been executed in the space of xxv.
years, from the great numbers in v. years of Queen Mary's saigne.
forgetting or rather with their stony and sensles hearts not regarding, in
what cruel sort in the time of Queen Marie, which little exceeded the space of
five years, the Queens Majesty's reign being five times as many, there were
by imprisonment, torments, famyne and fire, of men, women, maidens and
children, almost the number of four hundred: and of that number, above twenty
that had been Archbishops, Bishops, and principal Prelates or Officers in
the Church lamentably destroyed, and of women above three score, and of
children above forty, and amongst the women, some great with child, out of
whose bodies the child, by fire was expelled alive, and yet also cruelly
burned: examples beyond al heathen cruelty. And most of ye youth that then
suffered cruel death, both men, women, and children (which is to be noted)
were such, as had never by the Sacrament of baptism, or by confirmation,
professed, nor was ever taught or instructed, or ever had heard of any other
kind of religion, but only of that which by their blood and death in the fire
they did as true Martyrs testify. A matter of another sort to be lamented with
simplicity of words, and not with puffed eloquence, then the execution in this
time of a very few Traitors, who also in their time, if they exceeded thirty
years of age, had in their baptism professed, and in their youth had learned
the same religion which they now so bitterly oppugned. And beside that, in
their opinions they differ much from the Martyrs of Queen Mary's time: for
though they continued in the profession of the religion wherein they were
christened, yet they never at their death denied their lawful Queen, nor
maintained any of her open and foreign enemies, nor procured any rebellion or
Civil war, nor did sow any sedition in secret corners, nor withdrewe any
subjects from their obedience, as these sworn servants of the Pope have
continually done.

And therefore all these things well considered, there is no doubt, but all
good subjects within the realm do manifestly see, and all wavering persons
(not being led clean out of the way by the seditious) will hereafter perceive,
how they have been abused to go astray. And all strangers, but specially al
Christian Potentates, An advertisement to al Princes of countries abroad.
as Emperors, Kings, Princes and such like, having their sovereign estates,
either in succession hereditarie, or by consent of their people, being
acquainted with the very truth of these her Majesty's late just and necessary
actions, only for defense of her self, her crown, and people, against open
inuadors, and for eschewing of civil wars, stirred up by rebellion, will
allow in their own like cases, for a truth and rule (as it is not to be
doubted but they will) that it belongs not to a Bishop of Rome as successor
of Saint Peter, and therein a pastor spiritual, or if he were the Bishop of
all Christendom, as by the name of Pope he claymeth, first by his Bulls or
excommunications, in this sort at his will in favor of traitors and rebels,
to depose any sovereign Princes, being lawfully invested in their Crowns by
succession in blood, or by lawful election, and then to arm subjects against
their natural Lords, to make wars, and to dispense with them for their
oaths in so doing, or to excommunicate faithful subjects, for obeying of their
natural Princes, and lastly himself to make open war, with his own
soldiers, against Princes moving no force against him.

For if these powers should be permitted to him to exercise, then should no
Empire, no kingdom, no country, no City or Town, be possessed by any lawful
title, longer then one such only an earthly man, sitting (as he says) in S.
Peter's chair at Rome, should for his will and appetite (without warrant from
God or man) think meet and determine: The authority claymed by ye Pope not
warranted by Christ, or by the two Apostles, Peter and Paul.
An authority never challenged by the Lord of lords the son of God, Jesus
Christ out only Lord and Savior, and the only head of his Church, whilst he
was in his humanity upon the earth, nor yet delivered by any writing or
certain tradition from Saint Peter, from whom the Pope pretends to derive
all his authority, nor yet from Saint Paul the Apostle of ye Gentiles, but
contrariwise by all preachings, precepts and writings, contained in the Gospel
and other Scriptures of the Apostles, obedience is expressly commanded to all
earthly Princes, yea, even to Kings by special name, and that so generally, as
no person is excepted from such duty of obedience, as by the sentence of
Saint Paul even to the Romans, appears, Omnis anima sublimioribus
potestatibus sit subdita, That is, Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers: within the compass of which law or precept, Saint Chrysostom being
Bishop of Constantinople, writes, that even Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
and Monks are comprehended. And for proof of Saint Peter's mind herein, from
whom these Popes claim their authority, it can not be plainlyer expressed,
then when he writes thus: Proinde subiecti estote cuiuis humanae ordinationi,
propter Dominum, sieve Regi, vt qui superemineat, sieve presidibus ab eo missis:
That is, Therefore be you subject to every humane ordinance or creature, for
the Lord, whether it be to the King, as to him that is supereminent, or above
the rest, or to his presidents sent by him. By which two principal Apostles of
Christ, these Popes the pretensed successors, but chiefly by that which
Christ the Son of God the only Master of truth said to Peter and his
fellow Apostles, Reges gentium dominantur, vos autem non sic, That is, The
Kings of the Gentiles have rule over them, but you not so, may learn to
forsake their arrogant and tyrannous authorities in earthly and temporal
causes over Kings and Princes, and exercise their Pastoral office, as Saint
Peter was charged thrice at one time by his Lord and Master, Pasce oues meas,
Feed my sheep, and peremptorily forbidden to use a sword, in saying to him,
Convert gladium tuum in locum suum, or, mitte gladium tuum in vaginam, that
is, Turn thy sword into his place: or, Put thy sword into the scabbard. All
which precepts of Christ and his Apostles, were duly followed and observed
many hundred years after their death, by the faithful and godly Bishops of
Rome, that duly followed the doctrine and humility of the Apostles, and the
doctrine of Christ, and thereby dilated the limittes of Christ's Church and the
faith, more in the compass of an hundred years, Pope Hildebrand the first yt
made war against the Emperor. An. Do. 1074.
then the latter Popes have done with their swords and curses these 500
years, and so continued until the time of one Pope Hildebrand, otherwise
called Gregory theseuenth, about the year of our Lord, 1074. who first
began to usurp that kind of Tyranny, which of late the Pope called Pius
Quintus, and since that time, Gregory now the thirteenth has followed, for
some example as it seems, that is: Where Gregory the seventh, in the year of
our Lord 1074. or thereabout, presumed to depose Henry ye fourth, a noble
Emperor then being, Gregory the thirteenth now at this time, would attempt
the like against King Henry the eightes daughter and heir, Queen Elizabeth, a
sovereign Queen, holding her Crown immediately of God. And to the end it may
appear to Princes, or to their good Counselors in one example, what was the
fortunate success yt God gave to this good Christian Emperor Henry against
the proud pope Hildebrand, it is to be noted, that when the pope Gregory
attempted to depose this noble Emperor Henry, there was one Rodulphe a noble
man, by some named the Count of Reenfield, that by the Popes procurement,
usurped the name of the Emperor, who was overcome by the said Henry the
lawful Emperor, and in fight having lost his right hand, The judgment of God
against the Popes false erected Emperor.
he, the said Rodulphe, lamented his case to certain Bishops, who in the
popes name had erected him up, and to them he said, that ye self same right
hand which he had lost, was the same hand wherewith he had before sworn
obedience to his Lord and master the Emperor Henry, and that in following
their ungodly counselles, he had brought upon him Gods heavy and just
judgments. And so Henry the Emperor prevailing by Gods power, Pope Gregory
the vii. deposed by Henry ye 4.
caused Gregory the pope by a Synod in Italy to be deposed, as in like times
before him his predecessor Otho the Emperor, had deposed one pope John for
many heinous crimes: and so were also within a short time, three other popes,
namely, Siluester, Bennet, and Gregory the sixth, used by the Emperor Henry the
third, about the year of our Lord 1047. for their like presumptuous attemptes
in temporal actions against the said Emperors. Many other examples might be
showed to the Emperors majesty, Henry. 5. Fredrick. 1 Fredrick. 2 Jews of
Bauar, Emperors
and the Princes of the holy Empire now being, after the time of Henry the
fourth: as of Henry the fifth, and after him, of Frederick the first, and
Frederick the second, and then of Lewis of Bauar, all Emperors, cruelly and
tyrannously persecuted by the popes, and by their bulls, curses, and by open
wars, and likewise to many other the great Kings and Monarchs of
Christendom, of their noble progenitors, Kings of their several dominions:
whereby they may see how this kind of tyrannous authority in popes to make
wars upon Emperors and Kings, and to command them to be deprived, took hold
at the first by pope Hildebrande, though the same never had any lawefull
example or warrant from the Laws of God of the old or new Testament, but yet
the successes of their tyrannies were by Gods goodness for the most part made
frustrate, as by Gods goodness there is no doubt, but the like will follow to
their confusions at all times to come.

And therefore, as there is no doubt, but the like violent tyrannous
proceedings by any Pope in maintenance of traitors and rebels, would be
withstoode by every Sovereign Prince in Christendom in defense of their
persons and Crowns, and maintenance of their subjects in peace: so is there
at this present a like just cause that the Emperors Majesty, with the Princes
of the holy Empire, and all other Sovereign Kings and Princes in Christendom,
Whatsoever is lawful for other princes Sovereigns, is lawful for ye Queen
and crown of England
should judge the same to be lawful for her Majesty being a Queen, and
holding the very place of a King and a Prince sovereign over diverse kingdoms
and nations, she being also most lawfully invested in her Crown, and as for
good governing of her people, with such applause and general allowance, loved,
and obeyed of them, saving a few ragged Traitors or rebels, or persons
discontented, whereof no other Realm is free as continually for these xxv.
years past has been notably seen and so publicly marked, even by strangers
repairing into this Realm, as it were no cause of disgrace to any Monarchy
and King in Christendom to have her Majesty's felicity compared with any of
theirs whatsoever: and it may be, there are many Kings and Princes could be
well contented with the fruition of some proportion of her felicity. And
though the Popes be now suffered by the Emperor, in the lands of his own
peculiar patrimony, and by the two great Monarchs the French King and the
King of Spain, in their dominions and territories (although by other Kings not
so allowed) to continue his authority in sundry cases, The title of universal
Bishop is a preamble of Antichrist.
and his glorious title to be the universal Bishop of the world, which title
Gregory the great above nine hundredth years past, called a profane title,
full of sacrilege, and a preamble of Antichrist: yet in all their dominions and
kingdoms, as also in the Realm of England, most notably by many ancient
Laws it is well known, how many ways the tyrannous power of this his
excessive authority has been and still is restrained, checked and limited by
laws and pragmatiques, both ancient and new: a very large field for the
Lawyers of those countries to walk in and discourse. And howsoever the Popes
Cannonistes being as his Bombarders, do make his excommunications and curses
appear fearful to the multitude and simple people: yet all great Emperors
and Kings aforetime, in their own cases, of their rightes and royal
preeminences, though the same concerned but a City or a poor Town, and
sometime but the not allowance of some unworthy person to a Bishopric or to
an Abbey, never refrayned to despise all Popes curses or forces, but attempted
always, either by their swords to compel them to desist from their furious
actions, or without any fear of them selves, in body, soul, or conscience,
stoutly to withstand their curses, and that sometime by force, sometime by
Ordinances and Laws: the ancient hystories whereof are too many to be
repeated, and of none more frequent and effectual then of the kings of France.
But leaving those that are ancient, we may remember how in this our own
present or late age, it has been manifestly seen, how the army of the late
noble Emperor Charles the fifth, father to King Philippe that now reigns,
was not afraid of his curses, when in the year of our Lord 1527. Rome it
self was besieged and sacked, and the Pope then called Clement, 1527. Rome
sacked, and the Pope Clement taken prisoner by the Emperors army.
and his Cardinals, to the number of about 33. in his mount Adrian or Castle
S. Angelo, taken prisoners and detained seven months or more, and after
ransomed by Don Vgo di Moncada a Spaniarde, and the Marquis of Grasto, at above
four hundred M. duckates, besides the ransomes of his Cardinals which was very
great, having not long before time been also notwithstanding his curses,
besieged in the same Castle by the family of the Colonies and their fautors
his next neighbors being then Imperialistes, and forced to yield to all their
demau^ds. Neither did King Henry the second of France, 1550. King Henry the
second of France his Edicts against the Pope and his courts of Rome.
father to Henry now King of France, about the year 1550. fear or regard ye
Pope or his court of Rome, when he made several straight edictes against many
parts of the Popes claymes in prejudice of the crown and clergy of France,
retracting the authority of the court of Rome, greatly to the hinderance of
the Popes former profits. Neither was the army of king Philip now of Spain,
The besieging of Rome and the Pope by the D. of Alua with King Philips army.
whereof the Duke of Alua was general, stricken with any fear of cursing,
when it was brought before Rome against ye pope, in the year of our Lord 1555.
where great destruction was made by the said army, and all the delicate
buyldings, gardens and orchardes next to Rome walls overthrown, wherewith his
holiness was more terrified, then he was able to remove with any his curses.
Neither was Queen Mary the Queens Majesty's late sister, a person not a little
devoted to the Roman religion, so afraid of the popes cursings, but that both
she and her whole counsel, and that with the assent of all the Judges of the
realm, according to the ancient laws, in favor of Cardinal Poole her
kinsman, did forbid the entry of his bulls, and of a Cardinal hatte at
Callis, that was sent from the pope for one Friar peyto, whom the pope had
assigned to be a Cardinal in disgrace of Cardinal Poole, neither did
Cardinal Poole himself at the same time obey the popes commandments, nor
showed himself afraid, being assisted by the Queen, when the pope did
threaten him with pain of excommunication, but did still oppose himself
against the popes commandment for the said pretended Cardinal Peyto: who
notwithstanding all the threatninges of the pope, D. Peyto a begging Friar.
was forced to go up and down in the streets of London like a begging Friar:
a stout resista^ce in a Queen for a poor Cardinals hatte, wherein she followed
the example of her Grandfather King Henry the vii. for a matter of Alum. So
as howsoever the christian kings for some respects in policy can endure the
pope to command where no harm nor disadvantage grows to themselves, yet
sure it is, The kings of Christendom never suffer the Popes to abridge their
titles or rights, though they suffer them to have rule over their people.
and the popes are not ignorant, but where they shall in any sort attempt to
take from christian princes any part of their dominions, or shall give aid to
their enemies, or to any other their rebels, in those cases, their Bulls,
their curses, their excommunications, their sentences and most solemn
Anathematicals, no nor their cross keys, or double edged sword, will serve
their turns to compass their intentions.

And now, where the pope has manifestly by his bulls and excommunications
attempted as much as he could, to deprive her Majesty of her kingdoms, to
withdraw from her the obedience of her subjects, to procure rebellions in her
realms, yea, to make both rebellions and open wars, with his own captains,
soldiers, banners, ensigns, and all other things belonging to war: shall
this pope, or any other pope after him, think yt a sovereign Queen,
possessed of the two realms of England and Ireland, stablished so many years
in her kingdoms as three or four popes have sit in their chair at Rome,
fortyfied with so much duty, love and strength of her subjects,
acknowledging no superior over her realms, but the mighty hand of God: shall
she forbear, or fear to withstand and make frustrate his unlawful attemptes,
The Queen or England may not suffer the Pope by any means to make Rebellions
in her Realm.
either by her sword or by her laws, or to put his soldiers inuadours of her
realm to ye sword martially, or to execute her laws upon her own rebellious
subjects ciuilly, that are proved to be his chief instruments for rebellion,
and for his open war? This is sure, that howsoever either he sitting in his
chair with a triple crown at Rome, or any other his proctors in any part of
Christendom, shall renew these unlawful attemptes, almighty God, whom her
Majesty only honors and acknowledges to be her only sovereign Lord and
protector, and whose laws and gospel of his son Jesus Christ she seeks to
defend, will no doubt but deliver sufficient power into his maidens hand his
servant Queen Elizabeth, to withstand and confound them all.

And where the seditious trumpetters of infamies and lies, Additaments to ye
Popes martyrologe.
have sounded forth and entitled certain that have suffered for treason, to be
martyrs for religion: so may they also at this time if they list, add to their
forged catalogue, the headles body of ye late miserable Earl of Desmond, who
of late, secretly wandering without succor, as a miserable beggar, was taken
by one of the Irishry in his caben, and in an Irish sort after his own
accustomed savage manner, his head cut off from his body: an end due to such an
archrebell. And herewith to remember the end of his chief confederates, may
be noted for example to others, the strange manner of the death of D. Sanders
the popes Irish legate, who also wandering in the mountains in Ireland without
succor, died rauing in a phrensey. And before him, one James Fits-Morice the
first Traitor of Ireland next to Stukely the rakehel, a man not unknown in
the popes palace for a wicked crafty traitor, The ferang ends of James Earl
of Desmond. D. Saunders.

James Fitzmorice.

John of Desmond.


was slain at one blow by an Irish noble young Ge^tleman, in defense of his
fathers country which the traitor sought to burn. A fourth man of singular
note was John of Desmonde, brother to the Earl, a very bloody faithles
traitor, and a notable murderer of his familiar friends, who also wandering to
seek some pray like a wolf in the woods, was taken and beheaded after his own
usage, being as he thought sufficiently armed with the popes Bulls and certain
Agnus dei, and one notable ring about his neck sent from the popes finger (as
it was said:) but these he saw saved not his life. And such were the fatal ends
of al these, being ye principal heads of ye Irish war and rebellion, so as no
one person remains at this day in Ireland a known traitor. To this number,
they may if they seek number, also add a furious young man of Warwickeshire,
John Someruile
by name Someruile, to increase their Calendar of ye popes martyrs, who of late
was discovered and taken in his way, coming with a full intent to have killed her
Majesty (whose life God always have in his custody.) The attempt not denied
by ye traitor himself, but confessed, and that he was moved thereto in his
wicked spirit, by inticements of certain seditious and traitorous persons his
kinsmen and allies, and also by often reading of sundry seditious vile books
lately published against her Majesty. But as God of his goodness has of long
time hitherto preserved her Majesty from these and the like trecheries: so
has she no cause to fear being under his protection, she saying with king
David in the Psalm, My God is my helper and I will trust in him, he is my
protection, and the strength or the power of my salvation. And for the comfort
of al good subjects against the shadows of the popes Bulls, it is manifest to
the world, that from the beginning of her Majesty's reign, by Gods singular
goodness, her kingdom has enjoyed more universal peace, The prosperity or
England, during the Popes curses.
her people increased in more nombers, in more strength, and with greater
riches, the earth of her kingdoms has yielded more fruits, and generally all
kind of worldly felicity has more abounded since and during the time of the
popes thunders, bulls, curses and maledictions, then in any other long times
before, when the popes pardons and blessings came yearly into the Realm: so
as his curses and maledictions have turned back to himself and his fautors,
that it may be said to the fortunate Queen of England and her people, as was
said in Deuteronomy of Balaam, The Lord thy God would not hear Balaam, but
did turn his maledictio^s or curses into benedictions or blessings: the reason
is, for because thy God loved thee.

Although these former reasons are sufficient to persuade all kind of
reasonable persons to allow of her Majesty's actions to be good, reasonable,
lawful and necessary: yet because it may be, that such as have by frequent
reading of false artificial libels, and by giving credit to them, upon a
prejudice or foreiudgement before grounded, by their rooted opinions in favor
of the pope, will rest unsatisfied: therefore as much as may be, to satisfy
all persons as far forth as common reason may warrant, that her Majesty's
late action in executing of certain seditious traitors, has not proceeded for
the holding of opinions, either for ye popes supremacy, or against her
Majesty's regalitie, but for the very crimes of sedition and treason, it shall
suffice briefly, Reasons to persuade by reason ye favorers of ye Pope, that
none has been executed for religion but for treason. The first reason.
in a manner of a repetition of the former reasons, to remember these things
following.

First, it cannot be denied, but yt her Majesty did for many years, suffer
quietly the popes bulls and excommunications without punishment of the fautors
thereof, accompting of the^ but as of words or wind, or of writings in
parchment wayed down with lead, or as of water bubbles, commonly called in
Latin Bullae and such like: but yet after some proof that courage was taken
thereof by some bold and bad subjects, she could not but then esteem them
to be very preambles, or as forerunners of greater danger: and therefore, with
what reason could any mislike, that her Majesty did for a bare defense
against them, without other action or force, use the help of reviving of former
laws, to prohibit the publication or execution of such kind of Bulls within
her Realm?

The second reason.
Secondly, when notwithstanding ye prohibition by her laws, the same bulls
were plentifully (but in secret sort) brought into ye realm, The Bull of Pius
Quintus let up at Paul's.
and at length arrogantly set upon the gates of ye Bishop of Londons palace
near to ye Cathedral Church of Paul's, the principal city of ye realm, by a
lewd person, using ye same like a herald sent from the pope: who can in any
common reason mislike, yt her Majesty finding this kind of denunciatio^ of
war, as a defiance to be made in her principal city by one of her subjects,
auowing and obstinatly maintaining the same, should according to justice, cause
the offender to have the reward due to such a fact? and this was the first
action of any capital punishment inflicted for matter sent from Rome to move
rebellion, The first punishment for ye Bull.
which was after her Majesty had reigned about the space of twelve years or
more.

The third reason.
Thirdly, when the pope had risen up out of his chair in his wrath, from words
and writings to actions, and had contrary to the advice given by S. Barnard to
his predecessor, that is, when by his messages he left Verbum and took ferrum,
that is, left to feed by ye word, and began to strike with ye sword, and
stirred her noble men and people directly to disobedience and to open
rebellion, Rebellion in the North.
and that her lewd subjects by his commandment had executed ye same with all
the forces which they could make or bring into the field who with common
reason can disallow that her Majesty used her Principal authority, and by
her forces lawful subdued rebels forces unlawful, and punished the authors
thereof no otherwise then the pope himself uses to do with his own
rebellious subjects, in ye Patrimony of his church? And if any Prince of
people in the world, would otherwise neglect his office, and suffer his rebels
to have their wills, none ought to pity him, if for want of resista^ce and
courage, he lost both his Crown, his head, his life and his kingdom.

Fourthly, The fourth reason.
when her Majesty beheld a further increase of the popes malice,
notwithstanding that ye first rebellion was in her North parts vanquished, in
that he interteined abroad out of this Realm, the traitors and rebels that
fled for the rebellion, and all the rabble of other the fugitives of the
Realm, and that he sent a number of the same in sorts disguised into both the
Realms of England and Ireland, who there secretly allured her people to new
rebellions, and at the same time spared not his charges to send also out of
Italy by sea, certain ships with Captains of his own, with their bands of
soldiers, The invasion of Ireland by the Pope.
furnished with treasure, munition, victuals, ensigns, banners, and all other
things requisite to ye war, into her Realm of Ireland, where the same forces
with other auxilliar companies out of Spain landed, and fortified themselves
very strongly in the seaside, and proclaimed open war, erecting the popes
banner against her Majesty: may it be now asked of these persons, favorers
of the Romish authority, what in reason should have been done by her Majesty
otherwise, then first to apprehend all such fugitives so stolen into the
Realm, and dispersed in disguising habites to sow sedition, as some Priests
in their secret profession, but all in their apparel, as roisters or ruffins,
some scholars, like to the basest common people, and them to commit to
prisons, and upon their examinations of their trades and haunts, to convince
them of their conspiracies abroad, by testimony of their own companions, and
of sowing sedition secretly at home in the Realm? What may be reasonably
thought was meet to be done with such seditious persons, but by the laws of
ye Realm to try, condemn and execute them? and specially having regard to the
dangerous time, when the popes forces were in the Realm of Ireland, and more
in preparation to follow as well into England as into Irelande, to the
resistance whereof, her Majesty and her Realm was forced to be at greater
charges, then ever she had been, since she was Queen thereof. And so by Gods
power, which he gave to her on the one part, she did by her laws suppress
the seditious stirrers of rebellion in her Realm of England, The Popes forces
vanquished in Ireland.
and by her sword vanquished all the popes forces in her Realm of Ireland,
excepting certain captains of mark that were saved from the sword, as
persons that did renounce their quarrel, and seemed to curse or to blame such
as sent them to so unfortunate and desperate a voyage.

But though these reasons, grounded upon rules of natural reason, The
politic adversaries satisfied.
shall satisfy a great number of the adversaries (who will yield that by good
order of civil and christian policy and government, her Majesty could nor
can do no less then she has done, first to subdue with her forces her
rebels and traitors, and next by order of her laws to correct the ayders
and abettors, and lastly to put also to the sword such forces as the pope sent
into her dominions) yet there are certain other persons, more nisely addicted
to the pope, Objection of the papists, that the persons executed, are but
scholars and unarmed.
that will yet seem to be unsatisfied, for that, as they will term the
matter, a number of silly poor wretches were put to death as traitors, being
but in profession scholars or priests, by the names of seminaries, Jesuits
or simple scholemasters, that came not into the Realm with any armor or
weapon, by force to aid the rebels and traitors, either in England or in
Ireland in their rebellions or wars: of which sort of wretches ye
comiseration is made, as though for their contrary opinions in religion, or for
teaching of the people to disobey ye laws of the Realm, they might have been
otherwise punished and corrected, and yet not with capital peane. These kinds
of defe^ces, tend only to find faule rather with the severity of their
punishments, the^ to acquit them as Innocents or quiet subjects. But for
answer to the better satisfaction of these nyse and scrupulous favorers of
traitors, it must be with reason demanded of them (if at least they will open
their ears to reason) whether they think that when a King being stablished
in his Realm, has a rebellion first secretly practiced, and afterward openly
raised in his Realm by his own seditious subjects, and when by a foreign
potentate or enemy, the same rebellion is mainteyned, and the rebels by
messages and promises comforted to continue, Many are traitors though they have
no armor nor weapon.
and their treasons against their natural prince auowed, and consequently when
the same potentate and enemy, being author of the said rebellion, shall with
his own proper forces invade the Realm and subjects of the Prince that is so
lawefully and peacebly possessed: in these cases, shall no subject favoring
these rebels, and yielding obedience to the enemy the inuador, be committed
or punished as a traitor, but only such of them, as shall be found openly to
carry armor and weapon? Shall no subject, that is a spial and an explorer for
the rebel or enemy, against his natural Prince, be taken and punished as a
traitor, because he is not found with armor or weapon, but yet is taken in his
disguised apparel, with writings, or other manifest tokens, to prove him a
spy for traitors, after he has wandered secretly in his soueraigns camp,
region, court or city? Shall no subject be counted a traitor, that will
secretly give earnest and pressed money to persons to be rebels or enemies, or
that will attempt to poison the victual, or the fountains, or secretly set on
fire the ships or munition, or that will secretly search and sound the havens
and creekes for landing, or measure the depth of ditches, or height of towns
and walls, because these offenders are not found with armor or weapon? The
answer I think must needs be yielded (if reason and experience shall have
rule with these adversaries) that all these and such like are to be punished as
traitors: and the principal reason is, because the actions of all these are
necessary accessaries, and adherents proper, to further and continue all
rebellions and wars. But if they will deny, that none are traitors that are
not armed, they will make Judas no traitor, that came to Christ without armor,
coloring his treason with a kiss.

The application of the scholasticall traitors, to others, yt are traitors
without armor.
Now therefore it rests to apply the factes of these late malefactors that
are pretended to have offended but as scholars, or bookemen, or at the most but
as persons that only in words and doctrine, and not with armor did favor
and help the rebels and the enemies. For which purpose let these persons be
termed as they list, scholars, schoolemasters, bookemen, seminaries, priests,
Jesuits, friars, beademen, romanistes, pardoners, or what else you will,
neither their tytles, nor their apparel does make them traitors, but their
traitorous secret motions and practices: their persons make not the war, but
their directions and counsels have set up the rebellions. The very causes final
of these rebellions and wars, have been to depose her Majesty from her
crown: the causes isntrumental, are these kind of seminaries and seedemen of
sedition: the fruits and effects thereof, are by rebellion to shed the
blood of all her faithful subjects: the rewards of the inuadours (if they
could prevail) should be the disinheriting of all the nobility, the clergy,
and the whole comminaltie, yt would (as they are bound by ye laws of God, by
their birth, and oaths) defend their natural gracious Queen, their native
country, their wives, their children, their family, and their houses. And now
examine these which you call your unarmed scholars and priests, wherefore they
lived and were conversant in company of the principal rebels and traitors at
Rome, and in other places, where it is proved that they were partakers of their
conspiracies? Let it be answered why they came thus by stealth into the
realm? why they have wandered up and down in corners in disguised sort,
changing their tytles, names, and manner of apparel? Why they have intised and
sought to persuade by their secret false reasons, the people to allow and
believe all the actions and attempts whatsoever the pope has done or shall do,
to be lawful? Why they have reconciled and withdrawn so many people in
corners from the laws of the realm to the obedience of the pope, a forreyne
potentate and open enemy, whom they know to have already declared the Queen to
be no lawful Queen, to have mayntayned the known rebels and traitors, to
have invaded her Majesty's dominions with open war? Examine further, how
these vagarant disguised unarmed spies have answered, when they were taken and
demanded what they thought of the Bull of pope Pius Quintus, Six Questions to
try traitors from scholars.
which was published to deprive the Queens Majesty, and to warrant her
subjects to disobey her: whether they thought that all subjects ought to obey
the same bull, and so to rebel? Secondly, whether they thought her Majesty to
be ye lawful Queen of the realm, notwithstanding the said bull or any other
bull of the pope? Thirdly, whether the pope might give such license as he did
to the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, and other her Majesty's
subjects to rebel as they did? or give power to D. Sanders a natural borne
subject but an unnatural worn priest, to take arms and move warred as he did
in Ireland? Fourthly, whether the pope may discharge ye subjects of her
Majesty, or of any other princes christened, of their oaths of obedience?
Fifthly, whether the said traitorous priest D. Sanders or one Bristowe a
rebellious fugitive, did in their books write truly or falsely, in approving
the said bull of Pius quintus, and the contents thereof? Lastly, what were to
be done, if the pope or any other assigned by him, would invade ye realm of
England, and what part they would take, or what part any faithful subject of
her Majesty's ought to take? To these questions very apt to try the truth of
falshoode of any such sedicious persons, being justly before condemned for
their disloyalty, these lewd unarmed traitors I say would no wise answer
directly hereto, as all other faithful subjects to any prince christian ought
to do. And as they upon refusal to answer directly to these questions only,
might have been justly convinced as guilty of treason, The offenders executed
for treason, not for religion.
so yet were they not thereupon condemned, but upon all their other former
actions committed both abroad and in the Realm, which were no less
traitorous then the actions of all other the spies and traitors, and of Judas
him self before remembered which had no armor nor weapon, and yet at all times
ought to be adjudged traitors. For these disguised persons (called scholars
or Priests) having been first conversant of long time with the Traitors
beyond the sea in all their conspiracies, came hither by stealth in time of
war and rebellion by commandment of the Capital enemy the Pope or his
Legates, to be secret espialles and explorers in the Realm for the pope, to
deliver by secret, Romish tokens, as it were an earnest or pressed, to them that
should be in readiness to join with rebels or open enemies, and in like sort
with their hallowed baggages from Rome to poison the senses of the subjects,
pouring into their hearts malicious and pestilent opinions against her Majesty
and the Laws of the Realm, and also to kindle and set on fire the hearts of
discontented subjects with the flames of rebellion, and to search and sound
the depthes and secrets of all men's inward intentions, either against her
Majesty, or for her: and finally, to bring into a beadroll, or as it were into
a muster roll, the names and powers with the dwellings of all them that should
be ready to rebel and to aid the foreign invasion. These kinds of seditious
actions for the service of the pope and the traitors and rebels abroad, have
made them traitors: not their books nor their beads, no not their cakes of
wax which they call Agnus dei, nor other their relics, nor yet their
opinions for the ceremonies or rites of the Church of Rome: and therefore it is
to be certainly concluded that these did justly deserve their capital
punishments as traitors, though they were not apprehended with open armor or
weapon.

Now if this latter repetition, as it were of all the former causes and
reasons before recited, may not serve to stop the boisterous mouths, and the
pestiferous tongues, and venomous breathes of these that are infected with so
gross errors, as to defend seditious subjects, stirrers of rebellion against
their natural Prince and country: Unreasonable and obstinate persons are left
to Gods judgment.
then are they to be left without any further argument, to the judgment of the
Almighty God, as persons that have covered their eyes against the suns
light, stopped their ears against the sound of Justice, and oppressed their
hearts against the force of reason, and as the Psalmist says, They speak
lies, they are as venomous as the poison of a serpent, even like the deaf
Adder that stops his ears.

Wherefore with charity to conclude, if these rebels and traitors, and their
fautors would yet take some remorse and compassion of their natural country,
and would consider how vain their attempts have been so many years, and how
many of their confederates are wasted by miseries and calamities, and would
desist from their unnatural practices abroad: and if these Seminaries, secret
wanderers, and explorators in the dark, would employ their traueiles in the
works of light and doctrine according to the usage of their schools, and
content them selves with their profession and devotion: and that the remnant of
the wicked flock of the seedemen of sedition would cease from their
rebellious, false, and infamous railings and libellings: there is no doubt by
Gods grace (her Majesty being so much given to mercy and devoted to peace)
but al color and occasion of shedding the blood of any more of her natural
subjects of this sand, should utterly cease. Against whose malices, if they
shall not desist, Almighty God continue her Majesty with his spirit and power
long to reign and live in his fear, and to be able to vanquish them and all
Gods enemies, and her rebels and traitors both at home and abroad, and to
maintain and preserve all her natural good loving subjects, to the true
service of the same Almighty God according to his holy word and will.

Many other things might be remembered for defense of other her Majesty's
princely, honorable, and godly actions in sundry other things, wherein also
these and the like seditious railors have of late time without all shame, by
fained and false libels sought to discredit her Majesty and her government:
but at this time, these former causes and reasons alleged by way of
aduertisements, are sufficient to justify her Majesty's actions to ye whole
world in the cases remembered.

FINIS.

