ANDROMEDA LIBERATA. OR THE NVPTIALS OF PERSEVS and ANDROMEDA. By GEORGE
CHAPMAN.

Nihil a veritate nec virtute remotius quam vulgaris opinio.
Pet. LONDON, Printed for LAVRENCE L'ISLE and are to be sold at his shop in St,
Paules-Church-yard, at the sign of the Tigers-head* 1614.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHILY HONORED, Robert Earl of Sommerset, etc. AND HIS MOST
NOBLE LADY the Lady FRANCES.
AS nothing under heaven is more removed
From Truth and virtue, then Opinions prou'^
By vulgar Voices: So is naught more true
Nor soundly virtuous then things held by few:
Whom Knowledge (entered by the sacred line,
And gouernd evermore by grace divine,)
Keeps in the narrow path to spacious heaven,
And therefore, should no knowing spirit be driven
From fact, nor purpose; for the spleens prophan
Of humors errant, and Plebeian;
But, Famelike, gather force as he goes forth,
The Crown of all Acts ends in only worth.
Nor will I fear to postrate this poor Rage
Of forespoke Poesy, to your patronage,
(Thrice worthy Earl), and your vnequald grace
(Most Noble Countess) for the one-ear'd Race
Of set-eyd vulgars, that will no way see
But that their stiff necks drive them headlongy,
Stung with the Gadflie of misgouernd zeal:
Nor hear but one tale and that ever ill.
These I contemn, as no Rubs fit for me
To check at, in my way to Integrity.
Nor will ye be incenst that such a Toie
Should put on the presumption to enioie
Your grauer ear, my Lord, and your fair eye
(Illustrous Lady) since poor Poesy
Has been a Jewel in the richest ear
Of all the Nuptial States, that ever were.
For as the Bodies pulse (in Phisique) is
A little thing; yet therein the Arteries
Bewray their motion, and disclose, to Art
The strength, or weakness, of the vital part;
Perpetually moving, like a watch
Put in our Bodies: So this three men's catch,
This little Souls Pulse, Poesy, panting still
Like to a dancing pease upon a Quill,
Made with a childs breath; up and down to fly
(Is no more manly thought) And yet thereby
Even in the corpse of all the world we can
Discover all the good and bad of man,
Anatomise his nakedness, and be
To his chief Ornament, a Majesty:
Erect him past his human Period
And heighten his transition into God.
Thus Sun-like, did the learnd and most divine
Of all the golden world, make Poesy shine;
That now, but like aglow worm, gleams by night
Like Teachers, scarce found, by their proper light.
But this (my Lord) and all poor virtues else
Exposed, ah las, like perdu Sentinels
^o warn the world of what must needs be nie
^or pride, and avarice, glas'd by Sanctity,
Must be distinguished, and decided by
Your clear, ingenuous, and most quiet eye
Exempt from passionate, and duskie fumes,
That blind our Reason: and in which consumes
The Soul, half choakt, with stomach casting mists
^red in the purest, turned mere humorists.
And where with douelike sweet humility
They all things should authorize or deny,
The vulgar heat and pride of spleen and blood
Blaze their opinions, which cannot be good.
For as the Bodies Shadow, never can
Show the distinct, and expact Form of man;
So nor the bodies passionate affects
Can ever teach well what the Soul respects.
For how can mortal things, immortal show*
Or that which false is, represent the true*
The peaceful mixture then that meets in you
(Most te^perat Earl) that naught to rule do thou:
In which, as in a thorough kindled Fire,
Light and Heat marry Judgment and Desire.
Reason is still in quiet, and extends
All things to advantage of your honored Ends,
May well authorize all your Acts of Note,
Since all Acts vicious, are of Passion got:
" Through dead Calms, of our Perturbations ever
" Truths Voice (to souls ears set) we hear or never
" The merely animate Man, does nothing see
" That tends to heaven: It must be only He
" That is mere foul: Her separable powers
" The scepter giving here: That then discourse
" Of Motions that in sense do never fall,
" Yet know them too, and can distinguish all
" With such a freedom, that our earthly parts
" Sincke all to earth: And then th'ingenuous arts
" Do their true office, Then true Policy
" Winds like: a serpent, through all Empery.
" Her folds on both sides bounded, like a flood
" With high-shores listed, making great and good
" Whom she instructs, to which, you (my Lord)
May lay all claims that Temper can afford;
Naught gathering ere to is ripe: and so must taste
Kindly and sweetly, and the longer have,
All fruits, in youth, ripe in you; and must so
Imply a faculty to ever grow.
And as the morning that is calm and gray,
Decked all with curld clouds; that the Sun does lay
With varied coullours; All aloft exhall'd
As they t'adorn even heaven it self were called,
And could not fall in slendrest deawes till Night,
But keep days Beauty: firm and exquisite;
More for delight fit, and does more adorn
Eue^ th'Eue^ with Graces, then the youthful morn:
So you (sweet Earl) stay youth in aged bounds
Even absolute now, in all life's grauest grounds,
Like Air, fill every corner of your place,
Your grace, your virtue heightning: virtue, grace
And keeping all clouds high, air calm, and clear
And in your self all that their height should rere
Your life and light will prove a still full Moon,
And all your night time nobler then your noone,
The Sun is in his rising, height, and set
Still (in himself) alike, at all parts great,
His light, heat, greatness, coullors that are shown
To us; as his charge, merely is our own.
So let your charge, my Lord, in others be,
But in your self hold Sun-like constancy.
For as men skild in Natures study, say,
The world was not the world, nor did convey
To coupling bodies Natures common form,
But (all confused, like waves struck with a storm)
Some small were, and (in no set being, staid)
All comprehension, and connection fled;
The greater, and the more compact disturbed
With ceaseles war, and by no order curbed,
Till earth receiving her set magnitude
Was fixed her self, and all her Birth indu'd
With stay and law, so this small world of ours:
Is but a Chaos of corporeal powers:
Nor yields his mixed parts, forms that may become
A human Nature; But at random rome
Past brutish fashions, and so never can
Be called the civil body of a man;
But in it, and against it self still fights,
In competence of Cares, loyes, Appetites:
The more great in command, made servile more,
Glutted, not satisfied: in plenty, poor:
Till up the Soul mounts, and the Scepter swaies
Th'admired Fabric of her world suruaies,
And as it has a magnitude confinde,
^o all the powers therein, she sees combinde
^n fit Acts for one end, which is t'obay
Reason, her Regent; Nature giving way:
Peace, Concord, Order, Stay proclaimed, and Law,
And none commanding, if not all in Awe,
Passion, and Anger, made to vnderlie,
And here concludes, man's moral Monarchy
^n which, your Lordships mild Soul sits so hie
Yet cares so little to be seen, or heard,
That in the good thereof, her scope is Sphear'd.
The Theban Ruler, paralleling Right,
Who, thirst of glory, turned to appetite
Of inward Goodness, was of speech so spare,
To hear, and learn, so covetous, and yare,
That (of his years) none, things so many knew:
Nor in his speeches, ventured on so few:
Forth then (my Lord) and these things ever thirst
Till Scandal pine, and Bane-fed envy burst.
And you, (most noble) Lady as in blood
In mind be Noblest, make our factious brood
Whose forked tongs, would fain your honor sting
Convert their venomd points into their spring:
Whose own hearts guilty, of faults faind in yours
Would fain be posting off: but, arm your powers
With such a seige of virtues, that no vice
Of all your Foes, Advantage may entice
To sally forth, and charge you with offense,
But sterue within, for very conscience
Of that Integrity, they see expressed
In your clear life: Of which, the examples Rest,
May be so blameless; that all past must be
(Being Fount to the other) most undoubtedly
Confessed untouched; and Curiosity
The beam pick rather from her own squint eye,
Then ramp still at the motes shade, faind in yours,
Naught does so shame this chimick search of ours
As when we pry long for assured huge prise,
Our glasses broke, all up in vapor flies.
And as, the Royal Beast, whose image you
Bear in your arms, and aires great Eagle too;
Sill as they go, are said to keep in close
Their seres, and Tallons, lest their points should lose
Their useful sharpnes, when they serve no use:
So this our sharp-eyd search that we abuse
In others breasts, we should keep in, t'explore
Our own foul bosoms, and quit them before
We ransacke others: but (great Lady) leave
These Rules to them they touch; do you receive
Those free ioies in your honor, and your Love
That you can say are yours; and ever move
Where your command, as soon is served as kown,
Joys placed without you, never are your own.
Your Honors ever most humbly and faithfully vowed. Geo. Chapman.
To the preiudicate and peremptory Reader.
I Am still in your hands; but was first in his, that (being our great
sustainer of Sincerity, and Innocence) will, I hope, defend me from falling. I
think you know not him I intend, more then you know me, nor can you know me,
since your knowledge is imagined so much above mine, that it must needs
ouersee. He that lies on the ground can fall no lower. By such as backebite the
highest, the lowest must look to be de uor'd, Forth with your curious
Scrutinie, and find my Rush as knotty as you lust, and your own Crab-tree, as
smooth. Twillbe most ridiculous* and pleasing, to sit in a corner, and spend
your teeth to the stumps, in mumbling an old Sparrow, till your lips bleed,
and your eyes water: when all the faults you can find are first in your
selves, to is no Herculean labor to crack what you breed. Ah las who knows
not your uttermost dimensions? Or loves not the best things you would seem to
love, in deed, and better? Truth was never the Fount of Faction. In whose
Sphere since your purest thoughts move, their motion must of force be oblique
and angulare. But whatsoever your disease be, I know it incurable, because
your urine will never show it. At adventure, at no hand be let blood for it,
but rather sooth your rank bloods and rub one another.

You yet, ingenuous and judicious Reader: that (as you are your self) retain
in a sound body, as sound a soul: if your gentle tractability, have unawares
let the common surfeit surprise you: abstain, take Phisique here, and recover.
Since you read to learn, teach: Since you desire to be reformed, reform
freely. Such strokes shall be so far from breaking my head; they shall be
rich Balmes to it, comfort, and strengthen the brain it bears, and make it
healthfully neese out, whatsoever anoies it.

Vale.
The Argument.
ANdromeda, Daughter of Cepheus, King of Aethiopia; and Cassiope (a virgin
exempted from comparison in all the virtues and beauties, both o^ mind and
body) for the envy of Juno to her Mother; being compared with her for beauty
and wisdom; (or as others write, maligned by the Nereides, for the eminent
Graces of her self) moved so much the Deities displeasures; that they procured
Neptune to send into the Region of Ceph^us, a whale so monstrously vaste and
dreadful: that all the fields he spoild and wasted; all the noblest edifices
tumbling to ruin; the strongest cities of the kingdom, not forcible enough
to withstand his invasions. Of which so insufferable a plague Cepheus
consulting with an Oracle; and asking both the cause, and remedy; after
accustomed sacrifices, the Oracle gave answer, that the calamity would never
cease, till his only daughter Andromeda, was exposed to the Monster. Cepheus
returned, and with Iron chains bound his daughter to a rock, before a city
of the kingdom called Ioppe. At which city, the same time, Perseus arrived
with the head of Medusa etc. who pitying so matchles a virgins exposure to so
miserable an event; dissolved her chains and took her from the Rock. Both
sitting together to expect the monster, and he rauenously hasting to devour
her, Perseus, turndpart of him into stone, and through the rest made way with
his sword to his utter slaughter. When (holding it wreath enough for so renownd
a victory) He took Andromeda to wife, and had by her one daughter called Perse,
another Erythraea, of whom, the sea in those parts is called Mare Erythraea^;
since she both lived and died there: and one son called after himself,
another Electrion, a third Sthenelus: and after lived Princely and happily with
his wife and his own Mother to his death. Then faind for their virtues to be
made Constellations in Heaven.

ANDROMEDA LIBERATA.
AWay ungodly Vulgars, far away,
Fly ye profane, that dare not view the day,
Nor speak to men but shadows, nor would hear
Of any news, but what seditious were,
Hateful and harmefull ever to the best,
Whispering their scandals, glorifying the rest,
Impious, and yet against all ills but your own,
The hotest sweaters of religion.
Whose poisons all things to your spleenes pervert,
And all streams measure by the Fount your heart,
That are in naught but misrule regulare,
To whose eyes all seem ill, but those that are,
That hate ye know not why, nor with more cause,
Give whom ye most love your profane applause,
That when Kings and their Peers (whose piercing eyes
Broke through their broken sleeps and policies,
Men's inmost Cabinets disclose and hearts;
Whose hands loves balance (weighing all deserts)
Have let down to them; which grave conscience,
Charged with the blood and soul of Innocence.
Holds with her white hand, (when her either skole,
Apt to be swayed with every grain of Soul,
Her self swaies up or down, to heaven or hell,
Approve an action) you must yet conceal,
A deeper insight, and retain a taint
To cast upon the pure soul of a Saint.
Away, in our mild Sphere does nothing move,
But all-creating, all preserving Love,
At whose flames, virtues, lighted even to stars,
All vicious Enuies, and seditious Iars,
Bane-spitting Murmures and detracting Spells,
Bannish with curses to the blackest hels:
Defense of Beauty and of Innocence,
And taking off the chains of Insolence,
From their profaned and godlike Lineaments,
Actions heroique, and divine descents,
All the sweet Graces, even from death revived,
And sacred fruits, from barren Rocks derived,
The Immortal Subjects of our Nuptials are:
Thee then (just scourge of factious populare;
Fautor of peace, and all the powers that move
In sacred Circle of religious Love;
Fountain of royal learning, and the rich
Treasure of Counsels, and mellifluous speech:)
Let me inuoke, that one drop of thy spring
May spirit my aged Muse, and make her sing,
As if th'inspir'd breast, of eternal youth
Had lent her Accents, and all-mouing truth.
The Kingdom that the gods so much did love,
And often feasted all the Powers above:
At whose prime beauties the enamored Sun,
His Morning beams lights, and does ouerrunne
The world with Ardor (Aethiopia)
Bore in her throne divine Andromeda,
To Cepheus and Cassiope his Queen:
Whose boundless beauties, made ore'flow the spleen
Of every Neirid, for surpassing them:
The Sun to her, resigned his Diadem:
And all the Deities, admiring stood,
Affirming nothing moved, like flesh and blood:
Thunder would court her with words sweetly phraz'd,
And lightning stuck 'twixt heaven and earth amazed.
This matchless virgin had a mother too,
That did for beauty, and for wisdom go
Before the foremost Ladies of her time:
To whom of super-excellence the crime
Was likewise laid by Juno, and from hence
Pined Envy sucked, the poison of offense.
No truth of excellence, was ever seen,
But bore the venom of the Vulgares spleen.
And now the much enraged Neireides
Obtained of him that moves the marble seas
(To wreake the virtue, they called Insolence)
A whale so monstrous, and so past defense,
That all the royal Region he laid wast,
And all the noblest edifices rac't:
Nor from his plague, were strongest Cities free,
His bodies vast heap raged so heavily.
With noblest names and bloods is still embrewd
The monstrous beast, the ravenous Multitude.
This plague thus preying upon all the land,
With so incomprehensible a hand:
The pious virgin of the father sought,
By Oracles to know, what cause had brought
Such banefull outrage over all his State,
And what might reconcile the Deities hate.
His orisons and sacrifices past,
The Oracle gave answer, that the waste
His Country suffered, never would conclude,
Till his Andromeda he did extrude,
To rapine of the Monster, he (good man,)
Resolved to satiate the Leuiathan:
With her, before his Country, though he loved
Her past himself, and bore a spirit moved
To rescue Innocence in any one
That was to him, or his, but kindly known,
To grace, or profit; do them any good
That lay in swift stream of his noblest blood,
Constant to all, yet to his dearest seed,
(For rights sake) flitting: thinking true indeed,
The general uproar, that it was sin in her,
That made men so exclaim, and gods confer
Their approbation: saying the Kingdoms bale
Must end by her exposure to the Whale:
With whom the Whale-like vulgar did agree,
And their foul spleenes, thought her impiety,
Her most wise mother yet, the stern intent,
Vowed with her best endeavor to prevent.
And told her what her father did address;
She (fearful) fled into the wilderness:
And to the instinct of savage beasts would yield,
Before a father that would cease to shield
A daughter, so divine and Innocent:
Her feet were winged, and all the search out went,
That after her was ordered: but she flew,
And burst the winds that did incenst pursue,
And with enamoured sighs, her parts assail,
Plaide with her hair, and held her by the veil:
From whom she brake, and did to woods repair:
Still where she went, her beauties did the air,
And with her warm blood, made proud Flora blush:
But seeking shelter in each shadie bush:
Beauty like fire, comprest, more strength receives
And she was still seen shining through the leaves.
Hunted from thence, the Sun even burned to see,
So more then Sunne-like a Divinity,
Blinded her eyes, and all invasion seeks
To dance upon the mixture of her cheeks,
Which showed to all, that followed after far,
As underneath the roundure of a star,
The evening sky is purple'd with his beams:
Her looks fired all things with her loves extremes.
Her neck a chain of orient pearl did deck,
The pearls were fair, but fairer was her neck:
Her breasts (laid out) showed all enflamed sights
Love, lie a sunning, twixt two Crysolites:
Her naked wrists showde, as if through the sky,
A hand were thrust, to sign the Deity
Her hands, the confines, and digestions were
Of Beauties world; Love fixed his pillars there.
Her eyes that others caught, now made her caught,
Who to her father, for the whale was brought,
Bound to a barraine Rock, and death expected;
But heaven has still such Innocence protected:
Beauty needs fear no Monsters, for the sea,
(Mother of Monsters) sent Alcyone,
To warrant her, not only against the waves,
But all the deaths hid in her watrie graves.
The loving birds flight made about her still,
(Still good presaging) showed heavens saving will:
Which cheering her, did comfort all the shore
That mourned in shade of her sad eyes before:
Her looks to perle turned peble, and her looks
To burnisht gold transformed the burning Rocks.
And no^ came roaring to the tied, the Tide
All the Neireides decked in all their pride
Mounted on Dolphins, ro^de to see their wreake
The waves fom'd with their enuies; that did speak
In mutest fishes, with their leapes aloft
For brutish joy of the revenge they sought.
The people greedy of disastrous sights
And news, (the food of idle appetites
From the kings Chamber, straight knew his intent,
And almost his resolved thoughts did prevent
In dry waves beating thick about the Shore
And then came on the prodegie, that bore
In one mass mixed their Image; that still spread
A thousand bodies under one sole head
Of one mind still to ill all ill men are
Strange sights and mischiefs fit the Populare.
Upon the Monster red Rhamnusia rode,
The Savage leapt beneath his bloody load
Mad of his prey, given over now by all:
When any high, have any means to fall,
Their greatest lovers prove false props to prove it
And for the mischief only, praise and love it.
There is no good they will not then commend,
Nor no Religion but they will pretend
A mighty title to, when both are used,
To warrant Innovation, or see brus'd
The friendlesse Reed, that under all feet lies:
The sound parts evermore, they pass like flies,
And dwell upon the sores, ill in themselves,
They clearly sail with over rocks and shelues,
But good in others ship wrack in the Deepes:
Much more unjust is he that truly keeps
Laws for more show, his own ends understood
Then he that breaks them for another good.
And it is the height of all malignity,
^o tender good so, that ye ill implie:
^o tread on Pride but with a greater pride.
When where no ill, but in ill thoughts is tried,
To speak well is a charity divine:
The rest retain the poison serpentine
Under their lips, that sacred lives condemn,
And we may worthily apply to them,
This tragic execration: perish he
That si^ts too far humane infirmity.
But as your cupping glasses still exhale
The humor that is ever worst of all
In all the flesh: So these spic't conscienc't men
The worst of things explore still, and retain.
Or rather, as in certain Cities were
Some ports through which all rites piaculare,
All Executed men, all filth were brought,
Of all things chaste, or pure, or sacred, naught
Entering or issuing there: so curious men,
Naught manly, elegant, or not unclean,
Embrace, or bray out: Acts of stain are still
Their Sirens, and their Muses: Any ill
Is to their appetites, their supreme good,
And sweeter then their necessary food.
All men almost in all things they apply
The By the Maine make, and the Maine the By.
Thus this sweet Ladies sad exposure was
Of all these moodes in men, the only glass:
But now the man that next to Jove comptrold
The triple world* got with a shoure of gold:
(Armed with Medusa's head, and Enyos eye:
The Adamantine sword of Mercury
The helm of Pluto, and Minerua's Mirror,
That from the Gorgus made his pass with Terror)
Came to the rescue of this envied maid:
Drew near, and first, in admiration stayed
That for the common ill of all the land,
She the particular obloquie should stand:
And that a beauty, no less then divine
Should men and women find so serpentine
As but to think her any such event:
Much less that eyes and hands should give consent
To such a danger and to such a death.
But though the whole Realm labored underneath
So foul an error, yet since Jove and he
Tendered her beauty, and integretie,
In spite of all the more he set up spirit
To do her right; the more all wronged her merit,
He that both virtue had, and beauty too
Equal with her to both knew what to do:
The Ruthles still go laughed at to the Grave
Those that no good will do, no goodness have:
The mind a spirit is, and called the glass
In which we see God; and corporeal grace
The mirror is, in which we see the mind.
Amongst the fairest women you could find
Then Perseus, none more fair; among worthiest men,
No one more manly: This the glass is then
To show where our complexion is combinde;
A woman's beauty, and a manly mind:
Such was the halfe-diuine-borne Trojan Terror
Where both Sex graces, met as in their Mirror.
Perseus of Loves own form, those five parts had
Which some give man, that is the loueliest made:
Or rather that is loueliest inclined,
And bears (with shape) the beauty of the mind:
Young was he, yet not youthful, since mid-yeeres,
The golden mean holds in men's loves and fears:
Aptly composde, and soft (or delicate)
Flexible (or tender) calm (or temperate)
Of these five, three, make most exactly known,
The Bodies temperate complexion:
The other two, the order do express,
The measure and whole Trim of comeliness.
A temperate corporature (learned Nature says)
A smooth, a soft, a solid flesh bewrays:
Which state of body shows the affections State
In all the humors, to be moderate;
For which cause, soft or delicate they call
Our conquering Perseus, and but young withal,
Since time or years in men too much reuolu'd,
The subtiler parts of humor being resolved,
More thick parts rest, of fire and air the want,
Makes earth and water more predominant:
Flexible they calde him, since his quick conceit,
And pliant disposition, at the height
Took each occasion, and to Acts approved,
As soon as he was full informed, he moved,
Not flexible, as of inconstant state,
Nor soft, as if too much effeminate,
For these to a complexion moderate
(Which we before affirm in him) imply,
A most unequal contrariety.
Composure fit for Jove's son Perseus had,
And to his form, his mind fit answer made:
" As to be loved, the fairest fittest are;
" To love so to, most apt are the most fair,
" Light like it self, tran^parent bodies makes,
" At ones act* the other joint impression takes.
" Perseus, (as if transparent) at first sight,
" Was shot quite thorough with her beauties light:
" Beauty breeds love* love consummates a man.
" For love, being true, and Eleutherean,
" No Injury nor con^^^elie bears;
" That his beloved, either feels or fears,
" All good-wils enterchange it does conclude
" And man's whole sum holds, which is gratitude:
" No wisdom, noblesse, force of arms, nor laws,
" Without love, wins man, his complete applause:
" Love, makes him valiant, past all else desires
" For Mars, that is, of all heavens erring fires
" Most full of fortitude (since he inspires
" Men with most valor) Cytheraea tames:
" For when in heavens blunt Angels shine his flames,
" Or he, his second or eight house ascends
" Of ruled Natiuities; and then portends
" Ill to the then-borne: Venus in aspect
" Sextile, or Trine does (being conioyn'd) correct
" His most malignitie: And when his star
" The birth of any gouernes (fit for war
" The Issue making much to wrath inclined
" And to the ventrous greatness of the mind)
" If Venus near him shine she does not let
" His magnanimity, but in order set
" The vice of Anger making Mars more mild
" And gets the mastry of him in the child:
" Mars never masters her; but if she guide
" She love inclines: and Mars set by her side
" Her fires more ardent render, with his heat:
" So that if he at any birth be set
" In the house of Venus, Libra, or the Bull,
" The then-borne burns, and loves flames feels at full.
" Besides, Mars still does after Venus move
" Venus not after Mars: because, of Love
" Boldness is handmaid, Love not so of her:
" For not because men, bold affections bear
" Loves golden nets does their affects enfold;
" But since men love, they therefore are more bold
" And made to dare, even Death, for their beloved,
" And finally, Loves Fortitude is proved
" Past all, most clearly; for this cause alone
" All things submit to Love, but love to none.
" Celestials, Animals, all Corporeal things,
" Wisemen, and Strong, Slaue-rich, and Freeborn Kings
" Are loves contributories; no gifts can buy,
" No threats can love constrain, or terrify
" For love is Free, and his Impulsions still
Spring from his own free, and ingenious will.
Not God himself, would willing love enforce
But did at first decree, his liberal course:
Such is his liberty, that all affects
All arts and Acts, the mind besides directs
To some wished recompense, but love aspires
To no possessions, but his own desires:
As if his wish in his own sphere did move,
And no reward were worthy Love but Love.
Thus Perseus stood affected, in a Time
When all love, but of riches was a crime
A fancy and a folly. And this fact
To add to loves deseruings, did detract;
For it was a Monster and a monstrous thing
Whence he should combat out, his nuptial ring,
The monster vulgar thought, and conquered gave
The combatant already, the foul grave
Of their fore-speakings, gaping for him stood
And cast out fumes as from the Stigian flood
Against his great enterprise, which was so fit
For Jove's chief Minion, that Plebeian wit
Could not conceive it: Acts that are too hie
For Fames cracked voice, resound all Infamy:
O poor of understanding: if there were
Of all your Acts, one only that did bear
Man's worthy Image, even of all your best
Which truth could not discover, to be dressed
In your own ends, which Truths self not compels,
But couers in your bottoms, sinckes and hels.
Whose opening would abhor the sun to see
(So ye stood sure of safe delivery
Being great with gain or propagating lust)
A man might fear your hubbubs; and some trust
Give that most false Epiphonem, that gives
Your voice, the praise of gods: but view your lives
With eyes impartial, and ye may abhor
To censure high acts, when your own taste more
Of damned danger: Perseus scorned to fear
The ill of good Acts, though hel-mouth gap't there:
Came to Andromeda; sat by, and cheerd:
But she that loved, through all the death she feared,
At first sight, like her Lover: for his sake
Resolved to die, ere he should undertake
A combat with a Monster so past man
To tame or vanquish, though of Jove he wanne
A power past all men else, for man should still
Advance his powers to rescue good from ill,
Where means of rescue served: and never where
Ventures of rescue, so impossible were
That would increase the danger: two for one
Expose to Ruin: Therefore she alone
Would stand the Monsters Fury and the Shame
Of those harsh bands: for if he overcame
The monstrous world would take the monsters part
^o much the more: and say some sorcerouse art
Not his pure valor, nor his Innocence
Prevailed in her deliverance her offense
Would still the same be counted, for whose ill
The Land was threatened by the Oracle.
The poisoned Murmures of the multitude.
Rise more, the more, desert or power obtrude:
Against their most (said he) come I the more:
Virtue, in constant sufferance we adore.
Nor could death fright him, for he dies that loves:
And so all bitterness from death remoues.
He dies that loves, because his every thought,
(Himself forgot) in his beloved is wrought.
If of himself his thoughts are not employed
Nor in himself they are by him enjoyed.
And since not in himself, his mind has Act
(The minds act chiefly being of thought compact)
Who works not in himself, himself not is:
For, these two are in man joint properties,
To work, and Be; for Being can be never
But Operation, is combined ever.
Nor Operation, Being does exceed,
Nor works man where he is not: still his deed
His being, consorting, no true Lovers mind
He in himself can therefore ever find
Since in himself it works not, if he gives
Being from himself, not in himself he lives:
And he that lives not, dead is, Truth then said
That whosoever is in love, is dead.
If death the Monster brought then, he had laid
A second life up, in the loved Maid:
And had she died, his third life Fame decreed,
Since death is conquered in each living deed:
Then came the Monster on, who being shown
His charmed shield, his half he turned to stone
And through the other with his sword made way:
Till like a ruined City, dead he lay
Before his love: The Neirids with a shrieke
And Sirens (fearful to sustain the like)
And even the ruthlesse and the senseless Tide
Before his hour, ran roaring terrified,
Back to their strength: wonders and monsters both,
With constant magnanimity, like froth
Suddenly vanish, smothered with their prease;
No wonder lasts but virtue: which no less
We may esteem, since to is as seldom found
Firm and sincere, and when no vulgar ground
Or flourish on it, fits the vulgar eye
Who viewes it not but as a prodegie?
Plebeian admiration, needs must sign
All true-borne Acts, or like false fires they shine:
If Perseus for such warrant had contained
His high exploit, what honor had he gained?
Who would have set his hand to his design
But in his skorne? skorne censures things divine:
True worth (like truth) sits in a groundless pit
And none but true eyes see the depth of it
Perseus had Enyos eye, and saw within
That grace, which out-lookes, held a desperate sin:
He, for it self, with his own end went on,
And with his lovely rescued Paragon
Longed of his Conquest, for the latest shocke:
Dissolved her chains, and took her from the rock
Now woing for his life that fled to her
As hers in him lay: Love did both confer
To one in both: himself in her he found
She with her self, in only him was crowned:
While thee I love (said he) you loving me
In you I find my self: thought on by thee,
And I (lost in my self by thee neglected)
In thee recouer'd am, by thee affected:
The same in me you work, miraculous strange
Twixt two true Lovers is this enterchange,
For after I have lost my self, if I
Redeem my self by thee, by thee supply
I of my self have, if by thee I save
My self so lost, thee more then me I have.
And nearer to thee, then my self I am
Since to my self no otherwise I came
Then by thee being the mean: In mutual love
One only death and two reuiuals move:
For he that loves, when he himself neglects
Dies in himself once, In her he affects
Straight he renewes, when she with equal fire
Embraces him, as he did her desire:
Again he lives too, when he surely sees
Himself in her made him: O blessed death
Which two lives follow: O Commerce most strange
Where, who himself does for another change,
Nor has himself, nor cease still to have:
O gain, beyond which no desire can crave,
When two are so made one, that either is
For one made two, and doubled as in this:
Who one life had: one interuenient death
Makes him distinctly draw a two fold breath:
In mutual Love the wreake most just is found,
When each so kill that each cure others wound;
But Churlish Homicides, must death sustain,
For who beloved, not yielding love again
And so the life does from his love divide
Denies himself to be a Homicide?
For he no less a Homicide is held,
That man to be borne lets: then he that killed
A man that is borne: He is bolder far
That present life reaues: but he crueller
That to the to-be borne, enuies the light
And puts their eyes out, ere they have their sight.
All good things ever we desire to have,
And not to have alone, but still to save:
All mortal good, defective is, and frail;
Unless in place of things, on point to fail,
We daily new beget. That things innate
May last, the languishing we re'create
^n generation, re'creation is,
And from the prosecution of this
Man his instinct of generation takes.
Since generation, in continuance, makes
Mortals, similitudes, of powers divine,
Divine worth does in generation shine.
Thus Perseus said, and not because he saved
Her life alone, he her in marriage craved:
But with her life, the life of likely Race
Was chief end of his action, in whose grace
Her royal father brought him to his Court
With all the then assembled glad resort
Of Kings and Princes: where were solemnized
Th'admired Nuptials: which great Heaven so priz'^
That Jove again stoopt in a goulden shower
To Enrich the Nuptial as the Natall hour
Of happy Perseus* white-armd Juno to
Deposed her greatness, and what she could do
To grace the Bride and Bridegroom, was vouchsaf^^
All Subiect-deities stoopt to: and the Shaft
Golden and mutual, with which love comprest
Both th'enuied Lovers: offered to, and kissed:
All answerablie feasted to their States:
In all the Stars beams, stoopt the reverend Fates:
And the rere banquet, that fore ran the Bed
With his presage shut up, and seconded:
And said they sung verse, that Posterity
In no age should reprove, for Perfidie.
Parcarum Epithalamion.
O You this kingdoms glory that shall be
Parents to so renownd a Progeny
As earth shall envy, and heaven glory in,
Accept of their lives threads, which Fates shall spin
Their true spoke oracle, and live to see
Your sons sons enter such a Progeny,
As to the last times of the world shall last:
Haste you that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
^ee Hesperus, with nuptial wishes crowned,
^ake and enjoy; In all ye wish abound,
Abound, for who should wish crown with her store
^ut you that slew what barren made the shore?
You that in winter, make your spring to come
Your Summer needs must be Elisium:
^ race of mere souls springing, that shall cast
their bodies off in cares, and all joys taste.
Haste then that sacred web, haste spindles haste.
Jove loves not many, therefore let those few
That his gifts grace, affect still to renew:
For none can last the same; that proper is
To only more then Semideities:
To last yet by renewing, all that have
More merit then to make their birth their grave,
As in themselves life, life in others save:
First to be great seek, then loved, then to last:
Haste you that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
She comes, o Bridegroom show thy self enflamed
And of what tender tinder Love is flamed:
Catch with each spark, her beauties hurl about:
Nay with each thought of her be rapt throughout;
Melt let thy liver, pant thy startled heart:
Mount Love on earthquakes in thy every part:
A thousand hewes on thine, let her looks cast;
Dissolve thy self to be by her embraced,
Haste ye that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
As in each body, there is ebb and flood
Of blood in every vain, of spirits in blood;
Of Joys in spirits, of the Soul in Joys,
And nature through your lives, this change imploies
To make her constant: so each mind retains
Manners and customs, where vicicitude reigns:
Opinions, pleasures, which such change enchains.
And in this enterchange all man does last,
Haste then who guide the web, haste spindles haste.
Who body loves best, feeds on dantiest meats,
Who fairest seed seeks, fairest women gets:
Who loves the mind, with loueliest disciplines
Loves to inform her, in which verity shines.
Her beauty yet, we see not, since not her:
But bodies* (being her forms) who fair forms bear
We view, and chiefly seek her beauties there.
The fairest then, for fair birth, see embraced,
Haste ye that guide the web, haste spindles haste.
Stars ye are now, and ouershine the earth:
Stars shall ye be hereafter, and your birth
In bodies rule here, as your selves in heaven,
What here Detraction steals, shall there be given:
The bound that here you freed shall triumph there
The chain that touched her wrists shall be a star
Your beauties few can view, so bright they are:
Like you shall be your birth, with grace disgraced
Haste ye that rule the web, haste spindles haste.
Thus by divine instinct, the fates enraged,
Of Perseus and Andromeda presaged
Who, (when the worthy nuptial State was done
And that act past, which only two makes one,
Flesh of each flesh and bone of eithers bone)
Left Cepheus Court; both freed and honored.
The loving Victor, and blessed Bridegroom led
Home to the Seriphins, his rescued Bride;
Who (after issue highly magnified
Both rapt to heaven, did constellations reign,
And to an Asterisme was turned the chain
That only touched his grace of flesh and blood,
In all which stands the Fates kind Omen good.
APODOSIS.
THus through the Fount of storms (the cruel seas)
Her Monsters and malignant deities,
Great Perseus made high and triumphant way
To his star crowned deed, and bright Nuptial day.
And thus do you, that Perseus place supply
In our Jove's love, get Persean victory
Of our Land Whale, foul Barbarism, and all
His brood of pride, and lives Atheistical:
That more their pallats and their purses prise
Then propagating Persean victories:
Take Monsters parts, not aucthor manly parts:
For Monsters kill the Man-informing Arts:
And like a lothed prodegie despise
The rapture that the Arts does naturalise,
Creating and immortalising men:
Who scorns in her the Godheads virtue then,
The Godheads self has boldness to despise,
And hate not her, but their Eternities:
Seek virtues love, and vicious flatteries hate,
Here is not true sweet, but in knowing State.
Who Honor hurts, neglecting virtues love,
Commits but Rapes on pleasures; for not Jove
His power in thunder has, or downeright flames,
But his chief Rule, his Love and Wisdom frames*
You then, that in loves strife have overcome
The greatest Subject blood of Crhistendome,
The greatest subject mind take, and in Both
Be absolute man: and give that end your oath.
So shall my sad astonished Muse arrive
At her chief object: which is, to revive
By quickening honor, in the absolute best:
And since none are, but in Eternity, blessed,
He that in paper can register things
That Brass and Marble shall deny even Kings:
Should not be trod on by each present flash:
The Monster slain then, with your clear Seas, wash
From spots of Earth, Heavens beauty in the mind
^n which, through death, has all true Noblesse shinde.
FINIS.

