AN Answer for the time, unto that foul, and wicked Defense of the Censure,
that was given upon M. Charkes Book, and Meredith Hanmers.

Containing a maintenance of the credit and persons, of all those worthy
men: namely, of M. Luther, Calvin, Bucer, Beza, and the rest of those Godly
(...)of Gods word, whom he, with a shameless (...)most slanderously has
sought to deface: finished sometime sithence:

And now published for the stay of the Christian Reader till Master Charkes
Book come forth.

Exodus 20. 16.

Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Receive not an accusation against an Elder, but under two or three witnesses.
1. Tim. 5. 19.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Dawson and Tobie Smith.

1583.

To the Christian Reader, Grace and peace from God the father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ, by the holy Ghost sealed in thy heart for ever. Amen.
Marvel not (good Christian Reader) that I have taken upon me, before the
publishing of M. Charkes fuller answer, to say somewhat unto that same
shameless and impudent defender of his proud and ungodly Censure. For first I
consider the great hurt that may come, by reason, that the common sort lack
judgment, To try the truth by men's persons absurd, and unequal.
when such outrageous and unjust sla^ders are spewed forth: the common sort
being given rather to measure the truth by men's persons, then their persons by
the truth, which is a very absurd and unequal trial to try the truth by. For
why should the naughtines of men prejudice the truth of God? Why should Judas a
(...)tor deface the doctrine of Jesus Christ, Mat. 26.
or discountenance any of the rest of the Apostles? Why should Peter's
inconstancy and fear in denying his Master, disadvantage the constant Mat.
26. 70.
truth for which he afterward suffered, and all the rest of the Apostles so
constantly aduouched? Mark therefore good Reader, that this wretch, Act. 2. 22.
12. 4. etc.
against whom I write, that he may deface the Gospel of thy redemption,
labors for nothing more, then to deface their persons, that have bin some of
the most singular instruments, that ever God raised up in his church since the
Apostles times. With what truth and grounds he charge the^, and upon what
testimony, we shall see afterward when we come to it: In the mean time, I
doubt not but the whole Church, and specially M. Charke will take it well, that
I keep his hands from raking in their filth, and ease him of this foul work:
whereunto, though I be drawn by the adversary against my will, yet it shall
appear that we have athousad for one to charge them with, in the persons not
only of their late restorers of Romish religion, but in their very fathers and
founders: wherein also, if they have made me to rake deeper, (...)was meet, to
the raising up of such a filthy savor that all the world may be annoyed with:
let the^ tha^k themselves. If they say it be against charity, let them
remember that it stands with charity, to maintain innoce^cie against their
cursed teeth: and if it be against charity in us, why was it not so in
themselves, who yet are most guilty, in giving the first example? and let the^
learn the (...) Truth not to be measured by (...).
betwixt the truth and error, betwixt the light and the darkness. In very deed
we do not measure Gods truth by men, nor religion simplye by men's lives, as
they do. We know that al me^ are liars, and in the profession of the Gospel
there are, have been, and shall be, many Hypocrites, such as Romans 3 4.
cause the everlasting truth of God to be evil spoken of, amongst such as 1.
(...)1. 10.
are without, and such as they are (...), to who^ they are stones of offense,
Luke 12. 1.
set up in Gods just judgment, that they may stu^ble at them, forsake Romans 2.
24.
the truth, and be confirmed in error, and confounded to their utter Isay 52. 5.
destruction. But why should this withdraw from truth? Why should the Mat. 18.
7.
darkness of me^, put out the clear light of the gospel: seeing it shines not
only to discover the unrighteousness of the world, but also (...)chase away
errors eue^ in the best? Why should we be charged with the faults of me^ and
private me^ which our profession do not allow, neither in our selves nor
others? Nay rather, we teach according to the doctrine ofregeneratio^,
mortificatio^ and sanctification, that holiness of life which is not in our
selves and yet we wish in others. We teach the killing of the corruption of old
Ada^, and newnes of life, which these men never understood: to who^, if the
professors of the gospel be (...), if conversation be laid with co^uer satio^
in theirs and ours, and in their several professio^s and ours, their holiness
with ours: we shall be Angels, and they devils: we may as we are (...)show our
infirmities: but they as they are men, al their abominations, not of men, but
of Antichrist, that both in life and doctrine set themselves against Jesus
Christ the (...)of God, and that same blessed spirit of (...), We in professing
the truth, acknowledge our errors, find them (...) cap. 5. de (...)Christiana.
Greg. Martin. cap 10. page 163.
out, and judge them by the truth, condemn them in our selves and in others,
yea, we condemn the very motions, and should or do punish according to Gods
word, both private and public offenders to the uttermost of our powers: these
in professing falsehood and false religion, do maintain every cursed
abomination, and though they say they have Discovery.
Canisius cap. 5. did. 4.
free will, and ca^ fulfill all the co^mandemets of God, yet boldly and impudently
they break the^ al: they make no account of concupiscece, unless they consent
Hosius de sacra. Baptis. cap. 33.
unto it, and though the foam break forth into cursed attemptes, See the
defense (...)the Censure. page (...).
into idolatry, swearing and blasphemy, into profaning the (...)Sabaoths with
their devised religion contrary to his word: though they dishonor them, to
whom honor belongs, commit adultery, buggerie, sodomitrie, and al kind of
filthiness: though they kill, steal, lie and slander, bear false witness, and
suffer every affection to roue at his pleasure, yet these with them are either
no sins, or very light sins, which they will satisfy for, with a little
bodily punishment, which they hypocritically and voluntarily devise and lay
upon themselves. Wherefore good Christian Reader, I be seech thee in the bowels
of Jesus Christ, beware of these pestilent hissing adders, whose poison is not
only in their cursed doctrine Antichriste the head of the papists.
manifestly against gods everlasting word, but also in their sinful, shameful
and abominable lives: their head, being that man of sin and child of 1.
These. 2.
perdition. And albeit in us our sins ought not to weigh against the truth,
which the truth conde^neth and punishes, and we condemn in our selves,
neither to discredit it, nor shake thy faith, because we measure it not by men's
lives, which were to measure light by darkness: yet in them it ought, in whom
both are joined together, false doctrine and evil life: and of these thou
ought to be warned, yt thou may learn to judge Math. 7.
the^, and to know the^ by their fruits. For as their profession is wicked, so
their lives are accursed: as they are Idolaters, so they are abominable
livers, iustifiyng sin, and maintaining it, and lesning it, as afterward shall
more plainly appear. Neither is this to uncover our fathers priutties though
they belaide open and naked. For they are nofathers of Sir Thomas Moore in his
di alogues. (...). 3. ca. 11.
ours, but monsters, and they are those cursed Cammites, that feed their
lustful eyes, in the sight of our priuities, who are their fathers in deed,
which they should hide, because we profess and honor Came the father of all the papists accursed together with the^, sor their shame less (...)of the
wantes and priuities of the Church.
the truth of God, and they are enemies of it. They are those swine and ravens
that delight in nothing but carrion, letting pass whatsoever is wholesome and
good, as not agreeing to their gross appetite and humor. Therefore good
Reader, even as thou love thine own salvation: beware of the^, learn to
have judgment, that thou may discern. Let none steal thy heart from the
love of the truth: men are me^, and (...)in (...)theologia. fol. 130.
these are worse then men: and if any prusate man, come short of that he
professes, why should we be charged with it, rather pray that thou as God in
mercy has opened thy heart to believe his truth, so it will please him to
strengthen thee against all offenses, that thou may also live according to
it, stopping their foul mouths from (...)it, and holding out the excellent
praise and glory of it, by an holy profession to many, to his honor, and thy
everlasting salvation in him. Ame^, Amen.

AS for Master Correctors Declenson of a Nomen Heretic, I omit as a Babble
for a fool to play with: It appears the man traveled with folly, and
could not tell where to lay his burden else, but in the forefront of Parsons
Book, even under his nose; that it might be as a taste to the Reader of the
stuff contained in it. It is pity that his name was not set to it. For now he
must needs forgo the fame and praise of so woordie and foolish a work.
Belike he was some Usher, that was appointed to be a Corrector, and rather then
he would say nothing, he would censure his Masters work both to shame
himself and his Master also.

Dixi.

A Brief consideration of the Publishers Preface to Master Charke.
I Mean not to stand upon words otherwise, then as they comprehend most
manifest and palpable untruths, such as all the world may even handle. For I
know and can witness, that there is no cause so evil, no doctrine so false and
wicked, but that Satan's instruments are furnished, Satha^s instruments
furnished to maintain evil causes.
from that strong spirit of illusion, to say somewhat in maintenance of it.
We are eloquent enough by nature, to speak naughtily, and what error was
there ever so gross that you Papists could not pounze out, and cast some
cunning color upon it: we know that Antichrist your head shall be furnished from
Satan his Grandsier, with all efficacy of deceit, yea he shall come with all
power, with signs 2 Thessalonians. 2.
and lying wonders, with all deceit of unrighteousness in them that perish, Mat.
24.
having a shameful mouth, and a shameless forehead to deceive the Luke 21.
reprobate. But all this cannot deceive us, to whom the Lord has vouchsafed
mercy, and has given a discerning spirit.

Concerning M. Charkes long expectation therefore, of your promised reioynder
for any truth or honesty that he may find in it, it had bin better for the
credit of the Writer, it had been smothered in the begetting and bringing
forth, then to have seen the light, being such an unnatural monster, and
which for the goodness of it, might have come forth, in as sudden and
untimely a birth as the former did. But where you say, that he should guess at
the long travel, nay, that he knows and is (...)to the cause thereof, Surely
herein you show your impudency. For if he had looked for it, why might it not
have come out long or this? As Soon as the former, for any thing that is in it
better. O but Persecution has let, you are destitute of al helps: Indeed
it is great pity No helps are to be allowed to the wicked.
that you should not have fullibertie, rest, Libraries, Conference, etc. to
write against the truth, to disquiet her Majesty's subjects, to turn our
happy peace into trouble, to practice your treasons: and to broche your
heresies to the whole world. You complain like murderers and thieves because
you cannot murder and kill freely.

Where you threaten further kindness, that be inpart knew that the author
addressed himself to a defense, and that the print was dispersed, that is even
as true as the other. For ought that ever he A popish nest discovered in
Oxford shire, where their press and printe was taken, and their works (...).
could hear or understand, there was no such copy taken with your seditious
furniture. In deed some other of your follies were met withal, your nest was
discovered, and your cockatrises eggs, before they were fully hatched, were
broken and dispearsed. But all this is to show how master defender was
hindered, and yet what a man he is, that amidst so many losses, has wrought
such a wonder. Parturiunt montes and nascitur ridiculus mus: The mountains
swell, and there is borne a ridiculous mouse.

Again, it was pity that he kept not his first resolution upon the James 1.
8.
difficulties alleged: but a wavering minded man, is inconstant in all his
ways, he would and he would not answer: Especially master Charkes book
answering it self, Of this also he complains in the last division of the last
preface, which made him forsooth, to set down his own censure again at large.
being very obscure in many places, and very weak, so as it needed no
confutation, and most of all because Campion the subject of the whole matter
was now taken, whom we had so long desired and thirsted after: but I wonder,
whence you drew such a conclusion, that therefore you looked he should be
disputed withal, according to reason, and al our own promises, openly and
publicly, etc. Was it like that this should give you any hope, and make you
slack so necessary a work? no, no, you knew full well, that whenever you
attempted to confute the truth, you should but wash a tile: and if master
Charkes book had been so easy a pill, for you to swallowe, we should have
heard of it long ere this: or if it had answered it self your foolish pains
might have been well enough spared. And But he knew well enough by M.
(...)answer that such disputation was dangerous and inconuenie^t
as for Campions being taken, whom you call the subject of the matter, whereby
you confess a man to be the foundation of your whole work: (...)should his
being taken hinder your co urse: Where did any one of us. much less al,
promise him or you, any such open and free disputation? Should we promise that
which was not in our power? or if we had been so foo, lish, being (...)men to
have promised, as he and the rest of you, have been (...)to challenge, how
should we have performed it? Surely I Disputation.
think you suppose us to be princes, to do what we lift: because you are
insolent, and take upon you, that for which you have no warrant.

Of like consequence is it that you say, we desired his taking: whereby you
would insinuate, that we thirsted for his death: no no, it is you who have
always thirsted for blood: we wished him more fear of God, and The (...)blood
(...)men.
grace, to have holden him in duty and obedience both toward him and his
Sovereign, then had he not come to that shameful and deserved end he came to.

Concerning our handling him when we had him, before and after our conference
in the Tower, of his making away by death, without any show or shadow of
crime, and of M. Charkes following him to the place of Execution, with big
looks, stern countenance, proud words, merciless behavior, which caused M.
Defender to resume his defense, for the honor of Christ's martyr (forsooth);
and to show his valor in reasoning and learning. These accusations best
become an impudent, shameless, and lying defender. For he charge us, with
that which the magistrate, and law laid (...)upon a wicked runnegate and
traitor, whereby, in nipping us, he does not only belie us, but reaches at
those whom God has set in authority over us, and at the seat of justice. And
as for our handling of him, we appeal to all that heard the dealing betwixt
us, whether in any respect any (...)was offered him by us. But the kingdom of
Antichrist must stand by lying. If now and then a sharp word was given, for
repressing his pride and insolency: it was all, I am sure he received no other
blows from us. But what a shameless and traiterous defender is this, when
Campion upon record is condemned That Campion was a traitor, and justly
executed by the laws of this Realm.
for high Treason according to our public laws, that he dare say in print,
that we made him away, that there was no shadow nor show of particular crime
committed by him, either against Prince or country. If his only Religion,
(which yet is high Treason against God, and deserves death an hundredth times
more, then Treason against a Prince or country) had been the cause of his
death, why is not the same proceeding with Watson, Fecknam, Metham, and the
rest at Wisbitch? Why are Bosgraue and others, that now upon better advise
acknowledge her Witness that little Book set forth of their answers to those
interrogatories, under the hands of those worshipful Commissioners that dealt
with the^.
Majesty's foueraignty, and dominion, whether the Pope confess it or no,
(though the law (I say) have passed upon them) why are they spared? But they
care not whom they strike, and this is the account they make of authority, to
charge them with cruelty, that they may mainteyne their whelps.

For the other part of this accusation concerning M. Charke, it needs no
confutation, they that know the man, know him to be no cruel man, and if he
followed Campion to the deserved place of his execution, he did (...)in (...)as
other men did, desirous to win him to salvation. His looks and countenance
were neither big nor stern, his words were * You imagine every man to
(...)like your popes, and popes (...): such as Pandolphus and August. were, of
whose pride and big looks every story is full.
neither proud nor merciless, but humble and full of mercy to have drawn
Campion to repentance, if it had been the good will of God. These properties
are inseparable to blood thirsty Papists, who in Queen (...)and in other
times since, have (...)nothing but cruelty and pride, joining with their
words, swords; and always concluding with faggot and fire, when they were
not able, to do any thing with other argument. As for his reason and
learning, let that appear as it is, I hope he has so learned the truth, that
he shall be able to mainteyne it against al your falsehood, and if he had not, yet
why should the credit of the truth of God, depend upon any man's learning:
less boast, and more roste would make us better like your provision.

That you have bin so good unto us amiddest so many disturbaunces, when you
could not give us the whole, yet to send us a part, we have in some sort to
thank you for your (...): And specially you (M. Publisher) that are so
forward; but seeing master defender taking this matter in hand after the
death of good Campion (as you traitorously call him, your new dubbed (...), but
indeed a traitor, for such commonly are your martyrs now a days) was so
disturbed with our spies, Searchers and other persecutors, I would wish you to
take heed, least you gleane not that which Ca^pion has scattered. For
certainly if once they catch you, though you should be a Lords fellow, they will
hinder your occupatio^ and give you the reward of a traitor, that thus defend
traitors, scatter your seditious and dangerous pamphlets and libels against
true religion, and the state of the la^d. You are not like then to deal
brokenly but wholly. The hemp will be strong enough. And though in our Princes
favor we have gotten the start before you, yet surely you will get the start
before us in another respect, wherein I trust we shall never overtake you. We
will always give you leave to have that advantage.

But whereas you speak of our following the matter with such (...), that we
allow you no one jot either of curtesy or humanity, or of reasonable
indiffere^cy, it is but a Rhetorical lie. We have (...)neither so earnest nor
egar, as we ought to have been, with such obstinate heretics as you are: we
have talked, conferred, written and printed too much with you. For there is no
hope in you, and we ought after 2. or 3. admonitio^s by the counsel of the holy
ghost to avoid you. But would you in good sadness so (...) 10.
feign (...)with us? Would you so feign write, confer and dispute in this All
the sort of them have long ago testified that there is no disputing with us,
(...)they might have liberty, and use their old arguments: read their note in
the Testament of Rhemes upon the forenamed place. Harding Apolo. fol. 20. 25.
115. Staphilus translated by Stapleto^ page 22. and infinite others. Defense.
fol. 3.
last gasp of your Romish religion, contrary to the direction of al your holy
fathers and founders? Why, who has given you this commission? Are we absolved
(man) that you may deal with us? Is not the popes black (...)yet upon us? If
it be, will you have intercourse with us? Well, I know your meaning, you would
confer with us if you might get us in your mouths, as the wolf does with the
sheep, or as the Fox does with the lambs: set you up again in your chaires,
and put the Sword in your hand, and let you alone, you will be good enough for
us.

But it is a wonder to hear how dilligent you make us; indeed you teach us what
to do, and by your selves, that were so egar against us for doing good, you
teach us what to do against your evil. For if we had utterly secluded
(...)from speech, conference, writing, printing, disputing and stopped the
course of your books, as you have done ours, etc, You had not been so wilful,
as now you are. If we had attached, driven away, put in prison, rent on rack
and put to death such traitors as you are, and still show your selves to be,
both religion for the church, and peace for the common wealth, had bin more
assured. If we had left no Innes, Tauerns, fields, stables, barnes, (...), or
(...)unsearched for such vermin, where yet belike you and your companions have
had your haunts, this garboile had bin long ago euded: our rebellio^s in the
North and in Ireland, had bin prevented and (...)your seditious books like
wild fire, would not have come tu^bling forth so fast, nor you had such means
of your inuasio^ against the truth: so many young ge^tlemen, and silly souls in
the la^d had not bin so corrupted, and yet notwithstanding al severity, you
still threaten that we shall not have any Either papists must show better
evidence or (...)they must be the intruders.
quiet (...) in our possession, which you call intrusio^, because we entered not
by your popes permissio^. You will forsooth continue your claim and title (...),
and surely we tell you that we mean to maintain our just and lawful right and
possession: you shall have hard getting it, except you come with better
evidence. It is not the rowt of your Jesuits, nor of your new Annu^cionists or
Assu^ptionists that can so win it of us. And therefore I give you (...), that
if you come not better appointed the^ your father (...) and the rest have done,
you are like to gain no more then they have done in your unjust claim
heretofore: so strong is truth against forgerie, and so mighty is the
sincerity of Christ against ye heresy and treason of Antichrist.

But now you say the credit of our cause is crushed, seeing we fly openly:
and with fury move the magistrate against you; which yet you will bear with
patience and not be discomfited in the midst of al your afflictions, to
resist our falsehood more then before. Example of your good Ca^pion, and the
rest of his companions, who died joyfully, protested their (...), forgave al
frankly; in the midst of al, resisting our foul heresy, and so became pure
constant Martyrs of their Lord and master Jesus Christ, etc. All this is but a
stiff bladder strowted out with wind. For who told you that in our own
conceit the truth is crushed? If we had flyen before you, does the credit of
the truth stand upon our standing? Bristow motive 6. fol. 37. motive 12. fol.
58. motive 15. fol. 40.
If all we were fallen, must the truth therefore be fallen? No, no: though
none of us were able to defend that, the truth shall defend it self. It is an
armor of proof, whereinto your counterfeite pelf cannot once pearce Saunders
de visib. monar. Eccle, lib. 2. page 78 lib. 7. page 130. 734.
or enter: If we move the magistrates, against such dangerous enemies, we do
but our duty. You are Gods and the Queens enemies, under pretense of
Religion you have continually practiced Treason: you still dishonor her,
amongst her enemies: you clip her government, and hold Excommunication of
Pius Quintus set up by Felton, confirmed also by Gregory the 13.
that she is no Queen of yours, nor of ours, because she is an excommunicate
person by the sentence of your Pope, a forteigne priest: whom you hold a God
in earth, that cannot err, and therefore dare not disauouch any his doings.
For this cause you came over, to reconcile her subjects to the Sea of Rome, to
discharge them of loyalty and duty toward her. Think you not then, that it
is our parts, to persuade the^ to justice, to give So Saunders says that Mor
ton was sent over, so was Campio^, Sherwin, and the rest of Seminary Priests
for that purpose. It is the duty of all the Lords watchmen, to give warning
against imminent danger. The Papists patience is (...)perforce.
the^ warning to take heed and to look about them, seeing also by your
bellows, both at home in england and abroad in Ireland, the fire of rebelio^,
has set on fire, the highest beacons amongst us, her subjects led under your
captains and co^ductors in arms against her highness, and against their own
natural country. I say nothing of other nations, but it shall be found when me^
shall learn to judge aright, that the pope and such as depend upon him, are the
common traitors, to all Christian Princes in Europe.

As for your patience, proceeding not from faith, it may welbe a Philosophical
patience, but it cannot be the patience of Christians. And yet what your
patience has bin, your outcries, stirs and insolences, your unquiet and
vnpacified minds can testify. The manner of the death of your new martirs, shall
witness to al posterities, that they die not with that joy, comfort, and
assurance of truth that the children of God feel and taste, that makes the^ to
sleep sweetly, and resolutely, where as yours die doubtingly, and therefore
with fear and horror. But I leave the^ to him, who knows his own. But this
is certain, an evil conscience that is not resolute in faith, ( New Test. of
Rhemes. Annor. in Io. 15. ver. 4. Romans 5. ver. 1.
which you teach to be presumption) cannot have that christian joy and patience
that a Read that whole discourse of R. Parsons, in that hipocriticall book of
his (...)Christian exercise cap. 4.
faithful man does feel.

As for protesting their innocence it was an aggravating of their sin and
villainy, that being so notoriously convicted by so many proofs, evidence and
testimonies, they would not yet confess their offense against God and her
Majesty.

As for their forgiveness, whether it were frank or fainte, that I think you
cannot tell. There was no cause why they should not forgive Wherein he
labors altogether to draw men from faith to works making them the cause of
justification, breathing out his poyso^ with a sweet breath, and with sweet
words covering his deadly venom.
all, that had so offended all: But they would not crave forgiveness there,
where they had most trespassed, and therefore they dyed not in perfect
charity. And as for their detesting of our religion, the more they detested
it, the more miserable and desperate was their estate and condition; that
setting themselves against the truth, had not grace to confess it, but dyed as
it were in the field against it. Concerning the fighting of their blood against
us, we fear not the force of it. For being shed for treason and falsehood,
truth cannot be guilty of it, neither can it gain any victory against true
religion. It is not the death but the cause, nor the shedding of blood, but the
cause of shedding it, that is to be regarded. If you will still pour forth your
blood for treason, and in maintenance of an usurped and foreign jurisdiction:
your blood shall be upon your own heads, and Leuit. 20.
we are clear from it. your blood is no innocent blood, to cry for any
vengeance, Genesis 4.
but it is the blood of Achab, and not of Abel, blessed are the hands 1. Re.
22. 38.
that are first upon you. It is the sword of Gedeon, and that sword of 3.
Reg. 2. 37.
the Lord that Christian magistrates bear, to execute his judgments Romans 13.
against such unnatural wretches, that rebel against God, and seek the
destruction Iugdes. 14.
of their own people. And seeing ye account them so well bestowed, especially
Campion and Sherwin, and all the rest, I am of mind with you, that they were
best bestowed so in deed: Idolaters, Thieves, murderers, and traitors, be
never better bestowed then on the gallows, and the Lord in mercy that loves
Syon, and forsakes not his poor Church, be praised, for pursuing his enemies
to the grave. And he that in his just judgment has thus found them out, will
find you out also, that you shall not go down to the grave in peace, except
you repent and turn to him: which I pray God you may do, if it be his
blessed will, to your own salvation, and the comfort of many.

The two things which you speak of concerning master Charks person, the one
of his writing, the other of his behavior, they shall be considered in their
proper place. Master Charke craves no further credit of the Church of God,
then he shall be found to have dealt faithfully, and sincerely according to the
word of God. He craves no testimony of you, nor such as you are: he
boasts no further of his knowledge, then is meet for a man of his
profession, that knows what soever he has, he has received it, by the mere
dispensation and favor of God. If he come short in any thing, he refuses not
to be taught. As for his behavior toward Campion, when for sooth he was
within the Mark this fru^per at the phrase of the scripture.
reach of his ministerial power, by reason of his high place, gay apparel,
great words, assistance of friends, etc. It is but a stale lying (...), to
fill up the book, for (...)man is sufficiently known, to stand upon none of
these things. If God strengthened his ministry, to daunt such an adversary,
which is the thing that most stingeth you, we praise God for it.

Whether his dealing be false or true, for which by your assignement he may
wear the garland, he will sufficiently declare in his answer. He is old
enough to answer for himself: and when these examples come, we shall
consider of them. I love not to bring sod Colewortes twice; that is a property
belonging to the papists, and fittest for them that will receive no answer.
That question allo concerning concupiscence, which is the greatest bulk of your
book, shall at this time be omitted of me, as being often handeled in other
places.

As for his other tricks which you say proceed not of negligence, simplicity
or ignorance, but must needs be of set malice, as for example, the repeating
of diverse untruths out of Gotuisus concerning the lesuites: you say in the
first book he concealed the authors name, which is most false. For he
names him often in that book. Now you say necessity compelling him, he
confesses. Wherein you discredit your self, and bring credit to him that
he does not conceal them: but yet you say finding in his own conscience the
things to be false which he reports, whereas his author cites always two
books, Censura As though if twenty had alleged one thing, he that alleged
but ten or two, had concealed the (...).
Coloniensis, and Canisius great Catechism, he cites but one, and that not to
be had (which is another lie), and omitteth the other, which shows the
falsehood both of M. Chark and of his author. Yea which is more, when Gotuisus
did not belie the Jesuits sufficiently, M. Charke without blushing, will
falsify his words to make them more odious. Is not here a merueilous long
thread drawn out of a little flax, and no bottom? What a fine spinster is
this, that can make so much of a little, of concealing the one, and aduouching
the other? As though men were always bound to allege all, and in the very
words of their authors, and also might not choose amongst store which to
allege: or as though one author were not to be cited upon the credit of
another, but all the rest must be discredited. why does not sir Robert
confute Gotuisus, and so make way to confute master Charke? But as he uses in
other things, so in this he leapeth over hills and dales, and when he
should overcome the foremost, he strikes at the the hindmost, and when he
cannot touch the heart, he hitteth the heel. But what are the matters
forsooth, that Gotuisus says the Jesuits hold, The Scripture is as it were a
nose of wax, and master Charke says: their words are, the Scriptures are a
nose of wax: What else? O infinite such things in the treatise, which shows
master Chark to be a man of no sincerity. Is not here wonderful a do about
nothing? But I pray you, what difference is there? does not he say that the
scripture is a nose of wax, that says it is as a nose of wax, that may be
turned and wrested which way a man will? Is not their doctrine general, to
derogate from the authority of the scripture: that it is a dead letter, a
matter of strife, dark, maimed, uncertain, a nose of wax, a leaden rule, a
lesbeian building, an occasion of all heresies, which comprehends not all
things necessary to salvation. Is not this doctrine as full in abomination as
that allegation? And therefore Cardinal Hosius worse then any Anabaptist,
says: That Read (...) (...). Col. Censura. Fol. 17 117. 220.
it is a vain labor, that is bestowed upon the Scripture, which is bestowed
as upon a dead and beggarly element, that rather we must look for voices
from heaven that must instruct us. This is the foundation of all their
unwritten verities of man his traditious, which they prefer before the word
of God: because (as Andradius says) It often times comes to pass, that he
is wrapped in a greater wickedness, that breaks the Ecclesiastical
traditions, then those that are Gods: adding that example of the Sacrament in
one kind etc. And yet who knows not that the holy Scripture, commends Pet.
a Soto contra (...).
the Scripture unto us, as a light shining in a dark place, until the day
break forth? And Christ himself (though they would have us to shun them)
(...)us to search them, as those that witness unto his, both his nature and
his will. Abraham also Psalm. 119
signifies to the ritche man that was in hell, that his brethren were 1. Pet.
2.
to be taught out of Moses, and the (...), to the end they John. 15.
might be delivered and obtain everlasting salvation. So Paul affirms to
Timothy, that all Scripture is inspired from above, Luke. 15.
and comprehends all things necessary to the perfection of salvation. 1.
Tim. 3.


Now he wrote this Epistle, when in a manner all the Apostolical writings
were committed to writing, as may appear out of the fourth Chapter. And
concerning your traditions, Christ says: They worship me in vain with the
precepts of men, and Paul plainly condemns Collos. 2. (...).
that will worship in the second to the Collossians.

For his behavior toward Campion in the Tower, whom you so highly advance
for singular learning, those that were present can tell the vanity of this
accusation. He gave him no uncomely words, but such as became both his own
person, and his to whom he spoke. The one, being a godly man, standing for the
truth: and the other, an enemy and traitor, both against god and it. There
was not any one word uttered of barbarous threat: only he might, when he was
insolent, be put in mind of his place and condition.

Of the like vanity is it, that you tell of his turning and speaking to the
people, that they should praise God for his good argument, and of shutting the
doors to keep the people in, to hear his prayer. He might perhaps now and
then as reason was, admonish the people to beware of such a runnagate Friar,
who having challenged our whole church, showed himself so insufficient to
maintain his own cause. As for hatred in his heart, and putting it in
execution: it is too malicious, to be suspected of master Charke, or any such
of his profession. You are the blood suckers, and the malicious men, whose
fury could never yet be otherwise queched, then with the effusion of christian
blood. If I lie, the^ let all the places and countries where ever you ruled
witness against me. If master Charke had had such malice as you say, yet how
could he put it in execution being a private man? To whom did he ever
complain? What indictment did he ever draw, or cause to be drawn against
him? Where did he ever go or intermeddle in any these matters, but when and
wherein he was called? But you may lie by authority. For here are no less
then five together: one that he dealt inciuilie. Another, that he commended
his argument to the people, which you set out tragically. The third, that he
did these to get commendation of the people. The fourth, that master Norton
whom you call fool wisely, the rack master, urged his arguments for his own
purpose. The fifth, that when he was brought to a non plus in arguing, yet he
caused the doors to be shut and no man to be let out till with one consent
they had joined with him in prayer, to give thanks for his victory. Will you
never be ashamed so impudently to set out your lies, when your own side, (if
there be any spark of modesty or honesty in them,) can convince them? I
speak not of Campions brevity, that in less then half three words Mulus
(...)seabit.
for sooth, dispatched his arguments. Why did you not set down his inciuill
words, the weakness of his reasons, upon what credit you had received these
informations. Some Papist told you, and you believed it, and yet In the
disputations: the last day, when it was agreed, that both sides should stay
till their (...)were set down
concerning master Norton, Campion confessed that he took his meaning
rightly, and was in truth as indifferent for that matter to the one as to the
other.

As for prayer, though Papists like it not, but turn it to a certain
coniuring and charming, and crossing themselves, yet we are taught neither to
begin nor end such solemn Actions but with prayer, and to do those things
that we do in the name of the Lord. If the doors were shut, that such of your
sort, which yet had crept in, and were present at the conference, could not get
out when they would, it was not long of M. Charke, who though he were a
disputer, and might provoke to prayer as was meet, yet he was not the porter.
As for the setting out of the disputations, it is not in you to appoint, it may
be they are come, or ever they be welcome to you, and now they are come I
warrant you, for an egg at Easter, of any gain that you can win by them.

Now with an O ysse, M. Charke is cried out upon for greediness of vain
glory: and how is that confirmed? Forsooth, there be men that have judgment in
the world abroad, so in deed there are, or else such blind bayards as your
self, would triumph before the victory. O many smiled in their (...)to
behold this bypocrisie: So there are that will rejoice at their own shame, and
as the Prophet says, Laugh in their own vomit. Yea, but if we had parted
with an even hand, as we joined with him in all inequality: then we should have
had books of triumph set (...)before now. Alack Campion was not the man, that
was to be envied, but pitied. What triumph was there to be had over a dead dog,
and over a shameless and impudent Jesuit? The men that were matched with him,
he was not worthy to lick the dust of their feet. It has In the preface to
the dispu.
bin erst showed, why the disputatio^s were not published sooner: and as for
doctor Fulkes looking in Wisbitch, neither was that published, to show any
triumph of his, but rather to pity, these poor and beggarly wretches, that
being many, durst not match with one, which they would never The (...)which
the Papists at (...) require before they (...)dispute.
have done, if their cause had been good: but they are great crakers and
small (...). All must be, as they will have it. They must first be set at
libertitie, have all their company together: as Campion set down, to come
from beyond the Seas to join with them: The Queen must lay down her crown,
disanul her laws, overthrow the truth, and set them in equal hope together
with us, and then the match is equal.

As for Campions racking, of which you so often speak, it was for treason and
not for religion. We are not to be charged with it, but his own wickedness,
whom the Lord found out in his sins, and brought a just judgment upon
him. If it were possible that you might be brought in an equal hand to deal
against us: we fear you not, we know your learning, your time and standing,
we come not with Saules armor, but with David's slyng: and though the odds
were as great betwixt you and us, as in deed it was betwyxt David and Goliath,
to the eye of man: yet we fear you not. For we come not in the strength of
flesh and blood, with degrees, and time upon our backs, although all know we
have had as much, and as many as you, but in the name of the Lord, armed with
truth, and with your own swords, we shall be able, and have been, to cut
your own throtes: in the name of the Lord of Hosts, we shall vanquish you, and
put you to flight.

Concerning your proud challendge made in the name of all your (...): when we
know your commission, and what safe conduit you can grant us, and have you
bound for our charges, we will tell you what we will do. You are like unto a
man that will cast his glove in defiance, and no man will file his hands upon
you. And as for your liberality, we know it is not with sincerity: there is
a hook within the bait, and the offer is but to allure us to your spray.
Again, if we have dealt with Campion and Sherwin, whom you so highly
commend, ((...)them be as they were) and with their fathers and masters, I
think we shall not need to fear you. For if the masters be so weak, what are
you their punies and scholars? But one thing I had almost forgotten, that you
do not only request us, but even conjure us to grant your request. I had not
thought you had been such coniurers before now: But to whom speak you, to a
prince or subjects? Is it in our power when we will after the truth
established and received, to open our gates and ports, to such Runnagates and
Traitors? Were you ever refused; Did you ever come in, and were not received?
You conjure us to come, and appointe the place, and then you run from us, and
mock us: drink you would but draffe is your arrand. O but fear moves us, to
deny this request: In deed as you say, who are most afearde, they that come
out, and stand (...)keeping that possession by the grace of God, they have of
the truth, or you that when you have provoked, are not to be found? If you be
free from treasons, come in deed with a mind to find out the truth, are in
doubt and would be resolved, (...)then I doubt not but you may be heard?
But there is nothing in your mouths but lies. For whatsoever you crake, you
mean it not: If we have not truth, convince us of error by Gods word: lay
your heads together, examine every point, by opening and clearing the
controversies betwixt you and us: Do it by short arguments and sillogismes
rightly drawn from the authority of the scriptures, so you shall reclaim such
as you think are (...)from you, confirm such as cleave to you, and stop our
(...)for ever hereafter for speaking any thing against you.

Then you shall neither be at that cost, (...)endure that danger you talk of.
For her Majesty's warrant, I can say nothing, but if it should please her to
grant it, I doubt you would not be so ready to perform your promise: and
yet there is great odds betwixt the promise of a faithful princess and your
promise, that always have been false. And I see not, what cause we have, more
to trust your safe conduit of the counsel What cause they had, may appear by
their own stories, and by the cruel death they were put to.
of Trent, then John Husse, and Hierom of Prage had, to trust the council of
Constance. You are large and gentle in promising, but scant and cruel in
perfourming, and that may appear not only by your Popes, Popish princes and
confederates, but even by you all, who hold it for a principle, that to
dissemble with an heretic, such as you slannder us to be, is a good policy.
And this trusting of your popish generation, has cost many a thousand godly
men their lives. What judgment others are of, I cannot tell, but for my part,
I will trust you no further then I see you. Howsoever a woolfe shall
counterfeit a lamb, (...)live in a house like a dog, as many of you do, yet
you cannot but show your woluish natures. And therefore I am of mind, there
is no trusting of any of your offers. There is small profit in disputing with
obstinate heretics. And whatsoever you prate of disputation, you cannot abide
that true disputation, which shall maintain the truth: but as Augustine once
said, you love to overcome by a most impudent manner, that you may gather that
which you never brought (...): that as the manner of all heretics has been,
you may deface men, and being convicted of your treason, and (...), ye may
(...)to backiting and slaundering.

As for your provoking of us out of the land, it is all one with us either at
home or abroad, to stand for the truth. We fear not (...)own people, we can
be content before them, to yield a reason of our hope, though their judgment
may be weak sometimes to (...)it. But seeing you are so francke, if you will
send us word of your resolution, under a convenient number of your hands,
that you are ready in all places, to try this matter: For we would beeloth
upon such a fickle man his word, as your self is (whose name we know not,
unless it be some great Parson) to be so provoked: but I say, if you will send
us word, your names and abiding places, we will become suitors for you, that
at Geneua, or in some other University, under the government of the Gospel,
some convenient number of you may be admitted to set up your questions and say
what you can. As for making of fermons, you shall receive our answer, when we
know your abiding, and how to send you word. For the passage of your books,
it is not in us to grant, they that are in authority are wise to consider,
how tolerable they are, being the very bellows of rebellion, full of
falsehood, slander, and lying, full of false doctrine, heresy, and cursed
abomination, being full fraught of all kind of wicked immanitie and cruelty,
not touching the living, but the dead, not the common sort of men, but the
honor of the most excellent men, whom God in great mercies toward his
Church has raised up in these last times, to display your cursed doctrine,
and most abominable lives, (...)is the cause of your bitter galle and spite
against them.

A defense of master Charkes Preface to the answerer.
IN the first section, there are nothing but words, barely affirmed in the
(...)of their readiness, to have their spirits proved. And this he proves
by their books extant, calling to trial all sectaries: and here he makes
an hotchpotch, matching with true Ministers of So does Staphi Ius, Ficklerus
and the rest, to bring those that were sound and godly into (...).
Christ such heretics as are them selves. For he matcheth Luther, and
Carolostadius together, that were at great odds: Zwinglius and Munser,
Calvin, and Stancarus: and yet he knew well enough, that neither Calvin nor
any of the rest, did ever agree with any that fell to heresies, or did
maintain them. But forsooth they have confuted them: Surely so, as wicked men
are wont with darkness to confute light, in them that were sound, or to
confute heresies in heretics, themselves being the greatest heretics that
ever were: as Tinkers, who are wont when they endeavor to mend one hole to set
down another, or rather in steed of mending one to make many. O but they
offer daily, and take great pains, yea they come with danger of their lives,
to make trial. Indeed they proclaim defiance and dare not come to the battle:
for notwithstanding the commandment of their superiors of voluntary trial, I
never knew any to come in, but against their wills, to aduouche their errors.
But how will they be tried? Why forsooth, they will be tried, by themselves, they
are the Church, we 1. Cor. 14. 32
are heretics, intruders, and what not? The spirits of the Prophets must be
subject to the Prophets. Now they are the Prophets, to whom we must render
account of al our doings. But Sir defender (that I may use Hardinges own
phrase) who made you judge in your own cause? You beg shamefully that which
is in question. For first we say that you are no true Prophets but false
Prophets, you usurp the name of the true (...)a Soto. (...). (...).
Church being a false, of the universal (if you be any,) being but a
particular, and therefore may (...)as men, as your own Doctors have confessed.
VVittenb. cap. de concilijs.
Whither the^ shall we go for the trial of spirits? Surely the spirit must be
Alfonsus a Castro aduersus Here Is lib. 1. cap. 8.
judged by the spirit. For whatsoever sauoureth of the spirit, shall be tried
by the spirit, in those that are enlightened by it, in whom the Church
consists, and where the spirit is. For the spirit is not without the
Verractus (...). (...)cap. 24. etc.
Church, and the Church is found in the Scriptures and no where else. And
therefore the Apostle says: The spiritual man judges al things. What better
way can there be to find out the spirit of error, but by the spirit 1. Cor.
(...). 15.
of truth: And how shall they be discerned that boast of the spirit, but by
August. (...). de correctione (...). cap. 30. (...)Epi. cap. 3.
the only word of God suggested by the spirit? When we offer therefore our
spirits to be tried, by the rule of S. John, concerning a true confession of
Jesus Christ, first also (as the Apostle says) believed with the heart, Where
knowledge and trial is to be sought.
and then confessed with the mouth, which also has this further (...), to make
us call upon him, and to acknowledge him our only Prophet, king, and Priest,
derogating from him, none of his offices, but receiving his whole word, and
bringing into knowledge his whole counsels, submitting our selves unto his
will. This must needs be a plain and evident trial which indeed the Papists
could never abide. August. lib. 1. de (...). (...)cap. 1. ad (...). 19.


This is the cause that they shun only Scripture, as a terrible bugge. For
if the trial should once come to that, as indeed it ought to do, the matter
would soon be at an end. I say it ought in all matters of Religion, being
necessary to the faith of a christian man, whatsoever they be. As for other
things without that compass, we refuse not such trials, as are (...)for them
also: But he says: This is a shifte common to all (...), such as Master
Charke is. And the cause thereof Augustine does testify of the Heretics of
his time. But first he should have proved us Heretics, and then have given us
that name. August. testifies truly, that al Heretics abuse the letter of the
Scriptures, as do the Papists, Anabaptists, Family of love, and such others.
But is not this a good (...)Heretics catch at the letter and words of the
Scriptures, to maintain their errors. Ergo the scriptures are not the touch
stone, to try al spirits by; yea but (...)are other things to try the meaning
of the scriptures by, and what are they? Forsooth the sense of the Church: Of
what church? Forsooth of that Synagogue of Rome, of her Doctors, of her
general councelles, and such like conspiracies, and I cannot tell what. As
though the scripture written by Gods spirit, should be expounded by the
spirits of men, and of such Erroneous men, as from time to time by the
scriptures have been found to (...)the son of God: as though there should
be uncertainty in GOD, and certainty in these men: Emptiness in
(...)writings of the Apostles, and (...)in their balde and absurd (...);
especially, when they have delivered, That the Scriptures are to be fitted to
the time, and to be understood (...), so that at one time they are to be
expounded, according to the universal current rite (...).
or ceremony. But if that ceremony be changed, then the sentence is to (...).
2. (...). 7.
be changed. Again, if the Churches judgment be changed, why then Gods
judgment is also changed. Farther the scripture, as touching the letter, is
not of the essence of the church, which may be utterly destroyed by (...).
a Tyrant, but it is the spirit that quickens. (...), Prierias, Eckius,
Hogstratus hold, that the Pope alone may determine all matters of faith, and
that the Pope may expound the scripture as he will. Habet authoritatem
interpretandi sacram Scripturam authoritatine pro suo sensu, Therefore, what
may we hope for, concerning the Synagogue of Rome, that challenges to be judge
over all, seeing it is proved by the practice of it, that sometime they
interpret the scripture one way, and sometime another; as afterward may
appear by their contradictory doctrines.

But here M Defender puts down three causes, why these new Teachers
appeal (...)to Scripture: We must by the way endure (...)names, without any
proof, when it is evident, that they are the new Teachers, and we the old:
teaching the same doctrine that Moses, Our doctrine the same that the Prophets,
Christ and his Apostles have taught.
the Prophets, Christ, his Apostles, and all holy Martyrs have taught and
professed, according to that word (...)the beginning of the world: and they
resisting it, and persecuting it. But what are these three? Forsooth the first
is to get credit with the people. The second, because we would exclude
Counselles, Fathers, and Auncetours of the Church ( who from time to time,
have declared the true sense of scripture unto us) that we might have
liberty, and authority to make what meaning we list, and thereby give color
to every fancy we list to teach. The third, because we would deliver our
selves from all ordinances or doctrines, left unto us by the first pillars of
Christ his Church; not expressly set down etc. For the first, whether it
be a way to get credit to cleave to the word of GOD, with the common people,
let them judge that know how contrary it is to man's corruption, only to
rely upon it. Indeed it deserves credit with all, when they shall see,
that we justify God in his word, and forsake our own testimonies, and the
testimonies of (...)and blood, (...)who made him a God, to know our purpose,
and to enter into Papists (...)all things for the praise of men.
our hearts? We leave it to all the world to judge, whether they hunt not
more for the praise of the (...), and (...)of men, then we do: who like proud
Pharisees do whatsoever they do, to be seen of men, Mat. 6.
and to be praised of them. And therefore bring the scriptures of God into
captivity under men, and under their interpretation to flatter them withal.
And so in other things: they fast and pray openly, at every pillar, and every
street: they give their alms like (...), and blase their vainglorious good
works to all men, etc: which also shows the purpose of their heart.

For the second, touching Councels, Fathers, and (...)etc. We (indeed)
exclude them from being either above, or equal with the word of God, we make
them not Judges, though some times in matters of story, to show the practice
of the Church, we admit them for witnesses. The (...)is, because General
councelles have Read all the Fathers, and this shall be found true.
erred, and have been one against another, one Doctor against another and
diverse times against them selves. The second Council of Ephesus, was against
the Council of Chalcedon, the one condemning, and the other absoluing
Eutiches. The second of Nice, (...) Councels against Councels.
that of Franckford, about images. The first of Nice, and those of (...),
Mentz, and of Carthage, about the marriage of Ministers: Those of Constance and
Basil, against those of Florence and Trent, about your holy fathers usurped
Supremacy, and so of diverse others, Concerning Fathers and Doctors, whether you
mean the former or the later, Fathers against fathers.
it is so also of them. For if councels gathered together in the name of God,
hearing each others reasons, and debating matters for finding out of truth,
have yet thus iarred; to the end we should not rest upon them as judges, but
only upon the Scriptures: what are we like to find amongst men, yea amongst
the eldest; and what then amongst the latest? If in the eldest, as in Irenae
the error of the Chiliastes: in Cyprian Anabaptisme: Lib. (...).
in Tertullian the heresy of Montanus, that there should come a new holy
Ghost, a new Prophecy, also condemning second marriages, and Read their
works who shall: and they shall find in the^, judging the^ by the Scriptures.
denying it to be lawful to fly in time of persecution: In Origene in finite,
which Hierom writing to (...)has noted before us, and so in all the rest, how
may we be judged by them? we speak not of those that you count errors, but
such as are errors indeed both with you and us. What shall we say then of
Thomas and Scotus, and your other school (...)Illirie. lib. de (...)Papist.
men and fool men? What shall we say of your other late writers, of your
Popes, and of their Canons in all times? It would fill a whole volume, to declare
al their errors and dissentions.

O But we cleave to only scripture, that we might deliver our selves from
traditions, which you call ordinances and doctrines of men, and Traditions
infinite, variable, unnecessary, hurtful and offensive.
surely, we have also good cause so to do. For as they are infinite and
variable, so also they are impious and ridiculous, neither fit nor possible
to be kept. If any can be proved out of the word of God, as derived from those
first pillars of his Church, containing in them no impiety, nor bynding the
conscience, as equal with the word of God, but are proved necessary to order
and edification, why these we receive, and allow, and follow the^ as patterns
to direct us by. But as God and men are to be discerned, so are those
traditions of God, and the traditions of men far unlike, and differing in
authority (...). And therefore those wicked traditions, which you have forged
and feigned as necessary to salvation, which want both a commandment and a
promise of God, we utterly detest them, to wit, of your sundry sorts of
masses, applied to al diseases and danngers, your Vigilles, years mynds, and
months mynds, your processions, churches dedicated to Saints, your
counterfaite fastes, from See their Pontifical, their mass book and such
other good stuff.
Butter, flesh, cheese and eggs: your feigned Relics of Saints, your holy
bread, and holy water, your Rosaries, blessings and exorcismes, of salt, ashes,
herbs, trees, palm, leaves, flowers, oils, flesh, grease, wine, and cheese
for the health both of body and soul. Should we not I pray you, upon the
credit of your Synagogue, receive all these? Is it not a good ease by cleaving
to the Scriptures only, to unburden and acquit our selves of all these
abominations? If you may obtain every devise without Scripture, then we must
yield a woorshippe to the Ass upon palm sunday, we must carry about the
Sacrament like Idolaters, (...)worship the bread: we must have a Letanie of
Saints: we must have your Popish confirmation: and many iestes in it: we
must have cream and spettlein Baptism, sensing and swinging to every idol; we
must (...)in (...)Catechism.
have an infinite number of Monks, Nuns, and Friars, and every one tugging
for his order, like caterpillars of the earth, eating us up and devouring us:
and together by the ears amongst themselves for their sundry ceremonies,
kinds of service, and a thousand such like wickednesses. As for Martine
Luthers opinion, denying seven Sacraments, and acknowledging 3. and then
properly confessing but one, and the confession of Auspurge that followed him,
teaching 3. and Melancthon 4. See the harmony of the confessions of the
Churches, that clear us from this slander.
and Calvin but two: and I cannot tell what: because these make nothing for the
proof of that you have in hand: they shall receive their answer in another
place. Though men have their sundry opinions, yet the Scripture is one, and
certain: we stand not to justify any man's private and particular opinion,
but would have al men's opinions brought to the trial of the word of God.
Wherein though men do double many times in their knowledge, in respect of
their ignorance, time and grouth, which makes against you: yet the truth is
one, and has certainly discussed, that there are but two Sacraments, which we
only follow and allow of. But for these places alleged by you, I add
further, that you might have considered that Luther wrote that book De
captiuitate, not the last. When Luthers book De captiuitate Babilonica was
written.
For if you had looked either into his great Catechism, or the little one that
was the abridgement of the other, you should have found but two. As for
Melancthon, who holds as you say 4; It appears you took them not by an
even tale. For in his last common places, where he aunsweareth those wicked
articles Bauaricae Inquisitionis, he holds that there are properly but two
Sacraments, howsoever more generally King Henry not the head of the Church as
the Papists understand by head, in their Antichrist.
the name Sacrament, was common to more etc.

Now whereas you bring in M Calvin for the title of King Henry, calling
himself head of the Church, and the Magdeburgens for holding that opinion
still, as M. (...) and they understood it, it was, and is according to the
Scripture, that none ca^ be head of the Church, but Jesus Christ, who is the
only king thereof. We disclaim not one Pope, and allow another. But as God
has erected Princes, in their several dominions, to govern the people
committed to their charge: so we hold, that they professing the Gospel have a
sovereign power, and are heads of their dominions, next and immediately under
God, and therefore also are chief members of the Church, and have to do, as
appointed by God to see his laws received and observed, and justice
administered amongst al states and persons, according to the word of God: your
cancred malice therefore, shall not provoke that mischief you aim at. Princes
that are taught of God, are wise to consideral circumstaunces, both what moved
M. Calvin so to write, and in what sense, that title for a time was retained.

As for that you write, of the opinion of burning Heretics, and of books
being written too or fro, it helps your cause little. It is enough, Heretics
are to be cut off, not such as they call Heretics, but such as they are
themselves, who are proved to be Heretics by Gods word. This also he handles
afterward.
that we have testified by our example, that Heretics are to be put to death:
and if some Anabaptist or Heretic, that would live as they list, have started
out such books out of their own de^nes, what is that to us, seeing we have
both answered them, and are ready to aunsweare whatsoever they or you can
object against the truth thereof? Neither does this help your cruelty, that
put not Heretics to death, but Christians, and such as profess the Gospel of
Jesus Christ against your cursed Idolatries.

Concerning Luthers heat against those that he called Sacramentaries; in
regard of those other excellent gifts, that God bestowed upon Concerning
Luthers heat.
him, for the benefit of so many: we do easily pardon. We thank God that
crawling out of (...)Dunghill of Popery, he was no more infected then he (...).
We doubt not, but if he had lived til these days of light and knowledge, he
would have had better judgment both in that, and some other points of
doctrine, which he did some what too toughly mainteyne. You have little cause
therefore to condemn our Christian modesty and holy persuasion; of his and
such like brethrens salvation, who though they iumpe not with us in all
things, yet holding the foundation, are not to be condemned, as desperate
Heretics. And as for Master Whitgift, and M. Cartwright, howsoever they have
differed (...).
and striued about the government of the Church, you shall find that they both
agree against your false Religion, and wicked Abominations, and as the Lord
shall make them wise by his word, they shall set them selves against every
thing that is not according to it. But must all the differences and
disagreementes of men, that profess (...)word of God, be attributed to the
word of God? Is not this a fine conclusion?

There are amongst men that profess one God, and one word of The (...)of
the Papists.
GOD, great differences; some are too far, and some are too short, some are
wise to discern, and some see but a little, some have a sounder knowledge, and
some a weaker: Ergo to appeal to the Scripture only, is an uncertain thing.
All pretend the authority of the Scripture: Ergo all have it, Ergo the
Scripture, is a nose of wax to serve to all purposes, because men abuse it.
Much like as if you should reason, the Spyder draws matter of Venom from
the Rose, therefore the Be must suck no honye from it.

But to stay upon Scripture only, you say, It is to deny all Fathers,
Doctors, Councelles, histories, examples, Presidents, customs, (...)and
prescriptions, and to make our selves Judges over them. Yea, it is to deny the
Books of Scripture them selves, and the sense, The papists account that a
fault in us, which they challenge them selves.
reserving all interpretation to our selves. But what is this else, but to beg
that which is in question? To charge us with that, which your selves usurp,
and put in continual practice. And how is this to deny the books of
Scripture: when we stay only upon the Scripture? And how is this to deny
the sense of the Scripture, when we stay upon that interpretation of the
scripture, which is by scripture, which is not private, of, or by any man,
but from the holy Ghost: And is this to deny Councelles, Fathers, Doctors,
Hystories, and Examples, etc: When we read them, consider of them, thank GOD
for the light and helps, they yield to us, by these gifts God has given
them; yet, always trying them, and all things by the only touchstone, which
is the scripture? Is this that Jesuitical Logic, that will make up the mouth
of Popery, against which, no man shall dare to wagge? Surely it is peeuishe,
it is foolish. Yea, but Catholics though they give sovereignty in all
things to it, yet they bind them selves also to other things besides. Very
well, that is to say, though the scriptures be chief, yet they set other
things equal with them. And what other things be they? If they be of men:
Why then it must follow, that you match the things of men with GOD; you make
earth equal with heaven; the wisdom of the (...), you couple to the wisdom
of the spirit. And this is one of your chiefest Abominations: your wits are
unhappy enough, to abuse the truth? But (...), whether they have more liberty
to roaue abroad, that have the Who use grea ter liberty, the Papists or we,
we that only keep our selves to the scripture or they that roue up and down,
and are bou^ded within no lists or bounds.
wide world to wander in; or they that are sh ut up in a parlar? Whether are
they looser to choppe and change, affirm and deny, allow and mislike; that
rest in the Scriptures or they that will wander in every wilderness of men's
devises, customs, prescriptions, and I cannot tell what? Indeed I know that
the word of God, is larger then all the world, and he is at greater liberty,
that is bound unto it, then he that wandreth after men; and yet we acknowledge
Gods gifts in men, and when the fathers speak as the word, we acknowledge
the word in them, and reverence Chrisost. in Ioh. bomil. 16. (...). 3. in
opere imperfecto.
them for the words sake. But if they speak, as Chrysostom says: With the
voice of a stranger, then we cannot hearken unto them. We know the voice of
Christ, but not the voice of a stranger. And all that are Christ's, do always
speak in Christ's voice, and if this exception be to Ioh. 10.
be taken of them that are Christ's: How should we except against them, that
have plainly proved themselves to be none of Christ's? You may therefore put
up your pipes, concerning those whom by supposition you call Heretics, but yet
could never prove them so to be, for standing only to the Scripture. As for the
interpretation of the Scripture, it is from the Author of the Scripture, not
from men's writings, but from the Scriptures themselves, which are not of any
private interpretation, as 2. Pet. 1. 20.
the Apostle says: Master Charke chanteth therefore worthily, as a good 2.
Tim 3. 17.
Musition upon this special point, treading the path of al faithful Christians
before him in keeping himself fast to the Scriptures, and you like a rouing
Heretic follow the paths of your forefathers, that dare not be tried by that
rule of righteousness, but follow your own sinful devise, and as you are a
corrupt flesh fly, so you feed upon the corruptions and soars of men,
because you love that, which is most agreeable to your corrupt nature.

That Spirits must be tried you confess, but that full and (...)rule out of
the Apostle vexes you to the heart, and howsoever you rave (...). Ioh. 4.
at it bringing in a diversity of interpretations, to set them at odds with M.
Charkes, as that the ancient fathers interpreted it of the Jews: and against
Ebion and Cerinthus that denied the Godhead of Christ, and (...)his coming in
the flesh: and rather against M. Charke and his fellows: yet it will sit nearer
your skirts, then that you can so easily remove it. For albeit, it be nothing
to the purpose, if you should bring twenty diverse interpretations, of sundry,
to prejudice the true meaning gathered naturally out of the circumstances of
the text, yet what lets that interpretation of the Doctors, that it should
not be also applied to you. For Christ is resisted by some, one way, and by
some, another: As the Jews therefore, Ebion and Cerinthus denied Christ,
dissolved Jesus Testamente (...)in the annotat. upon 1. Tim. cap. 2.
(that I may use your own word) so do you in truth, though you confess him
with your mouths. For of him with the Jews you deny him, to be a sole,
sufficient, and only Savior. You destroy his true humanity, and crucify him
continually, as they did. You stand upon former privileges, pretend a
personal succession, and fathers: even as they did when yet they crucified the
Lord of glory, for which act you praise Lut. Cortez in li. 3. distin. 3. (...).
Aquin.
them, and teach they had sinned deadly, if they had not done it. Even as the
Ebionites also taught, that faith was not only sufficient to salvation, but
that the keeping of the law must be joined with it: so do you. Again, you
hold with them, that Christ was not before the John de (...)Cremata.
Virgin Mary. What heresy is there in the world, that you do not communicate
withal, in one point or other? I have showed it largely Iren aus lib. 1.
Epiphanius.
in another place, and therefore mean not no we to stand upon it. With the
Valentinians you have devised an infinite number of Gods. As the Collyridians
sacrificed to the virgin Mary, and worshipped her, so do August.
you. As the Angelists gave divine honor to the angels, so do you. As
Montanus deuisyd laws for fasting and dissolved Matrimony, so do Read
Tapperus Ficklerus, and the whole brood of them.
you. As the Tatians, Eucratians, and Manichees, cried out that marriage was a
carnal kind of life, and forbade it to those that would be perfect, so do
you. As the Pellagians denied concupiscence of it self, and without consent to
be sin, and ascribed to the natural powers This may appear through out S.
August. in many places
strength to do spiritual things: and affirmed that a man is saved by
keepyng the law, so do you: and it is the greatest matter handeled in this
book.

Master Charkes good grace therefore in interpreting that place of John, cannot
be so easily wyped away. For if Christ must be confessed, as he must in
deed, then the controversy is not of the confession of his name in bare
words, and with the mouth only, but of his power, of his offices, that is to
say, of his prophetship, of his kingdom, and of his They that deny the
offices of Christ, his kingdom, priesthood, and prophetshippe, they deny
Christ.
priesthood acknowledged also from the heart. And though all the papists in
the world swear, that they allow these in Christ, and answer the matter
with a (...)flam, that they allow Prophets, teach kings to reign under
him, and priests to sacrifice under him: it cannot help a whit to clear them
from that just accusation. The (...) is not, whether there be Prophets under
Christ, Kings and Priests (wherein yet they show their ignorance, seeing it
is plain, that Prophets as they are strictly taken, such as were before
Christ's coming, are now ceased: and also that office of Priesthood of
sacrificing for sin, is ceased, seeing it is done by Christ) but whether
they, not resting in that which Christ teaches alone, nor suffering that
government he has established by his word, but erecting a false head,
which they will have visible, and general over the whole Church, which can
agree to no mortal man, and not contenting them selves with that all
sufficient and only sacrifice, but devising another most blasphemous and
injurious to his, do not deny Christ, in that sense, that the Apostle
means, to try all false spirits by. Yea forsooth, but they allow Prophets
under Christ, ergo, they rest in Christ the only Prophet. They allow
Kings, but they must be the Popes vassals: ergo, they deny not the kingdom
of Christ. They allow Priests, that is true: more then ever Christ
ordained: ergo, they deny not Christ his Priesthood. These arguments hold
thus: what is your name? A poke full of plummes.

But he takes compassion of master Charkes interpretation. But what should a
man think of this? Does not he, (think you) hye the mark as just, as he
that never came near it, when he alleges the fourth to the Ephesians, to
prove Prophets under Christ, where the Apostle reckons up all those
officers that he gave to his Ephe. 4.
church, for the edifiyng of his church, both those that were before and after
Christ, the one temporal, and the other continual, and yet he finds
neither Popes nor Cardinals, nor any other of their new (...)orders. Concerning
kings, the beast may be ashamed, to say, that these whom he calls
Puritans, do deny the office of kings. For it For he meneth by Purita^s not
the Anabaptists and spiritual illuminates, but those that dutiefully seek the
reformation of the Church.
is themselves, and their wicked generation, that always have trampled under
foot, that order instituted and appointed of God, have invaded their offices,
and drawn all government both from heaven and earth to that foul and
insatiable monster, that man of sin and very Antichriste. These are the
Mysteries of Puritanisme laid open enough: And whatsoever such villains belch
out against Jesus Christ and his saints, yet he is that Prophet alone that
teaches his people by his doctrine and word, which is absolute, and cannot
be either added unto or diminished from: that only Priesthood, that he put
out of place all other Priesthoods for to establishe a kingly Priesthood,
which is a spiritual and an holy generation, which now offer not any more
sacrifice for sin, but continual praise for deliverance from sin, who is
the only head of this kingdom, to rule it by the Scepter of his word and to
give it all necessary gifts and graces fit for the beautifying of it, in
that spiritual government, which Papists understand not.

As for his traditions, (not the traditions of Christ and his (...)) (...)
because there can appear no such warrant for them out of the word:
therefore they ought not to be compared with the word: They do impeach the
doctrine of Christ and his Apostles. For how can they stand with it when
they are besides it, nay when they are contrary to it? And how can
Antichrists authority, which he will have both spiritual and temporal,
whereby he iusteleth Christ, as much as lies in him, out of his throne, by
his laws that are directly against the laws of Christ, stand with the power
and authority of Christ? Let them show one jot or title of evidence, if
they can for their lives, out of gods holy word, for the maintenance of any
such usurped office, of any such blasphemous Priesthood, or sacrifice found
out by the Devil most derogatorie to that all sufficient and one only
sacrifice of Christ. Heb. 10. 11. etc.
We deny not that there is a sacrifice, but we say it is such a sacrifice,
as all Christians offer in that spiritual Priesthood and kingdom, which is
now reared up and established by Jesus Christ. And whereas he asks how
the traditions of Christ, and his Apostles impeach the teaching of Christ and
his Apostles, I answer, that there are no traditions of Christ and his
Apostles, which we are bound to (...)and receive, that have not special
warrant and evidence out of the word of God. If they talk of traditions
without the word, which Authority of the Pope usurped.
is the question, what abuses are there, or ever were, that under this name may
not be thrust upon the church of God? As for the spiritual authority of the
Pope under Christ: let him show by any right that ever the Pope had any such
authority, either spiritual or temporal, and yet he challenges both: can
this be any other, then a diminishing of the Kinglye power and authority of
Christ? The Mass an Idol of the Popes making patched together by many long
after Christ's ascension,


And as for the Mass it is so far off from being a sacrifice of the altar,
that can stand with Christ his Priesthood or sacrifice, that it was never
instituted by Christ, but patched together by many Popes, quite contrary to
the holy Supper, which is no other sacrifice, then of thanks giving, in steed
of which, when any other is devised by man, it is derogatorie from his, and
most blasphemous, contrary to that sole, and al sufficient sacrifice of Christ,
offered up upon the altar of the cross once (...). 7. and. 9
for all. Therefore it is more then impudency, that he says, that they both
teach it and grant it, but in that manner that it was done: by which manner,
they quite mar the matter: abusing that place of Daniel chap. 12. to prove
their daily sacrifice of the Mass: and also the first of Malachie, which
places, as they have been often miserably wrenched by them, so they have
received their answers long ago. The one mentions that the daily worship
shall be removed (whereby admit that he mean the sacrifice of the law): the
other, that they shall offer to him a pure and clean sacrifice: ergo, must
this needs mean the sacrifice of the Mass? And if Cyrill and other fathers
call it a sacrifice, meaning the sacrifice of the new Testament, which is
offered by us, in the blessed Communion of the body and blood of Christ, what
have they gained for their private Mass? For the execution whereof they
institute of them selves a blasphemous priesthood, making it a peculier office,
to a peculier sort of shauelings, using a strange language, etc. most contrary
to the word of God. We deny not either the priesthood or the sacrifice of
praise, which is the sacrifice of the new Testament, but as for their
blasphemous priesthood and sacrifice which they appropriate to their Pope, and
his greasy ones: there is not any one place of Scripture, or any one doctor
600, years after Christ, that speaks any one express and plain word for
it, how soever they miserably rack the scripture out of joint to draw them to
their purpose: as namely in their late Testament, applying that which is spoken
of Christ, Heb. 4. 16. to the Pope, which they make the Epistle at their
Mass, for the election of the Pope, read He. 4. their annotations upon the
fifth, 7. 9. 10, and 11. etc. The places therefore of Theoderet and Augustine
concern not us, but rather such wretches as your selves are, who have
overthrown that true sacrifice of the new Testament in deed.

Now, though by his own confession he might have made an end, and for the
goodness of the matter, might in deed have put up his pipes long ago, yet
here we have a (...)onset concerning their reasonable offers of trial, and
that we admit none. We forsooth name scripture in words to no purpose,
seeing the controversy is about the sense: Wherein we (say they) admit no
judge but our selves: Wherein he says no otherwise but thus, that for the
sense we must not go to the Scriptures, but to them, who are for sooth the
church, and then that wherewith he charge us, falls flat to his own head.

Again, he is grieved that if they bring scripture, we shift it of with some
(...)interpretation? Wherein we know not what he would have, unless he
would have us to admit whatsoever they bring without interpretation. But he
belyeth us, when he says we shifte it of. All heretics as themselves will
allege the words of the Scripture, See there how trimly? they alleged and
interpreted the (...)in defense of (...)images.
but they will not way the circumstances, nor admit one place to be (...)by
another, but abuse the Scriptures, dallying with them as their forerunners did
in the 7. session of that trifling Nicene council, in (...)of images, to their
own destruction.

Concerning that the fathers wrote in the praise of virginity, it cannot
(...)denied, but they were to excessive that ways: we also praise the gift in
them that have it, and yet we derogate not from holy matrimony: we dare not
affirm, that to live in matrimony, is to live in the Syricius.
flesh, as some of their Popes and others have wickedly done. The place The
place (...)of the 19. of
of the 19. of Matthewe, is as ill applied of you as may be. For the purpose
of Christ in that place is, to take away that offense that was objected by the
Disciples, that if they might not put away their wives, as Moses had practiced,
then it were not good to marry. But Christ shows, that all are not capable
of that saying, but to whom it is specially given. There are in deed (...)from
their birth, and Eunuchs made by men, and Eunuchs, which for the kingdom of
heaven sake, have gelded themselves, that are unfit for marriage, and need not
that remedy either in respect of themselves, or in respect of the gist of GOD,
but what makes this against the lawful and honorable ordinance of God,
appointed to all that have need of it? Again, that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7.
ver. 38. is a conclusion in respect of circumstances that went before, and not
simply in it self. For if they have not the gift, whether they have vowed or
not vowed, let them marry, It is better to marry then to burn: your doctrine
of forbidding marriage to your 1. Tim. 4.
vowed creatures, is the doctrine of Devils. It has been the (...)
sincke of the whole world, and the cause of unspeakable abominations.

Read into what (...)your Pope Nicholas fell, affecting this sole life:
forgette not Paul's young Widows that he mentions. (...). Timothy 5.
Read Epiphanius, Cyprian lib. 2. Epist. 11. aniste, or an Assumptionist, show
me what was his order; Tell us who they were that held of him, or of his name
and office were called Baptistes, unless they were some heretic: and whether
it were not safer to follow the best, I mean Christ, then John: we know
Christ had his Disciples, and so had John: but John sent his Disciples to
Christ, and kept none from him. And though you name Elias, John Baptist etc.
as patrones of Monkerie: yet some attribute their beginning to the Essaeis,
whom Philo in (...)of his Country men the Jews, describes to have been the
streightest and holiest Sozomenus.
So (...)onius.
order: and some ascribe their beginning to Mark: some to one, some to
another. But yet I pray you tell us, by what authority you can frame us so
infinite a number since, without any father or author in the scripture, far
unlike those that in time of persecution for saving of their lives lived in
such solitary places. For your number grows so great, that I think they
cannot well be reckoned, and these latter as that pretend to follow Jesus
our Lord and Savior, whom they forgate all this while to make their patron,
exceed all others: and the (...)are but drudges in comparison of them, unless
these last gay Anuncianistes put them out of countenance. Every particular
company have a peculiar patron, and according to their Cities and Towns, so
are their Gods. Every City, every Church, every Tutelares dei Camp. in
Epist. set out by (...). us.
vyllage, every house, and every man worshippeth a peculiar patron: even as
you appointed to every disease, sickness and danger a peculiar Saint, and
these in necessity must be called upon as singular Saviors.

And as your Gods, patrones, and heads were infinite, so are your means to
salvation diverse and variable: to wit, by works of supererogation, by pardons
from Rome, by Masses, alms deeds, building of Churches, putting on coules,
washings, whippings, and a thousand such trumperies. Your rules and orders,
in your several Monkeries, and fraternities, were of as great diversity in
your (...)ceremonies, as many, as there are colors in the raynebowe, (...)yet
all must merit salvation: yea, and Cardinal Hosius dares affirm, that these
diverse kinds of worshippes devised of men, are more acceptable then, if
(...)were commanded of GOD, because they are voluntary (...)done without
constrainte.

And surely as these monastical sects are variable, so they are together by
the ears one with another, about their prerogatives, and who shall exceed
others in the worthiness of merits. Do not all the world know, how In Paris
a great (...)against Jesuits, and wheresoever they come, where other such
vermin are, like vipers, they gnaw out the bellies one of another.
the Priests and Chanons, rail upon you Jesuits, for (...)late devised order
from Layolas the soldier? And besides other things, do they not complain of
you, that whilst you would be accounted poor, yet you lie in wait for the
wealth and riches of the whole world, and under the color of lacking all
things, you possess all commodities whatsoever? And that there have grown
such a number of sects and orders, that your Popes, and their councelles have
made canons against them, it is plain and evident. Hier. in Epist. ad
Eustochiu^, ad Rusticum. Council. (...). Council (...)Quest. 16. sub (...)Guliel.
de sancto amore. Nicolaus de Cle. (...).


Concerning the real presence, for which you urge Luther against us, with whom,
yet you do not agree, it is worthy no answer. That spiritual presence,
which Ambrose, (...), Epiphanius, and Chrysostom, in the places by you
alleged do maintain, we maynteine and confess. We believe such a presence as
is aduouched to be in all Sacraments: we look not to reason, nor to our
senses, but to Faith: but we may not destroy the nature of Sacraments, which
can be no Sacraments, if there be not the sign, as well as the thing
signified: The one offered to the sense, as consisting of an earthly part: the
other to faith, as being the heavenly and spiritual part. And where as you
say, that we have found out a new Real presence.
exposition of these words: this is my body, affirming that (we say) it must
needs be thus construed, It is the only sign of my body. We say not so. It
is an impudent slander, and you declare of what spirit you are, when you
shame not in the light of the son, and before all the (...)to aduouch such a
manifest untruth. Amb. says: As thou (...)in (...) An. bros hb. (...)Sacra.
cap. (...). And. in (...). (...)ad (...). (...). (...). 11.
received the similitude of death, so do thou in the Sacrament drink the
similitude of his blood. And again, in eating and (...)the bread and Wine, we
do signify the eating and (...)of the flesh and blood, he offered for us. And
in the very place by you alleged: (...)thou will say (says he) I see no
appearance of blood, no, (...)has a (...). Lib. de Sacra.
For eue^ as thou have taken a similitude of his death, so thou (...)the
similitude of his most precious blood. As for Cyrill, none is playner Lib. in
Job. 4. cap. 14.
then he, Christ gave (says he) pieces of bread to his disciples, saying: Take
ye, eat ye, this is my body Chrysostom says: (...)ordained the Table of
his last holy supper for this purpose, that in the Sacrament In (...). 22.
he should daily show us bread and wine, for a (...)of his body and blood.
But why do I enter into this course with you. The Doctors in infinite places,
do testify the truth of this doctrine, that we hold and maintain in our
Church. If you have any thing, it is either by clipping the^, adding unto them
or diminishing from the^. And though Luther in his time brought not only 8.
but 8. score interpretations, and your not learned Claudius de Zanctes, not 84.
but 800. and 4. what makes this to diminish the authority of the Scripture;
This is your reason, Luther in his time noted, 8. sundry interpretations upon
these words, This is my body, which yet is maliciously gathered of you, and
Claudius Za^ctes 84. who is an impudent Friar, and therefore a liar, and althese
allege the Scriptures: therefore there is no fit trial by the scriptures.

We lean not so to men, that we in their names, receive whatsoever comes
from them: that is common with papists, that if any thing be thrust upon you
in the name of any who^ you like of: by and by, you admit it, how corrupt
soever it be. And though Luther had his faults, yet we may truly say, that
he was a man enlightened by Gods spirit, and considering the time wherein he
wrote, being but newly crawled out of the du^ghil of your corruptions, in that
notable fortitude and zeal, wherein he set himself against Antichrist, he may
in some sort be well compared to Elias. This also he me^tioneth afterward. where
look for further answer.
And in regard that he taught the truth in the most principal matters of
faith and religion, we pardon whatsoever he has uttered against our persons,
(as I have said before) which you set forth in the 13. and 14. sections, and
this shall be all the answer, I will vouchsafe to bestow upon you at this time
for this matter.

But your conclusion of the premises is too gross in the 15. section, where
you disfavor the controversy betwixt us, concerning our provoking to
scripture: for we provoke to God, and you to men. We lean not upon any
interpretation, that is private, but to that which is from God, and we refuse
not the testimony of men, when it is not against God.

Further we shift no scriptures. For that concerning vows, it is plain, that
the prophet understands that place of the worship of God. For as Vows.
they received benefits under the law, so they vowed according to the holy
purposes of their hearts, such sacrifices as were enjoined by the law of God;
and what makes this for the maintenance of rash vows in a wilworshippe, Psalm.
76,
devised by sinful men, who neither have the gift, nor power to keep that,
which they rashly promise unto God? And therefore it is justly so wiped away by
M. Fulk. Again tha to there place of Mat. 19. If thou will be perfect, go and
sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor: who Perfection in selling all.
sees not that it was singular for him, that boasted of a perfection above
other; as also that other declares: If thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments: and though this belong unto all, yet our justification is not
from the law, but from faith, which that this young man might have bin made to
see he was beaten from his hold, yt knowing his own imperfection, he might
disclaim it, and rest in that perfection of Christ; which also unless you
Papists do (whatsoever you boast of a more perfection of life in Christianity
the^ others, and therefore do as you think, more then you ought, and therefore at
least must keep the commandments) you cannot be saved. It is pitiful to see
your blindness, how greedily you snatch at that, which yet you cannot Things
spoken to singular persons, in respect, and not simply.
swallow, and leave that which is provided for your everlasting comfort.
Whatsoever pertains to life or doctrine, is common to all, to serve both for
example and instruction, but yet many things are spoken to finguler persons in
singular respects, as the fasting of Christ 40. days, his going upon the
water, his healing of the sick, his raising the dead etc. which yet I think
you will not so apply, as though al your Jesuits should do al such things as
Christ did. But I know where to have you. For in times paste, you had some
shame, but now you have gotten harlots forheads.

That also of S. James cap. 2. Concerning justification, not by a dead faith,
has bin made plain long ago, and not only that, but also that which you The
place of James concerning Justification.
bring out of the 2 to the Romans and again out of 1. Cor. 7. and Mat. 19. where
as you had touched them often. But you make no conscience to blot paper again
and again, with one and the same thing. You are like unto flies, who though
they iolte themselves never so often against the glass, yet they seek still a
way to get out. We hold according to the doctrine of James, that he that shall be
justified both before God and me^, must have a true and a lively faith, which
we discern by good works as by fruits, from that dead faith, which has no
fruits of sanctification, and yet we affirm still with M. Fulk, that those
works that do proceed from the fullest and truest faith that is, cannot
justify us in themselves before God: and therefore when Abraham is said to be
justified by works, when he offered up his son Isaac, ye meaning is plain,
that he was found a justified man by that work, and that was before me^, and
not before God, otherwise the^ as faith being lively, lays hold upon that
righteousness of Christ, which as the apostle says, is neither in us nor 2.
Cor. 9.
of us. Him that knew no sin, he made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him, not in our selves. Such a faith as is true, and
thus laid hold of, the righteousness of Christ, is said to save us, because it
apprehends Christ, and all his riches: but such a faith as James speaks of,
a dead faith, because it lays no hold of Christ, cannot save us. So Saint
James speaks by a certain Catachresis or abusion, setting down works for
an effectual faith by works: and faith, for a vain faith; not that the
beginning of Justification. should be of faith, and the perfecting of it of our
own works and merits. For this were to make God to begin, and man to end:
when it is plain, that both to will, and to perform are only of God, but
because he is in this work of our justification, both the beginner and ender,
to whom is due the whole glory. As for your doctrine, it is full of blasphemy,
robbing GOD of his glory, when you attribute the beginning to God, and the
finishing to your selves. The other place, The doers of the law shall be
justified: shall be afforded you; when you fulfill the law, you shall be justified
by it, and then you need not Christ. Your places of Virginity, and marriage
are answered before. Neither Virginity, nor marriage, in themselves can
merit any thing before God; before men, they may be preferred one before
another, as in some times, and cases, it may be better for a man, if he have
the gift, to be unmarried: In other some to be married.

For Fathers also it has been said before. We reverence them, and Fathers.
thank God for these gifts of God in them, that may bring us any profit or
knowledge for the understanding of the word, but we bring not the spirit of
God to be tried by the spirits of men, but all men's spirits to be examined
and tried by the spirit of God. Where therefore they fail, it is no reason,
that we should fail with them. The word of God must prevail, that has
confirmed, that amongst his Apostles, there should be no superiority, That
Peter had no more prerogative then the rest, that that which was said to one,
was said to al. And though you would burst for anger, yet M. Fulke shall not
be bound to every thing aduouched by the Fathers, whereof you can bring no
sound proof or ground out of the Scriptures. Indeed as they were men, so
many times they trifle and err like men; and this is to teach us, to rest not
in men, nor in their opinions, farther then they rest in GOD, and upon his
word.

The same also may be said of our own Writers; and therefore you do us the
more wrong, when you call us Lutherans, Caluinistes, Puritans, Our own writers.
and I cannot tell what? For as much as we maintain them no farther, nor rely
upon them, then they maintain the truth, and stay upon it. We confess they
were singular and rare instruments of God, to whom the Lord vouchsafed rare
and excellent gifts, for the discovery of your whoredoms, and for the
buylding up of his Church; but yet they were men, and wherein soever they have
erred as men, we persuade our selves we are not bound to err with them. That
is a thing sit test for Papists, whose Babylonical buylding, is upon the
only foundation of men, and not upon Christ and his Apostles. And yet you may
take your selves by the noses in this accusation, for where your own men have
drawn near the truth, there you disclaim them. Hic non tenetur magister etc.
The Who is Caietane or Conturene against the whole Church.
master here was asleep etc. And why should you deny us that privilege,
which you challenge your selves? Will you receive al things whatsoever, at al
times, that the doctors, old, or new, your Popes, and his followers in times
past, or now, have set down and aduouched? And because they have set it down,
must it be true? Indeed if you take this way, you may begin and continue,
what heresy you list, you may maintain it, and defend it too, how absurd
and villainous soever it be? But truth shall scatter errors, as the chafe, and
it shall stand and abide for Disputation.
ever. As for disputation, for which you call so fast, and so often, whenever
Peter Martyr first: Latimer, Ridley, Cranmer, at Oxeford in Queen Mary's days.
Master Philpot, M. Elmer, Haddon, Cheney, and the rest that disputed in the
Co^uocatio^ house. 1553. October. 18.
you come to it, you shall gain as little by it, as your predecessors have
done, that came only appointed as you do. I pray you what gate you, when you
disputed with Luther at Worms, at Ratesbone, and in other places: when
Melancthon and Bucer also were assistauntes? What gained you at Poysie in
France, when Beza and Peter Martyr, were there face to face against you? What
at Oxeforde, when your greatest Doctors in the matter of the Sacrament said
what they could for their lives in mainteining your own corruptions: and
Bucer at Cambridge also disputed (That I omit the disputation in the
Convocation house in the time of Queen Marie) when the swoorde was at your
own commandment, when before the Law you ran so swiftelie, that first
shutting out such as you thought would match you; you declared by that
honest man Weston your Prolocutor, that howsoever any might dispute, yet that
the matter was already concluded and Read M. Foxes book of Acts and
Monuments, printed in 1570. fol. 1571. fol. 1579 and in many places.
determined, with shame enough: when also afterward Latimer, Ridley, and
Cranmer, those Reverend, Godly, learned Fathers, (when their lives lay upon
it) disputed with you, and not only they, but even handie crafts men, men,
women and children, in the Apologies they made at your cursed bars did so
stop your mouths, that you had nothing to say, but to pronounce a cruel and
unjust sentence of death against them. Again, in the beginning of the happy
reign of our Sovereign, when your chiefest Conference at Westminster anno
primo Regni Eliza.
and best me^ were called, and when the time served best, and was, if ever
there were any most fit, your selves being not displaced; when you had free
liberty, I pray you how did you acquit your selves? Surely like tawle
fellows, you went away without giving any one blow, and yet now the battle
is ended, and truth has triumphed; out of your holes, you keep a craking and
daring of all men, and yet evermore, when you come to show your forces, they
are found so feeble that you go away ashamed and confounded; as of late your
old Doctors of (...), that durst not abide one poor man. And your chiefest
Champion that had challenged al, and yet being sounded, was found not so empty
of truth, as of al good learning, either in knowledge of tongues, or any part
of your own popish Divinity. For what could he say more, then other his
masters had said before him? What did he bring, that he had not taken from
Melchior Canus? Canisius (which in disputation, was the only book that he
desired) or out of Belar minus dictates, which is (as it were) the only
Treasury of all the Papists, and your own good master, which has ministered
the matter, not only of this book, but of all the rest that you, or your
traitorous coadiutors, have foysted forth, with such speed amongst us. But
where you say that we refuse it, your slander is impudent: Indeed we think
unmeet, after the establishment of the truth, not that any such boasting
challenger, as Campion was, or your self is, or may be, should draw us to
such an action, as though we doubted of the truth, as though now it were to be
disputed of. We know heretics of al times have used ye like prouocatio^s, and
yt with as great co^fide^ce of their cause, eue^ such as Goliath did against
David: but you say we persecute, impriso^, torment, and slaughter the^ which
offer the same, where in you declare the modesty of your spirit, not accusing
us, but our whole (...). King. 17. 4
state, and begging that which is in question, as though you were true
professors, and we heretics, because you say so, and therefore that you are
persecuted; whereas indeed you are justly imprisoned, and executed for your
dangerous treaso^s and rebellions, as were your co^plices, that were in actual
rebellion against her highness. But in so often using this hot charge, you might
have cooled it with remembrance of your savage cruelty, that all the world
has Read the spanish Inquisitio^, Acts and monuments of M. Fox, M. Cryspius
history, in French of their martyrs, and the last French history of the
beginning and grouth of the churches in France. Popish writers (...)agreed yet
about the Canonical scriptures, which are the books and matching their
constitutions, with Gods word.
wondered at, in racking and roasting the true professors of Christ's Gospel
indeed, for only matter and cause of religion, you might have remembered the
trials you use, and the arguments you bring against me^ of our sort, when you
roast us alive, and devise new unwonted torments worse the^ ever did Phalaris,
or the wickedest tira^t that ever lived, without any knowledge or remorse of
god let your spanish inquisitio^, your murders in France, at Rome, and in
other places testify the truth hereof. As for your largess, out of the
superabu^da^t treasury of your possession, seeming (in your judgment) to be
the best, surest, and easiest means, that ca^ be devised, or ever were used
for trial in the church (because you dwell by il neighbors, and have a good
opinion of your selves) they are indeed nothing. For first, for the books of
(...)scripture, you know not which they are; you bring in every riff raff book,
yea the beggarly constitutions of your popes, and make the^ equal with the
scripturs, and though you boast of the^, you will not be ruled by the^, neither
for that which is set down expressly, or for that which is set down by
implication. Neither does yor literal acknowledgme^t stand you in steed no more
the^ the scribes and pharisees, that had the letter, and the literal
understanding to their own hurt and damnation, but no whit of the spirit or
(...). 20. cap. de libellis, did. 19. cap. in Canonicis. Agath. did. 19. cap.
Sic omnes.
spiritual meaning thereof to their salvation. But is not this a fine argument
trow you, Christ says plainly upon this rock will I build my church. Mat. 16.
But Peter's name signifies a rock, therefore the church is builded upon Peter,
and so upon all the popes Peter's successors, the most of the^ as like Peter in
doctrine and holiness, as an apple is like an oyster. And again, he that Read
August. upon this place, and Hierome upon 38. of Esaias.
(...)great among you, let him be as the younger. Lo, is not this a plain
place, that one was greater then others, and we have no plain place that there
is none greater? Surely if you lay so hardly to our charge, how shall we do?
This is plain gear indeed for your supremacy, so is all the rest, first for
your real presence, absolutio^, vows, (which you bringyet again) traditions,
co^mandeme^ts, works, penance, retribution or reward, prayer for the dead,
sacrifices for the dead, volu^tary afflictions, alms, prayers of saints, and
such like grounded stuff, as naturally inge^dred from your alleged texts, as a
lamb from a woolf. And surely if these be your plain textes, what are your
crooked ones? Surely if you deal thus with us after so many aunswers, we shall
have nothing to reply any further. For these are so plain, as you quite
confou^d us, and none of our shifts ca^ serve. As plain as this is: put you on
the whole armor of God, that you may stand against ye sleights Ephe. 6.
of the devil. This armor are the priestly garments, signifiyng the 7. fold
Gathered out of their (...)Bibles.
virtues, that were represe^ted by the 7. garments, that Christ put on, in the
time of his passion, the first garment was the covering of his head: signifiyng
Mat. 26.
the salvation which is attributed by faith. This the apostle calls the Luke
22.
(...)of salvation, whereby is meant also the covering wherewith ye Jews covered
the face of Christ, when they struck him upon the face and said, areed who
struck thee? The 2. garment was that wherewith he was covered a sursu^ and
deorsu^, I think you mean from top to toe, which was a white garment, and
this signifies the hope which comes by grace from above: and by the merits
of the church from below, and of this Paul speaks. For Luke 23.
you are saved through hope. This also is represented by the garment that Romans
8.
Herod put upon christ. The 3 garment that the priest puts on, is the
girdle which signifies righteousness, whose 2. arms clasping one another, is
to decline from evil, and to work good. Of this Esaias must needs speak, cap.
11. And righteousness shall be for the girdle of his loins. And Reed Rationale
Diuinoru^. Gab. Biel and Vaux his Catechism and there you shall see such
mysteries fetched out of the scriptures, as are pitiful to hear: Why salt,
cream, and spitle are used, why they have lights at noone days, why bells
ringe not on good Friday, but they use wodden clappers, and such (...)stuff.
this pelte was represented by the whippe, wherewith Christ was scourged by
Pilate Ioh. 19. The fourth garment, that the Priest put upon, was a maniple,
put on the right arm, whereby is signified the strength, wherewith we fight
against adversities, and of this the Apostle says: Fortitude is a virtue
restrayning the assaults of adversity. But where this is written I cannot
tell, but this is signified by the cord, wherewith Christ was bound, when he
was taken by the Jews, as itis said: They took him and bound him. The fifth
garment is the stoale of the Priest; or the orarium of the Deacon, which has
two hanging arms, that signify prudence and temperaunce. And thereupon the
apostle says to Tit. 2. Let us live soberly, justly, and godly, in this
present world. This stole represents the cord wherewith he was bound, when
he was tied to the pillar and whipped. The sixth garment is the aulbe, whereby
is signified charity. For even as that covers the other garments, so
charity covers the multitude of sins. And this does that purple garment
represent, which the Soldiers put upon Christ. Ioh. 19. They compassed him
about with a purple garment. How say you Sir, is not here plain Scripture,
and necessary collections upon Scriptures? Surely we might have beaten our
brains these 7 years ere we could have found out the mistical signification
of this profound gear, but we may thank good Gabriel Biel. Rationale diuinorum
and speculu^ Ecclesiae, not only for this profou^d stuff, but for a thousand
such other goodly interpretations. I am weary of wading so far into your
follies. For as it is in these that I have set down, so is it in all the rest,
which for breuities sake, and because I make conscience still to blotte paper
with one and the same thing to trouble the Readers I omit.

As for general Councels, which you say, you admit and refuse none, General
(...).
that ever antiquity used for the trial of a Catholic and Heretical
Spirit: I aunsweare, that though you said true, as you do not, yet these can
be no safe ways to try the truth by, for as has been said before, these
have been contrary one to another, and as there have been more then one Pope
at once, so there have been Councelles according to their several factions in
those same Schisms, the most and Read Onuphrius joined with Platina, in his
Epitom.
greatest, and of longest continuance in your Church, that ever were in any
Church in the world. Besides that, they have erred in great and weighty
matters, and most of all your late Chapter of Trent, whither if we had upon
your safe conduite come, we should have had the same intertaynment, that Iohu
Husse and Hierome of Prague had, coming to the council of Constance, against
your faith and promise, which you aduouch is to be holden or broken, as shall
be best for the commodity of the church. And this is your received doctrine,
that no promise is to be kept with an heretic: and we are (as you say)
heretics, therefore you are not bound to stand to any promise you make us.
This is not only practiced by your Pope, and his Cardinals, but also by such
popish Princes, as stay upon this his doctrine, and direction.

And yet for all this great brag it is plain, that you admit no general
councels: but wherein they resist your error, you resist them. As for example,
you refuse the council of Franck ford, because it determined against the
worshipping of Images, that of Nice that permitted Ministers to marry: those of
Constance and Basil, that subjected the Pope under the Church, and made him
equal with other Bishops, that of Carthage also, that curses him that calls
himself universal Bishop, which your Pope does, and all the rest, if there be
any point maintained against your popish religion.

Concerning the Doctors, which you bring again and again to fill up Doctors.
your book, sufficient has been said before. And yet we say Augustine did
well in urging Julian the Pelagian, with the consent of the Fathers: and so did
Theodosius to hearken to Sysinninus and Nectarius good advise, against the
Arrians. For the consent of holy fathers professing Consent in the truth
allowed by us.
the truth against errors and heresies, is not lightly to be esteemed.
Neither did we set light by that common judgment of these Orthodoxall and
sound fathers, that have lived before us, especially because their judgment
is grounded upon the Scriptures. But what serves this to bind us against the
truth, for trial of it, to be judged by men full of errors, and seeing that
immediately after the Apostles times, the church was combred with many
heresies? I suppose in the first four hundred years, there were not so few
as four hundred heresies, all disagreeing one from another, and all dissenting
from the truth of God: In which time yet God raised up many notable and
singulerinstrumentes, that held up right the glorious profession of the
Gospel, whereby they resisted these heresies and errors, and not by their
own word, or by their own authority. For how can these be any warrant or
strength of that hope which is for ever? Such presumption has notbeen found
in Gods children, but in those of your fort, who have lifted up your selves
above Angels, and made your selves Judges over the law of God.

As for universality, antiquity, consent, and succession of Popes, which
Universality, antiquity, (...), (...)
you have never done with, and bring so often, sometime as marks, and sometime
as tryalles, as you do in this place, they are nothing to the purpose. For
Universality which you call multitude, is rather a mark of the Devils
Synagogue, then of the Church of Christ. Mat. 7. 13. as for the Church of
Christ it is a little flock: neither does the word Catholic, which
signifies universal, help you one whit, whereby is noted not a multitude,
but that how many, or how few soever we are, have been or shall be
hereafter, that profess the Gospel of Jesus Christ, we make all but one
Church. So that the name Catholic (...)all Christians that ever have been,
Catholic, what it means.
are, or shall be, and agrees as unfitly to you, as general to particular, the
whole Church to Rome, which is but a City, and a less corner of the world,
then was that part of Affricke, wherein the Donatistes would have shut up the
universal Church.

As for departing, we have no otherwise departed from you then How we are
departed because they are gone from the truth.
you are departed from the Church, by whom is verified, that which was
prophesied, that many should fall, in the last times from the faith, and give
heed to spirits of error. And the same helping causes, that held Augustine
to continue his sincere profession against the Manichees, do also (...). Tim.
4. 1. Aug. con. Epist. (...). cap. 4.
hold us, for we are in deed true Catholics, and you heretics, we are
retained in the lap and bosom of the Church, sucking that pure and undefiled
milk, and you are in the lap of a strumpet drawing the filth and corruption of
man's superstition and abomination: we have the consent of all peoples and
nations, that are gathered by this voice with us, and you join in the
conspiracy, and treason, of all that are stiffnecked and rebellious against
the Gospel. In whose (...), though there be no end, yea though we be but an
handful, in respect of your confuse heap, yet we have the consent, and you
the dissent, we are Catholic and you schismatic: rent from the fellowship
and body of (...). (...).
Jesus Christ. The place of (...) which you allege is plain for us. For
speaking of the true Catholic church of Christ, whereof we are members: we
also hold it very needful, that we retain that truth, which has been,
is, or shall be, retained of all or most Christians. But Vincentius is not of
mind that we should follow the most, the eldest and the greatest consent, as
things to try the truth of God by, and as they are considered in themselves.
For who knows The (...)worst, and great consent in (...).
not, that the most are worste, that error is very old, and there may be and
is many times consent in iniquity as well as in verity. I am (...)that
Antichriste has been in the world these thousand and five hundred years.
Ioh. 2. 18. The mystery of iniquity began to work and prevail, even in
Saint Paul's days, 2. These. 1. 2. and in deed this is the antiquity of your
Romish Church, whereof you so much boaste. That the corruption of it, in
that Antichristian pride and ambition, that invaded it, and by little and
little afterward crept along, till it had overcome and choked it, till that
abomination of desolation foretold, was now placed in that holy place, and
temple of God, not so much consisting in the removing of those first sacrifices
of the law, and service then established as in bringing in a Maozim, and
vnblooddy sacrifice, such as Christ never instituted, I mean that abominable
Idol of the Mass.

As for their authority out of their counterfeit Hyppolitus, (whose In their
(...)Testament set out by the scho lers of (...), full of ridiculous (...)1.
These. 2.
testimony yet they wrest against us,) it cannot be admitted for current. As
for the antiquity of our Church, we prove it by the Testament of
(...)Christ. And where the doctrine of this is confessed and received they
cannot deny, but there is the Church of God. My sheep (says Christ) hear my
voice, they follow me, and I give them everlasting life. In deed it is not
always so visible upon earth, neither needs it Ioh. 10.
such a visible head, as the Pope is, to whom as Saunders says, it must be
joined or else be schismatic. It is enough that Christ is the head thereof
to comfort it, lead it, and teach it. We know that In his (...)before his
book of images. Diui. 17. 76. etc.
in the world iniquity shall abound. All nations shall be persecuted that
love his name Mat. 24. 9. And Paul mentions that there shall come an
Apostacy before the coming of Christ, that is a falling away of men from
Christ to Antichriste. 2. Thessa. 2. 4, 1 Timothy 4. 2. and Saint John says:
that the kings of the earth and all nations shall worship Antichriste,
Apocalips 13. 16. and 18. 3. That also the church for a time shall be so hid,
and invisible in the earth, that Christ fore warns his to beeware of them as
of liars, that shall say, Here is Christ, or there is Christ: as it were to
point out by places where the church is. Matthew 14. 23. And he has not
appointed it to be known by such (...). Luke 17. But as he says: where the
carcass is, thither will the Eagles be gathered, so where Chiriste is holden
by faith, there is his church, which though oftentimes we see not in that
beauty and glory that were meet: in that ministry and government, which do
lively paint her forth as it were in her colors: yet we must be of good
comfort, and not faint. For such grievous times are foretold, that our faith
may be strengthened: I believe the holy Catholic Church: and that as Paul
says: The foundation stands sure and has this seal: The Lord knows who
be his. 2. Tim. 1. 19.

Now for consent, wherein he would have us to embrace the definitions and
opinions, either of all, or the most part of Priests and teachers in
Antiquity: what does he else herein but go about still to draw us from God
to men? What would he else, but wrap us in those inextricable Labyrynthes of
men's opinions and contrarieties, that we should never be able to wind (...),
and in mean time deprive us of that word of life? Herein also, they not
only renew that great reproach of Belarmi. quest. 5. in dicta. scriptis
Cocleus. Hosius. Pet. a (...). Stapletonus (...) 7. lib. 2. cap. 12. says:
that faith is not learned out of the scriptures. Again, that the holy ghost
teaches the church many things without thescripture.
stainyng the scriptures with insufficiency, but also in a manner they despite
the author of them, as though he had not sufficiently provided for them, or
had deprived them of that which is necessary to their salvation. As if there
were more sufficiency in men, then in God: as if men should supply that,
which God either could not, or would not. This they do when they bind us
to their definitions and opinions of their priests and teachers, and yet dare
call the book of Censu. Colonien. fol. 2 20.
God a matter of strife, affirming it to be no direction nor guide, but this
to be left to them, and that in such an understanding and meaning, as they
give of it. By them we must understand the church of Rome, in Andradi. lib. 2
Council Trident.
whose interpretation without any further ado we must rest, upon pain of the
black curse, and for this cause they bind all their generation to Andradius
in defen. Conc. Tri. priest of Potiers of Later an in conc. (...). Papae.
Eccius. Verractus Pighius de Hierarch.
acknowledge (that I may use their own words:) The holy Catholic and
Apostolical Church of Rome to be the true mother of all churches and
congregations. And again, that the holy scripture is to be believed according
to such understanding, interpretation, meaning, and signification, as our
mother the holy Church has always allowed for good, and at this present does,
to whom of right does appertain to The impiety of the papists in
interpreting the holy scriptures.
give the scripture a right understanding, sense and interpretation: yea her
creatures most solemnly promise, that they will never understand, not
interpret the same otherwise, then according to the interpretation of the
fathers. They have therefore their special daliances in the interpretation,
shifting it off, some time with a litterall sense, some times with a
spiritual, sometimes it is allegorical, and sometimes it is Tropologicall and
Anagogicall. But of all it is not that it should be, In antididagmate. Colo.
sol. 17.
but they turn it and wind it like a weathercock, to serve all turns and to
maintain all their errors, and when no way will serve their turn, then they
leave them and run to men. I speak not this, as though I denied all these
ways of interpretation: but to show their shifts, that having devised so
many, will cleave to none, but still stay upon men: in whose writings there
can be no certainty, both because The doctors corrupted and many bastard
writings under their names thrust upon us.
they agree not amongst them selves, as also because their books and works,
especially of the most ancient that were either in or next to the primative
Church, have not come uncorrupted to our hands: many have been foysted out
under the names of the best, and others are (...): And those that we are
agreed upon have many errors. Who will admit for natural children the Eusebius.
li. 3. (...). 38 Nicepb. lib. 3. cap 18. Epipha. (...). 1. to. 2. beresis. 38.
(...). in vita Clem (...).
bastard writings of Clemens Romanus, who would have both goods and wives
common: of Dionisius Areopagita, who builded forsooth a Temple, and yet is said
to have been so poor that he had not a place to lay his head in: of Ignatius,
of master Hardings Abdias, of Martialis, and of an infinite number of such
like, as far Gennadi. in catal. vir. illustrium. Epist Clemen. 4. (...). li.
3. ca. 4. lib. 4. cap. 23.
unlike the natural children of ancient natural fathers, as you Papists are
those fathers whose children you boast to be, and the Popes that are now those
first good Bishops and martyrs that were in Rome, and yet Auctho. in vita
Dioni. Theodo. Gaza in prefa., in problem. Alexa. Aprodise. Epist. Ignatii. ad
Smir. Read Buchingerus in his eccl. fol. 66. 67. 68.
spite of their hearts, whether they will or no, you will be their sons: and
wheresoever the name of church is found in any Doctor or father, it must by
and by be understood forsooth of that Babylonicall strumpet of Rome.

Such also is your succession, upon which you stand so much, used, as you
say, by the fathers against heretics for proof of their religion. And yet who
knows not, that the succession whereof you boast is only personal. Whereof
Saint Augustine in his time spoke not in that Epistle by you alleged, but had
special regard unto truth, from which thitherunto, they had not declined, in
the greatest and most substancial points of religion, and so may be said of
the rest. As for that The popish (...)cession (...)broken and a lame succes
sion, wherein they are not agreed themselves
ordinary succession, the scripture is manifest, that it fails in the church,
as by the example of Ismael, who followed Abraham: and Esau, who followed
Isaac: the Jews at this day follow their fathers, in all whom is the image
of the church, and yet God changed this ordinary course, and chose
extraordinarily, Isaac, Jacob, and us that be Gentiles. the other (...),
because that first righteousness cleaves in him, and so of (...), be gets
reconciliation, and at length everlasting life an this you call the mercy of
(...), that God has promised (...), Cens. (...). 26. (...).
(...), to them that work well, that is to them that fulfill the law of God.
So that you make all our life and salvation to consist in the commandment of
the law, the fullness whereof is love: And yet the scriptures prove quite
contrary, that our whole health and salvation consists in the merit of
Christ: and Paul teaches, that men are iusufied freely without the works of
the law, whose righteousness performed and paid to the law, is imputed to
every believer: and To. 4. 3. 4, 5.
he adds to prove this, the example of Abraham, of whom it is said: He
believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness: Now to him that
works, reward is not imputed according to grace or (...), but according to
debt. But to him, which works not, but believes in him which justifies the
ungodly, his faith is reputed to righteousness, according to the purpose of
Gods grace. To this end is that saying alleged out of David: Blessed are
they whose Psalm. 32. 1
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered, that is, are not
imputed. And he writes else where of himself, that he would be found in
Christ, not having his own righteousness, but that which Philip. 3. 9.
was of the faith of Christ, and of. God, etc. So that we see here a plain
exchange, our unrighteousness is the debt that Christ has paid of his mere
goodness, and this payment is accounted ours by imputation. And on the
otherside, all our sins are laid again upon Christ, Cens. Col. fol. 46
Conc' Trid. ses. 5. in decrat. de orig. peccat. Caniz. de sacra. bapti. Lind.
lib. 3. cap. 19.
and that righteousness of Christ, whereby he satisfied the law, and pacified
the wrath of his father, is become ours through faith, and is translated unto
us.

What should I speak of your other heresies most blasphemous, in iustifiyng
concupiscence to be no sin, and this law of concupiscence, Tupperus arti 2.
de. peccar. originis In iudi (...)vni. Coloni. (...). Pellic. fol. 42. (...).
44.
Thou shall not lust: you affirm not to belong to us: that it does not forbid
us to have evil desires: that this evil that dwells in our flesh is
forbidden by no law, when as the scriptures teach that sin is simply called
(...), and Paul proves that by the law, we I. Ioh. 3.
know sin, and that if the law had not said, Thou shalt Romans 3. 7.
not lust, he had not known that to lust had been sin: and Mat. 5. 28.
yet sorsooth, this is one of the greatest matters of Divinity, handeled Joan.
1. 4.
in this your railing defense of the Censure, against the whole I. Cor. 12.
course of the Scripture, and all sound writers that ever wrote, who Gal, (...)
not only condemn that consent to lust, but even that titling of our corrupt
nature, which according to the new man is hated, which sin dwelling in us,
not only begets, but also nourishes and brings forth. Chrysostom. homi. in
Ma. 57.
Your other heresies I will not speak of in this place; which albeit you will
Hierony. in 18, Ezecb.
not confess to be heresies, yet as long as they are so proved by the word of
God, and are still defended by your church, they put an end to al controversy
about it.

As for your two conditions, to make it a lawful trial, to be observed of his
part, that will object an heresy to another: one that the accused party do
hold such an heresy indeed, and not the likelihood of it. The other that the
heresy be indeed an heresy, so accounted and condemned in the primative
church: although you might have brought both into one, yet we easily admit
them. For we in truth charge you not with any thing, where of you are not
guilty. Neither do we say, because such an heretic and such an heretic,
held this or that, therefore it is an heresy, we reason not so; that is your
wonted manner of reasoning. But we say, such an heresy contrary to the word
of God, was holden by such and such an heretic: which you hold in like sort
against the word: therefore, in those things you iumpe with them, and are
Heretics. Concerning the heresy of Pelagius, it is certain as may appear
out of infinite your writings, that as he, with his disciples and followers
were enemies to Read that whole treatise of justification, in the Censure of
Colen. page 141. etc.
the grace of God, so are you: as they maintained those natural powers, by
which they had (as they said an election) to do, or leave undone, that which
was good or evil, so say you. And in your opinion set down, you iumble
together man's will, and the grace of God, teaching that the will of man helped
with the grace of God, may not only do well, but Antidi. and the consent of
Colyne.
may fulfill the law of God expuris naturalibus, and so be saved: which is so
much the more monstrous, because you joy ne things contrary in one subject,
talking of the grace of God, and of those pure naturals together, whereat the
Apostle says: If of grace, then not of works. If of pure naturals, then what
needs grace? There is no grace where there is desert, Neither did the
Pelagians utterly deny grace, when in disputation they were pressed, but
confessed more of it, then you do, as may appear by Augustine his book ad
Innocentium. But this is your religion, and Lib. 99.
always has been, that it has never been at a stay. You boast of (...)and
consent, but look how many heads there are amongst you, so many monstrous
opinions also you hold, even in the greatest and weightiest matter of
justification. Some times you attribute to one thing, sometime to another, and
ye are not at one with your selves. You and we both (...)that good works are
necessary, and we agree that what (...)we do, which is good we do it by
the grace of GOD, whereby we are strengthened through faith to testify a
sincere and an holy profession; but we say that our works are imperfect,
we say that the fullest and best, that we can do, are too weak to
justify us in the fight of God, that they deserve nothing but death and
everlasting destruction; (...).
you contratiwise affirm, that good works, serve to cleanse your Catholic.
sins, to pacify Gods wrath, and to attain everlasting life, yea you say,
(...). Perio. in Topicis. Theolog. lib. 1.
that there are three things, that must be obtained by merit, that is
everlasting life, the increase of grace, and the forgiveness of the punishment
(...)sermon. 21.
of sin: And yet that these works, commanded of God, are not the works
that only please God, but also there are freewill works, Compend. Theo. de
gra^.
done at the choice of man, and that without Faith, as Andradius fayneth.
Andrad. lib. 3. page 281. 279.
But we know by the Scriptures, that these works of man's choice, can stand us
in no steed. S. Paul conde^neth (...), and whatsoever (says he) is not of
faith, it is sin, and it cannot please God, Good Romans 14. 23.
fruits, must needs have a good tree. The branches are worth nothing, Ephe.
2. 5. 8.
that are not engrafted into Christ, neither have they anielife, (...)Christ
their life. And therefore if you will magnify the grace of God as you ought,
you must confess, that we are saved by grace thoroughly: not of works, least
any should boast. You must go farther of from Pelagius, and join with
Christians: who hold, that a man is not justified by works of the law,
neither before or after grace, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. We says he,
hauo believed in Jesus, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ,
and not of the works of the law, by which no flesh shall be justified. And
because you take it in such skorne to be charged with Pelagius heresy, I
pray you yet consider further your Galat. 2. 21.
(...)doctrine; which is, that man's free will moved of God, does by consent
work together with the grace of God, so as both do concur in the conversion
of a man, or in bringing forth spiritual actions, to wit, Council. Trident.
the grace of God, and the natural strength of man's free will: your own
Andradius, a chief pillar of yours, says: that the liberty of our free will,
is the (...). lib. 4.
efficient cause of the applying of our (...)to grace; but so, as it is
confirmed by divine helps: and I beseech you how far differs this from
plain Pelagianisme. And yet the Scriptures are plain: No man comes unto
me, unless my Father draw him. And Saint Io. 6. 44.
Paul says: GOD woorketh both to will and to perform, in all Phil. 1. 13.
spiritual actions, for the natural man is enemy to God, neither are 1. Cor.
2. 14.
we fit as of our selves, to think any good thought, much less to do
it. Therefore, this (...), in spiritual things is to be regarded, where with
the powers of men are so diseased, that knowledge wanting, they can much less
have any liberty of election. And therefore Anton. Flor. (...). 1. part.
horrible is that doctrine of yours also, concerning the fulfilling of the
law, that it may not only be satisfied of us, in entionaliter,
constantionaliter, Tit. 11. ca 2 Trident. (...). Pet. a So to in asser.
and integraliter: For these are their own words, but also that the
fulfilling of it, is in a man's own power, to do these things, not only which
the law commands, but over and above the law, and these are their Cathar. de
lege.
Andradius.
works of Supererogation, and these by dispensations and Bulls may be applied
unto others, and unto their use serve as their own, to their justification.
Surely I feign nothing their own books have reserved this dung which now I
fling in their own faces. And yet who knows not The law of God spiritual.
that the (...)of God is spititual, and that it requires a perfect obedience
(...)the whole heart, soul and mind. As Christ himself has expounded in
the 5. of Mat. concerning the exposition of the 5. commandment etc. Seeing no
man has ever bin able to fulfill the law, it must needs follow, that no man can
be justified by it. He has shut all under (...), that he might have mercy on
all: and he has sent his only begotten Son, that he fulfilling the Law,
it might be to the justification of every one that belecueth. Now, if we must
needs confess, that we are not clear, neither from the sins of the first
table, nor of the second, and the law of God requires not only an outward
obedience, but also an inward, and that perfect from the heart, and not for a
while, but through out a man's whole life: it must needs proceed from a The
proud spirits of the Papists.
proud spirit, not only to boast of the fulfilling of the law, but to do
more then the law requires, such as are your vowed chastity and poverty,
whereby you mock both GOD and men: But howesoeuer you (...)the matter withmen,
GOD will not be (...). A time will come when you shall aunsweare it to him. In
mean time you shall answer it also to his Church sor hudling and confounding
the Law and the Gospel so together. For you Jesuits say, that this is the
doctrine of the Gospel, that if we will enter into life, we must keep the
(...): and yet Saint Paul shows Censur. (...).
Fol. 284.
a plain difference. For Moses describing the righteousness which is of the
(...)says: Is a man shall doc these things, he shall live in them: but the
righteousness which is of Faith is: If thou shalt confess the Lord Jesus,
and believe in thine heart, that God has raised him up from the dead, thou
shall be saved.

Now concerning the other injury (you say) we offer you in joining you with
those heretics, who were named Colliridians, that woorshipped the Virgin
Marie: you say, they sacrificed to her, and so do not you, and therefore you
have wrong: but you must remember, that herein they were said to worship her,
because it was the manner of their worshipping, to sacrifice. But if there be a
sacrifice of praise, and of prayer, due only to God, and yet you yield this
without al reason and ground of the word, unto that blessed Virgin; What do
you else, but as these heretics did, sacrifice unto her? This is but a mere
cauil, whereby you would avoid the point, charging us with an injury, that
do you but right, not (...)in this, but in all the rest, wherewith you are
justly charged, because as they were charged for these things done against the
truth of God, so are you. The Anthropomorphites ascribed to God the members and
lineamentes of a man, so do you in making an image of GOD the father, of Jesus
Christ, of the holy Ghost. The Valentinians had their cross and woorshipped
it, so do you. The Eutichians denied the truth of Christ's body, so do you.
The Apostolikes against the warrant of Gods word, vowed and yet kept not
continency and poverty, so do your Jesuits, and all the rest of your Popes
holy orders. The Marcionists also, were exceeding, in praising virginity, in
superstitious fasting, and suffering women to baptize, and so are you: what
heresy ever was there, or is there, with which you do not communicate with
one point or another, with those (I say) that are set down, and condemned for
heresies? You are Carpocratians for Images, Hemerobaptistes for holy water.
Ossenes and Mercosians for devised Relics, and prayers in a strange language.
Heracleans in anointing them that were at the point of death: Eucralites in
abstaining from flesh, and what not? And what sacrifice could you yield greater
unto the Virgin Marie, then that you have given her? when in a manner you have
preferred, and labored to prefer a service unto her before theseruice of
God, as may apyeare in your offices, both old and new, authorized even by your
chiefest fathers, and holiest Popes; wherein you abuse most (...)Mariae nuper
(...), and Pu (...)Gregorij 17. (...). editum. 1578
shamefully the Scriptures of God, applying sundry Psalms to the Virgin Marie,
that were never meant of her, as namely, the 8. Psalm, the 18. the 23. the 44.
the 45. and all the rest, as fitlye to the purpose, as all the rest of your
interpretations are. I speak not of your blasphemous Hymns. O gloriosa
(...)excelsa super sidera, etc. Aue regina coelorum: (...) Dominae Angelorum,
salve radix sancta, etc. But this is most blasphemous and intolerable amongst
the rest: Salve Regina, matter misericordiae, vita, dulcedo, and spes nostra
salve. Adte clamamus Exules Euae: Adte suspiramus gementes and flentes, in hac
lachrimarum valle. (...)ergo aduocatrix nostra, illos tuos misericordes oculos
ad nos convert. etc. Al hayle Queen, mother of mercy, Al hail our life, our
sweetness and our hope. To thee we cry, the exiles of Eve; to thee weegrone,
weeping and mourning in this vale of tears. O therefore our advocate, turn
those (...)merciful eyes toward us. It were too tedious, and would require an
Read that in 16. fol. 49. 51. and thorowout the whole Book.
whole volume by it self, to set down al their horrible prayers, in their
Breuiaries, Portifories Portuises, that they make to the Virgin and other
Saints: and that with setting such prices upon them, that they that say such
and such a prayer, with so many Pater nosters, Aue mary's, and a Credo, shall
have so many years and days of pardon, totie^s, quotie^s, (for that is their
Latin.) As for example, whosoever shall say this prayer following, before our
blessed Lady of pity, they being in the state of grace: She will show them
her blessed visage, and warn them of the day and hour of death, and in their
last end, the Angels of God shall yield their souls to heaven, and he shall
obtain 500. years, and so many Lentes of pardon, granted by five holy
fathers Popes of Rome. The prayer is blasphemous, and begins thus: Obsecro
te sancta Domina, etc. I beseech you holy Lady S. Marie, mother of God, most
full of godliness, the daughter of the high king, a most glorious mother, a
mother of Orphans, consolation of the desolate: the way of those that err, the
salvation and hope of those that trust in thee. A Virgin before her birth, a
(...)in her birth, and a virgin after her birth: the fountain of mercy, the
fountain of salvation and grace, the fountain of (...)and gladness, the
fountain of consolation and forgiveness etc. The like is, Aue Rosa sine spinis.
Al hail rose without thorns, written for sooth with letters of gold in her
breast, and that which was showed to S. (...)by an Angel of her: and that, Aue
Maria alta stirps lilij castitatis. Al hayle Mary the high stock of the Lilie
of chastity. For the saying of which, Bonifacius the Pope granted an 100.
days of pardon: and that Aue, wherein she is called the Queen of heaven, the
gate of Paradise, the Lady of the world, for which Pope Sixtus granted
eleven Fol. 50. 51. 52. in (...)de beata (...): printed at Paris in anno 1534.
thousand years of pardon, for saying this before the Image of our Lady,
Also another to her, for which Celestinus the Pope granted three hundred
days of pardon. Another Aue, for which Pope Sixtus granted, at the instance
of the high and most excellent Princess Elizabeth, late Queen of England, and
wife to our Sovereign Lord, King Henry the seventh, God have mercy on her
sweet soul, (...)al Christen (...). 54.
souls, that every day in the morning after 3. toulings of the Aue bell, 3.
times, the whole salutation of our Lady: Aue Maria gratiaplena, that is to say,
at 6. a in the morning. 3. Aue Mary's, at 12. at noone, other 3, at 6, at even
other 3: for every time so doing, is granted of the spiritual treasure of
holy Church, 3. hundred days of pardon, totiens quotiens. And also our holy
father the (...). of Canterbury and York, with other niene Bishops of this
Realm, have granted 3. times in the day 40. days of pardon to all them that
be in the state of grace, able to receive pardon. And this began the 26. day
of March in anno 1482. anno Henrici 7. And the sum of the indulgence and
pardon for every Aue marie, is eight hundred and sixty days totiens,
quotiens. It must be say de at the towling of the Aue bell, Suscipe verbum
Virgo Maria etc. O Virgin Marie, (...)the word, which by the Angel was sent
unto thee from GOD etc. This forsooth is the penance they speak of, and their
absolutions, when they had committed all their knaueries and wickednesses, to
rob Princes and to cousin them of (...)and (...). Then we must have such
(...)devised shifts to occupy superstitious people withal, and one thing
evermore mark, that there was never any such price set upon any service
done to Christ, as upon that which was done to the Virgin or to some other
Saint. The Virgin had the most, they were so (...)upon the mother, that in a
manner they forgotte both Father and Son. I am weary in stirring this
filthy Quakemyre of their cursed abomination, but that I see it very
necessary, seeing these fine witted Jesuits that will restore all, and
dispute the matter against all that can be brought, defending every
absurdity, do so greatly provoke me. (...). 56.


There is another prayer, that whosoever says deuoutely, he has by It is
called the contemplation of our blessed Lady weeping under the cross.
the grant of Bonifacius seven years of pardon, and forty Lentes; and by the
grant of Pope John the twentye two, three hundred days of pardon. But what
spend I breath about beggerlye things? There is one prayer not very long,
which yet if a man say devoutly (...)matter dolorosa.
in the woorshippe of Saint Anna, and our Lady, and her Son Fol. 85. in
(...)a (...).
Jesus, he has granted by Alexander the sixth, ten thousand years of
pardon for deadly sins, and twentye years for venial sins totiens
quotiens. And because it is so short, and yet the gain so great, not to
deprive thee of such a commodity, to bring thee out of Purgatory: (For Iam
sure the Pope is a man of his word) and thou need not to fear but it is
true, seeing it is printed and set down: I will show it thee. Aue Marye,
full of grace, our Lord is with thee, Blessed art thou amongst women, and
blessed is Saint Anne thy Mother, of whom thou Uirgin Marie cammest forth
without blotte and sin, and of thee was borne Jesus Christ the Son of the
living GOD Amen. Pater noster Aue, Aue Maria. Is not here an easy pennaunce
to lead a wicked life, in deadly sin ten thousand years? And then mark
how many times this may be said in a day, and then what a sum this
would mount too. Indeed even on the other side of the leaf, there is another
prayer as long though not so profitable, but that is but to be said before
the Image of Saint Anne, of Marie, and of Jesus, for which Raymundus the
Cardinal and Legate being somewhat more charie, would not lash out of the
Spiritual Treasure of the Church, so much as the Pope his Master did, but
only granted an hundred days of pardon, totiens quotiens.

But is not this trim stuff, that you translate Te Deum laudamus, into Te
matrem laudamus? where you call her the wife of the eternal Father, whom all
the earth does woorshippe: Whom all the glorious company all Confessors, do
call the Temple of the whole In Breuiario Romano. fol. 252.
trinity: whom the whole Court of Heaven does honor, as the Queen of
Heaven. Thou art the Lady of Angels, the gate of Paradise, Fol. 45.
the Lader of the heavenly kingdom, and the bedfellow Thalamus or marrying
chamber of the king of glory. (...)art the refuge (...)a sinner, the mother of
(...)Savior. Save us thy people thou Lady of thy servants, that we may be
partakers of thine inheritance, vouchsafe O sweet Marie, now and always to
keep us without sin. O Godly Marie have mercy upon us, have mercy upon us:
let thy great mercy be always with us, because (O Marie) we trust in thee. In
thee (O sweet Marie) we hope, that thou should defend us for ever. What
should I blotte paper with the blasphemies contained in the Rosaries? and what
should I rehearse the prayer that Laurence B. of Asses made and granted 40,
days of pardon to them that said it in the worship of our Lady, and that
which S. Edmond Archb. of Canterbury made and said, of the which many
miracles be showed? What should I speak of Fol. 47.
that prayer, made concerning Thomas Becket that traitor, of S. Erkenwalde, of
S. (...) the virgin that had a beard, suddenly grown upon her face, to keep
her from marrying the king of Cicilia: of S. Katherin, S. Sith. S. Dunston, S.
Elphege, S. Brigit, with her 15. Oos, to be said before the holy (...)in S.
Powles at Rome, and being said through out the year there, delivers 15.
souls out of Purgatory of the next of (...). 59.
kin, and conuerteth 15. sinners to good life, and makes that the 15.
righteous men of his kin, shall continue in goodlife: and he that says S.
Gregory's prayer before the Image of pity, with 5. Pater nosters, 5.! 32000.
seven hundred and 55. years of pardon.
Auies and a Credo: piteously beholding those arms of Christ's bitter passion,
there are granted 32. thousand, 700. and 55. years of pardon? And Sixtus the
4. has made the fourth and fifth prayer, and has doubled Fol. 63.
his foresaid pardon: I had almost forgotten that goodly Epistle of Crux
Christi sit mecum: Crux est quam semper adoro, etc.
our Savior, which Leo sent to Carolus magnus, which whosoever does bear
about him, and says it once a day, shall obtain 40. years of pardon, and
fourscore lenttidge, and he shall not perish with sudden The Cross of
Christ be with me: The Cross which always I worcester shipe.
death; and that prayer also which must be said before the elevation and
the three Agnus deis, for which Bonifacius the 6. holy Pope, granted ten
thousand years of pardon. So there was pardons granted by John 22. and
Innocentius, for prayers said at the Elevation. All hail true body, borne of
Marie the Virgin etc. All hail light of the (...). 66.
world: The word of the Father: the true Sacrifice, living flesh: the whole
Godhead: very man. All hail the beginning of our creation, the price of our
redemption etc. This Idolatry they committed to their Maozim their breaden God
of Abomination. But singular above all others is that, which being said
immediately after the elevation of the host, brings clean remission of all
their sins that say it perpetually enduring: Granted forsooth, by Sixtus
the 4 and by John the third, Popes of Rome, which being say de before the image
of our Lord (...), does bring as many days of pardon, as there were wounds in
the body of our Lord in the time of his bitter passion, the which were five
thousand 400. 65. as just as can be, but yet they miss of their reckoning.
For in another place they make them less. Saint Augustines prayer also is a
goodlye prayer, which, whosoever does but say, hear, or bear about him, he
shall not perish by fire nor water, in battle, or in judgment (For though he
deserve to be hanged, yet he shall escape) he shall not dye any sudden death,
and no venom shall poison him in that day: and when he dies his soul shall
not enter into hell: Saint Gregory's fol. 72.
five petitions also are of goodly virtue, and so are the three prayers written
in the chapel of the holy cross at Rome, which for the saying of them, have
allotted ten hundred thousand years of pardon Ten (...)thousand (...)of
pardon.
for deadly sins: and this that liberal Gentleman Pope John the 22. of his
large liberality granted, but you must remember to say also a Pater noster,
an Aue, and a Creed. If you live any longer, you may take it for advantage.
And I pray you forget not to pray to the Fol. 73.
sweet visage or vernackle of our Lord, for you shall obtain even by that,
ten thousand days of pardon. And if you cannot say this prayer, you may put
in steed thereof, five Pater nosters, five Aues, and five Credoes in Deum. As
Campion said, above all remember Campion would have a Credo, for a prayer at
the time of his death.
to join in Credo with me, when he was in his prayers at his death. And if
you do but devoutly behold the arms of an image of Christ, you shall have six
thousand years of pardon, three thousand for deadly sins, and three
thousand for venial sins, and I warrant you for the rest. And because you
shall not doubt of this, as if it had but a seal of Butter, I tell you, as
sure as Saint Peter was first Pope of Rome, so he granted it, and thirty
other Popes that were successors after him, and therefore doubt not of it: and
John the 22. has confirmed it. After all these many other odd things there
are to be had, which would not be lost. For all help, which is the prayer that
is to be said in the worship Fol. 75.
of our Lords wound in his side, brings four thousand days of pardon: and
S. Barnards prayer in the worship of the holy name Jesus, which is written in a
table at S. Peter's Church in Rome, delivers from the state of eternal
damnation, and changes eternal pain into the temporal pain of purgatory,
and the pain of purgatory into free (...) Fol. 79.
on. And there be prayers for women with child, even the first Psalm, as well
applied as the twenty two for her delivery, against thundering and lightning,
against the pestilence: to our Lady, for new married (...), for all diseases
and sorts of people: and one containing certain verses of the Psalter, which
Saint Bernard learned of the Devil. For when Saint (...) prayer (...)he
learned of the Devil.
on a certain time he was in his prayers, the Devil told him that he knew
certain verses in the Psalter, which, whosoever said them daily should not
perish, but he should have knowledge of the day wherein he should die. But
the feend would not show them to Saint Bernard: then Saint Bernard said, he
would say every day the whole Psalter, which when the Devil perceived, he
told Saint Bernarde which they weres you shall find the verses in Fol. 125.
You may see, how Bernarde learned to pray of the Devil (as they say) Luther
learned to know that the Mass was evil by the Devil. Surely it is like that
the one should be as true as the other: I will but tell you one more and so
get out (if I can) of this foul quakemyre: and that is to be said Fol. 144.
It begins. (...)omnes (...). etc. All hail all souls of the faithful,
whose bodies rest here, or else where in the dust. etc.
as you go through the Church yard, for saying of which, Pope John the
twelfth, granted as many years of pardon, as there were bodies buried, from
the time that it was first a Church yard. Do you not think that this passes
sacrificing to the Virgin Mary? And do we not great wrong unto them, When we
charge them with heresies? Who care not what they hold, nor what they set
down, but agree as I have said with all, and those the most gross heretics
that cuerliued, not in any good things that they held (for these are none of
theirs) but even in their greatest corruptions and villainies against God, and
his word, as may appear by their doctrine and lives, delivered in all times
and ages. And this is verified of them concerning prayer for the dead, as
master Fulke has justly charged them, joining with the Montanistes, among
whose heresies that is written: though Augustine, Ambrose. Chrysostom did also
in some sort hold it: For they held it not, as these do, besides the foundation
of faith, though it be an error in faith: nor in such gross manner, though
the corruption of that time had prevailed with them to make them err. We do
not therefore abuse the people, but do hold, that whatsoever is condemned for
heresy in the word of God, and so was accounted and convinced (as stood in
and maintained) in the primative Church, that we account and condemn still for
heresy.

But where he says, that we hold heresies, and culleth out those which are
in deed no heresies, but manifest truethes, according to the word of God, as
that of Aerius against prayer for the dead, and that of Vigilantius for praying
unto Saints: it needs no other answer, then that which is set down
already by writers from amongst us of all sorts. And it is a good answer,
that every thing is not an error, which Every thing is not an error, which
has bin reckoned for an error.
good men have reckoned for errors, for so, without all cause, the truth
should be condemned, and that which is false should be vpholden and maintained.

The conditions therefore you speak of are not maintained, seeing of the
greatest heresies, you cannot for all your malice accuse us of any one. And as
for these errors which you would have made so great heresies, they are none,
but are according to the truth of God, and as those fathers held them were not
so blasphemous, as they are in you, that hold little or nothing of the
foundation of faith.

As for the manner of heretics wherewith you fit us, and still with your former
two conditions, whether our or your manners best (...)them and agree with them,
shall in a fitter place appear. As for Augustines note of that property of
the Donatistes, that hated (as you say) the sea of Rome, and called it
Cathedram pestilentiae, the chair of Pestilence: if we should grant that
Rome now were (...)they read the name of Catholic Church, forsooth, it must
needs be meant of Rome. But there is no such word in lib. 2. cont. (...). (...).
the same Rome that it was then: how can it fit us that never called any member
of the Church, the chair of Pestilence? The Donatists in deed (...)shut up
the Catholic Church into a corner of the world, and thought other Churches,
and Rome amongst the rest, to be no Church, against whom Saint Augustine
disputes in the fifty Chapter. But of that you mention and specially of Rome
which you name, there is no word, not syllable in the fifty and one Chapter.

But this is always your property, like obstinate heretics as you are, to
abuse your Readers, with quoting places out of the Doctors for a show only of
that, which is not there, as though all went of your side, when neither word
nor matter tending that way, can be found in the places by you alleged. But
even as heretics are wont, you ly by tradition, and make no conscience, to be
daube your margent with show of Authorities, when you have not so much as a
syllable to maintain your errors. Bring me therefore that place directly out
of Augustine.

When you answer again, that heretics call the Church of Rome, Cathedram
Pestilentiae, when in deed it was a member of the true Church: if they did so,
they bear a just condemnation. But as it is now, it is in deed the seat of
Antichriste, despising and persecuting the Catholic Church of Christ, and
forsaking the scriptures, by which it refuses to be proved, mainteining false
doctrine, and living therewithal abhominably. And therefore must needs be
the chair of Pestilence. It must needs herein agree with the Donatists, that
dreamed of a decay of the Church, of an Apostacy and falling away, so, as
though all, were headged in at Rome, and you only as the two Tribes (as
Angustine speaks) had remained in the temple, that is in the Church: No, we
ask you with Augustine. Seeing we do not believe you, how will ye convince
us? Will you not (...)us by the holy scriptures, where, with so great
manifestation they are read, to the end that whosoever he be, that once
believes those letters, he cannot but confess these things to be most
true. Again, if I must therefore be compelled to believe these examples to He
means such as were alleged by Donatus, to prove that the vniuer sal church
was fallen and that his particular church was the church. August. lib. de vnitate
Ecclesiae cap. 12.
be true, because they are there written, when I cannot say, they are false
which are written: Why do not they also themselves, believe the same
Scriptures, concerning the Church spread throughout the world? Lo we believe
all those things, let them also believe that which the Lord says: that
repentance and remission of sins is preached in his name throughout all
nations, beginning at Herusalem: But what makes all this for Rome, or against
us, unless we should give that they beg, which is too too absurd, that a
particular Church, is the Catholic church, that Rome is the universal
church: which though we should That place out of the 3. book against the
letters of Petilian, cap. 4. is set down also for a show, seeing we lean not
to me^, but look to the unity of the spirit in the truth.
give them, yet they are never the near, seeing God never forsakes his, and
they are his whom he has foreknowen, whom he has chosen, whom he does
never reject, but keeps them amidst all trials and tentations, bringing them
to rest in the end? Another property, which must needs be ours, is for
hating and co^demning the life of Monks: and also for drawing Nuns out of
their cloisters, and joining our selves with the same in pretended wedlock.
First, for that place out of the second book, against the Epistle of
Parmenian, there is not one word tending that way, and as for that Epistle to
Eusebius: In The like is that out of the second book (...). (...). (...).
deed Augustine there complains of the breach of their discipline, and that
two were allured by the Cyrcumcelians, not because they would marry, but
because they would shake of the yoke of the Lords discipline, they went
gadding up and down like vagabonds, and gave themselves to drunkenness, and
so he complains of a Subdeacon, but what makes this against us? We draw
them not like Circumcelians from the religion and discipline of Christ, but
being Christians, and having not the gift of continency, we give them
counsel to marry. The Monks and Nuns, which Augustine spoke of, are as
like theirs, as they are unlike to Christians, whose names they boast: we
draw them not out in any disordered sort, to bring them to riot, and to allure
them from God, to make them harlots, as themselves commonly did, but we show
them of that liberty God has left, (...)them to honesty, and not to
villainy, as it is too evident they did, when scarce amongst a number, few
escaped from their filthy abuse, by which they were defloured, many bastardes
begotten and murdered, many buggeries con tinually committed, against the
word of God.

As for the Arrians, Saint Augustine had good cause disputing against them,
that abused the scripture, in that same sacred mystery of the Trinity, to
stand upon that lively tradition of the Apostles, which is no such thing, as
you intend by tradidion, contrary to the written word of God, but the same was
received from hand to hand, and agreed with the doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles, written and set down to all posterity. In this respect that
mystery of believing in the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, was so
called in the council of Conc. Constantinopl. 6. Act. 4.
Constantinople, by Tertullian and Basil: and of such like speaks the
Tertul. de (...)aduersus (...).
Apostle, when he says: Hold fast those traditions which you have received,
either by our word or by our Epistle. In this respect Basil de (...).
Augustine disputing against Maximinus an heretic, appealeth to the 2. These.
2. 2.
tradition of the Apostles. But what serves this to maintain your false named
traditions under the name of the Apostles, that are but birds hatched
yesterday, yet calow and scarce covered with feathers, as unlike those whom you
would make their dammes, as your selves are, who in all things are
degenerated from them? Of like consequence for proof of your Mass, Altars,
Chalices, Chrisme, and Priests vestiments, is that you set down, as you say,
noted by Optatus before Augustine. Surely the place by you alleged, serves
as little to your help as the other. We deny not but that in the waste made
by those barbarous Vandalles: There was great spoil in the just judgment of
God brought upon the church, all kind of learning ceasing almost, and the
monuments thereof being utterly decayed, which one of your great pillars,
master Harding says, was because of their schism from the Victor (...)This
was done in the space of 140. years.
church of Rome, which was neither so nor so in which yet Rome it self was
taken, possessed, and (...)by sundry men, above 6. times in a small space. But
would you hereby insinuate your Idolatrous Mass, which Hard. answer diuis. 28.
then had not half the Idolatrous patches, that since have been added? would
you insinuate your chalices, which then were no otherwise known, and taken,
then as cups fit for that service? would you insinuate your aulters of
stone, that took their first beginning, from Pope Sixtus as both Uolateran and
Vernerius testify? For as in Christ's time, Volateran.
there were not many temples builded, so there were not many alters erected,
(...).
and therefore in Origens time, it was objected by Celsus that they Origin
cont, (...)sum. lib. 4.
had neither images nor aulters, nor temples: and so Arnobius says, that
Arnobius in (...). lib. 3.
the Heathen cast this likewise in their teeth: whereby it appears, that in
their times the church was not acquainted with your prophanations. In deed the
name of Mass, of latter times has been used, but it shows not that it was
used then, or that it was yours whereof they spoke (I mean your private Mass):
no, it was the communion, and according to that they had tables of wood, and no
aulters. They might sometime call the communion tables, by the name of aulters,
as also some other things by those names that you yet retain: but this was by
Metaphor, and as a man would say improperly, rather, for the received manner of
speech, of the ancient worship instituted under the law, before the coming
of Christ whilst sacrifices endured, then now to prove such a blasphemous
sacrifice or altar as yours is. For Siluester the first (as some of you write
though falsely) was he, that commanded that none should (...). (...). (...). 4.
(...). 5. Gerson (...). (...)F. 4. ad (...)Epist. 50.
consecrate at a wooden altar: and Bonifacius was he that first divided the
priest from the people: And S. Augustine complains that the Donatistes on a
time in great rage, brake the boords of the altar, and wounded the priests.
And that they were made of wood, and stood in Read August. de verbis domini
secund. (...). ser. 24. Council. Constant. 5. Act. 1. Eusebius. lib. 10. ca. 4. ex
or at.
the midst of the Church, etc. It may appear by this, that he says, it was
the subdeacons office to remove the table, which he could not have done, if
either it had been of stone, or fast fixed against any wall Eastward as your
superstitious manner is. And is this your burning charity to compare us with
those barbarous heretics the Donatists, or those Vandals, (...)in (...).
being in deed Arrians, as all the rest were, that made such havoc, not
only of the Church of Rome, but of the Churches in Affricke, of Antioche, of
Hippo, where Augustine was, and sundry others? These were mad against the
truth, and we stand for it. It is not we that trouble Israel, but Achab, and
his fathers house. Is it all one to rage against The Papists (...)us with
Donatists, Arrians, and other heretics (...).
the people of God and to execute Gods sentence upon Baals priests? For with as
good right Baals priests, might have blamed Helias, and Helizeus, Iehu, and
such godly princes, for destroying their aulters, overthrowing their temples,
shedding their blood, as you blame and charge us. The difference is plain,
they were Donatistes and Arrians, and we Christians: they like savage and
brutish Boares, brake in upon the Lords inheritance, we labor to keep out
such Boars, Wolves, and beasts, as you are and have proved your selves to be.
The same may be said of that objected by Basil against Julian the (...) and
his fellows. You are the Iulians, and we those whom you persecute in
Christ, and in his members. But for qualities we shall say more hereafter.

For your contentedness to admit now, what soever trial we will for the
finding out of your spirits, surely we cannot but congratulate your
kindness. But is this the opinion of all your fellows, or of yourselfe
alone; If of all, then let us see their hands, authentikclie upon record
delivered unto us. Once we are sure of this that it is against their general
doctrine, as has been said before: If it be or your self, (that I may use
your own phrase) you are somewhat too cockishe against the common opinion of
your Church, to offer so franckly, and yet as you said to M. Hanmer, I think
when it shall come to trial, you shall be none of the disputers.

As for that you write, that you are not daunted, For that Campion and Sherwinn
(that were foreward that way) are taken away by death, surely we think so. If
the trial of your cause, had depended upon them, then your religion had fallen
with their treason. And thanks be to God how hard soever your hearts be:
yet you have and had cause to fear, seeing under pretense of Disputation, they
were proved to practice (...), and to establish an Antichristian jurisdiction,
against the crown, dignity, and peace of our Sovereign Queen and Princess,
I give you warning therefore before, Look ere you leap: for without doubt
your religion and treason are so clasped and twined together, that they will
hardly be sundered. Would you dispute with us, who are to be shunned? Come
you to learn or to teach? Dispute you, as men to be tried, or rather as these
that are (...)and would subvert both Church and common wealth; You may prate
what you list, and write as long as you will: but wise men see well enough
where at you shoot, as has been said before. And whereas you attribute their
obstinacy, which you call constancy, to the mercy and grace of God, you
abuse both the name and grace of God, contrary to the commandment of God:
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain. Exodus 20.
Besides, you charge God with their treason and superstition, the cause neither
being his, not depending upon any word of his. And therefore it was not for
him but against him, and in his just indgemente he found them out, as I doubt
not but in time it shall likewise fall out with all those that are so ready (of
whom you speak) that carry so treasonable and traitorous minds: whereto if
according to your confession, they be still so bent, and shall pursue that
which others left: I beseech the Lord to appoint the time quickly, that you
may receive a just recompense, and peace may be upon all Gods Israel amongst
us.

The rest you say, in master Charkes Preface is not worth answer, neither
surely is that which is answered already, which yet you have accounted most
worthy of answer. For your bare affirmation, and words is no more proof and
reason then a (...), is a millstone: no more is your disabling of our cause in
comparison of yours. Not ours but Christ's, as yours is not yours, but
Antichrists. And we easily yield you, that in respect of the world, surely,
our cause is somewhat more beggarly then yours. For Satan by Antichriste the
Pope, does enable, furnish, and deck it with all possible pomp, efficacy,
deceit, lying signs and wonders that can be. Rome is a rose colored whore,
and your Rochettes and Crochets, your Hattes and crowns are not decked with
studdes of Iron, but all to beedawbed with jewels and precious stones. Her cup
in her hand is of fine gold. She is a whore not for The glory of Rome.
every man, but kings and princes commit fornication with her. And Christ and
his truth beggarly in comparison of the pope and his false religion.
for universality it is clear that all the inhabitants of the earth, shall
worship the beast, whose names are not written in the book of life, they are
not written in the book of the lamb that is slain. He shall rule, and give
them a mark in their hands, and no man shall by nor sell, without the mark
of the beast. In deed in this respect, Christ is a beggar, Apoc 13.
true religion is beggerie, and your cause is honorable, and you are the
Lords of the world. But here I must warn you that whilst you talk of your
wealth and your honor, yet you forgate not to beg very beggarly, the matter
in question. If you had won the cause then you might charge us with pride,
and take the name of humility. But if you be so good a Physician to know the
disease of an heretic, I wonder you could not find your own sickness to
the death: heretics in deed, and therefore pride such a disease in you, as
mean Physicians may see and handle, known to all that know but little, seen
to them, that are half blind, and apparent to the whole world without
measure. But Christ how base and beggarly soever you make him, yet is he the
high riches and very treasury of God. And as Augustine with the testimony and
consent of those sound witnesses, standing in mainteinance of the truth, had
an honorable cause, and the other, though Iulianistes, Arrians, Donatists, and
all the rabble of earth and hell, set against him in the strength of flesh and
blood, had a weak and beggarly cause, even so have you, that have neither
sentence of Scripture, nor sound Doctor, for the space of the first 600.
years to take your part. your pith is so poor, of these almost 1200 years,
that we can neither see nor feel it, and therefore it is a vain popish
brag. As for Luther, who^ you rave so much against, it is a lie that our
religion began with him. For our religion is the wisdom of God before al
beginning. All the Saints of God that ever were in all the times and ages of the
world have ever both opened their mouths, and spoken against Antichrist, and
you his members. All the Patriarchs, Prophets, Christ himself and his
Apostles: Yea when Antichrist grew, and occupied that holy place, boasting
himself as God in the greatest times of darkness, yet God evermore stirred up
(long before Luther was borne) sundry excellent spirits to control his
abhominato^s, and to stand for his blessed truth: which as it has gained
against him, and made the towers of his pride to bow toward destruction, so
being the breath of Christ, it shall not cease til it have utterly
overthrown him. But it is to be marked how your popish heat carried you here
into a disdayneful reproach against one of your own names: when you call him a
Ru^negate Friar. If his order were holy, then you do amiss because of his
heresy, to disdain his profession. But a man may see what reverence, and
conscience you bear to your own titles. And yet me thinks this should not so
much gaul you in respect of us, and cause you so to rave against us, seeing he
is one of your own, and having so far proceeded amongst you, brought out
(such is the straight of truth) so hard battery against you. But blessed be
God that even out of your own bowels, has bred so sundry and notable
instruments, to bewray your falsehood, and to vindicate the truth. As for his
impugning of us, take you no care for that. It will be best for you to keep your
own heads: as has bin said. We easily pardon that which may be pardoned, every
man sees not al things, and some differences, may well stand with the unity of
faith. You papists, be not al of a coat, nor all of a religion, your
division is indeed in the bowels, in matters of substance and weight; and
therefore I trust it is a true Prognostication of your utter destruction, when
God shall appear in glory. You are divided into infinite orders, and
professions, at war and contrary one to another. Nay your opinions are so
contradictorie, as by no means, they can be reconciled, and so are your
popes, and your Popes Canons. At the death of your popes, you are wont to
publish, that they are departed out of this life, to everlasting happiness and
rest; and yet you command In their (...)after the death of any Pope.
herses to be set up, and prayers to be said for them: that they may be
received to happiness and rest. Ye glory of your consent and agreement Epist.
(...). 2. 7.
in expounding the scriptures, and yet your doctors teach that the scriptures
are fitted and diversely understood for the time, so as they may be
expounded at one time, according to the curraunte universal ryte of the
Church, but that ryte being changed, that also is to be changed. Distinct. 8.
They forbid a man to hear the Mass of an adulterer, and yet Popish (...).
the whole life of many of their Priests is nothing else: These Jesuits and
Friars commend voluntary poverty, as an acceptable service to GOD, and yet
they persuade men continually, that the more money they give and bestow, the
greater shall their pardon be; and what do they refuse? They had such store
long ago of the woodde of the very cross that Christ died on in sundry
places, that as Erasmus writes would load a ship, and yet it is plain by
the Scriptures, that Simon Cyreneus did carry it. They celebrate and stand
greatly upon the praise of their Relikes, which they aduouche to be the
same, that they would make the people believe they are: and yet it is plain,
the nails of the cross are increased without number. The bodies and bones of
sundry Saints are in infinite places. Susannaes body is at Tolous, at Rome,
and in other places: they say we must (...)of our salvation, which is not
only against the Article, I believe the forgiveness of sins, but they also
stand upon absolution, upon the use of the Sacraments to confer grace, upon
their Bishops Bulls and pardons, which were needelesse if they spoke
truly. In the canon of the Mass they use this prayer for the dead: O Lord
remember those which have gone before us, with the sign of Faith, and (...) A
prayer in their mass.
in the sleep of peace: We beseech thee, grant unto them, and unto all that
rest in Christ, a place of refreshing a place of light and peace. Now if they
slepte in faith, and rested in Christ, what needed (I pray you) this prayer?
Is not this a pretty mockerye. So they recite in their Mass the words of the
institution out of the eleventh of the first Epistle to the Corinthians: Take
ye, eat ye, drink ye, and yet they give them nothing that stand by, but
once in a year, unless it be an emptye blessinge of an empty cup: for
like Sacriledgers they rob them of the cup. Marriage they make a
Sacrament, contrary to the word of GOD, and yet their smeared priests must
none of it. When they pray upon their holy days, and call upon other
Saints whereof GOD never gave them commandment, they They have turned the
whole Psalter to the Virgin Marie.
say the Lords prayer in a set number, and ever add their salutation
which agrees as well to Saints, as Dixit Dominus Dominae meae, sede a
dextris meis: The Lord said to my Lady; Sit at my right hand. For what
can be more foolish, that betrayeth their blockishe (...), then to make the
salutation of the Virgin, to Read Bonauentures Psalter turned wholly to the
Virgin.
an Apostle, and to call the Virgin Marie their father? They teach that a man may satisfy the law in respect of the commandment, but not in
respect of the intent of the commander: and yet who knows not that the
substance of the law is nothing else but the express intent and meaning of
GOD the Law giver? Of like concord is that also, that they say the Pope is
servant of servants, and yet will have him also Lord of Lords, and to
bear both the swords. They glory that they are Christ's Vicars, and yet
mean nothing less, then to execure his will expressed in his written word.
They Popish contrarieties.
teach we must look for forgiveness of sins from GOD, and yet they
contend that we must satisfy for our sins, by our good works. They
deny that grace is imputed to believers, by the righteousness of Christ,
fulfilling the law, and yet they glory of the righteousness and merits of
Saints which is to be imputed to others, and which is greater: they esteem
the works of supererogation so highly, as taking money, by giving their
Bulls and patentes to others, they both sell them and impute them: they say
that Christ suffered for our sins, but not for the punishment of sin, and
yet the strength of the punishment is in the fault, and Christ suffered those
pains of death both in body and soul, to take away those everlasting pains
and torments. (...)teach that a man may be saved through Romans 4.
grace and good works, when as the rigor of the law and grace, are most
diverse as Paul witnesses: Their fasting is not broken; Alensis.
though they gorge them selves full of the costliest fish, iunkettes, and
sweet meats that can be gotten: they swear by the Gospel, they (...).
singe continually like Parrattes without understanding out of the Psalms,
they sense the book of Gospelles, and uncover their head before it, and yet
they give the Scriptures the vilest reproaches that can The places are quoted
(...).
be, calling it a dead letter, a beggarly element, a matter of strife, (...),
the way to heresy. etc.

By their monastical life, they pretend a forsaking of the world, an holy
(...), and cutting themselves off from the pleasures and commodities of this
life, and yet in all countries they have the chiefest places, dwell in the
most notable Cities, in the pleasauntest and richest soyles for fruits and
all commodities, having their tenauntes to do them al kind of homage and
service, and superfluously to bring unto the^ al delicious things, so that they
are rich without labor, poor without Our Jesuits and Monks how (...)the old
Monks that were Lay men and great Students in divinity: Laboring with their
hands, from whose superstition yet having no commandment from God, has
proceeded all those eerours and abuses that we find in Monks and Friars at
this day.
want, and low without contempt. Are not these (think you) like the Monks of
old time that betook themselves to such solitary places to avoid the sword of
persecutors, that labored with their hands, to supply their necessities, and
yet lived in holy exercises, that they might by conference, and mutual help,
one toward another, be made more fit for the service of the gospel? Even as
like as an apple is like an oyster. This is the pith they have had so many
hundred years, and this is the agreement in great matters of their doctrine,
which they make a very Chymaer, full of most monstrous and variable opinions.
What should I speak of their popes dashing and flashing one against another?
Parsons the Censurer or some other Favorite that lies in a corner for him, and
now after Campio^ chief chalenger and defender, will say these are not in the
bowelles. Surely if the head be against the head, and principal member against
principal member, and every part one against another, here is small unity; and
this is the unity of popery, that is not at one with it self, nor never was,
since it brake from Christ and from that unity of the spirit. Who can be
ignorant that is but Praemonstratensis Martin. Polon. platins.
meanly read in stories, how one pope has thundered and lightened against
another, one disanulling that, which his predecessor had established, and when
they could not be avenged one of another, whilst they were alive, did it when
they were dead, cursing them to hell, and cutting of the noses Sigebertus.
Benno Cardinalis invita Hilde.
of their faces, the fingers of their hands, and casting their dead carcases
upon the face of the earth, either to be devoured of birds, or into the water,
(...).
to be eaten of fishes. I will but name the men they are so notorious.
Formosus, Stephanus the 3. and Sergius the 3. These are known almost to al
writers: and as these heads are out of order and unity, so are their Canons
and their decrees, sometime as heretical (as they call it) as any of our
propositions; and sometimes as overthwart, and direct against the Gospel, No
stay in Popery.
For that which they grant in one Canon, they foribid in another: that which
they build up to day, they throw down to morrow. As for No unity in Popery.
example, in some Canons, their popish Bishoplike authority is mittigated,
Distinc. 93. cap. legimus.
and all the rest are made equal unto them. But in others it is so extolled,
Distin. 99. cap. 1.
Distinct. 4. cap. multi.
that all men, what state or calling soever they be of, what gifts soever God
has blessed them withal, yet they must be subject unto the^, and contrary to
that order which God has appointed, they must ride men, and use them at their
pleasures. Sometime they say, it is lawful for a Christian that is unmarried to
have a Concubine, and in others, they condemn Distinct. 34.
against Gods truth. But your own books, as full as they are of leaves or
rather lines, so full they are of outrageous and malicious lies, slanders,
reproaches, reuilinges, and raylings: And let all the Papists bring forth their
whole pack of pelting and lewd writings, and inuectiues, and let them lay them
to this learned, godly, and mild reply of M. Charkes: The chief (...)ter of
popish books.
(who as (...), of purpose labored but too much considering with whom he had
to deal to cut off that sharpness, which had been meet he had more used
against such enemies of God as you are) and the^ they shall see the difference
and therefore this lie in the entrance, co^cernig his entrance, shows yt
before you begin, you are a man (...)spent of al truth and mo (...), and such
is that you say he began so hotly with Ca^pion. But that his quiet behavior
cooled him with shame. (alack there while) They that knew Campion as well as
ever Parsons did, knew his mild spirit well enough. And it is evident, that
both in the first, second, and third days (...)spirit and behavior
disputation, and generally in all, howesoeuer there were some difference, he
behaved him self more like a man of defiance, that had been at liberty in
grace and favor both of God and Prince, then like a prisoner in the tower of
London, that in the testimony of his own conscience, had to answer, at
another bar, and felt the gilte of his own treasons: which if any thing might
have cooled him, no doubt that might have done it. And whatsoever you speak of
humility, it was not humility, nor the assistance and confidence of a good
cause, sealed with that comfortable spirit of gladness above the rest, that
made him either gentle or soft, but his own naughty cause and conscience,
that made him to counterfaite sometimes as I have already alleged.

As for that note of the conference with those of Wisbitch, which by your
magisteriall authority you call a vain pamphlet, charging that reverend man,
who has taken such notable pains in the Church of god, How and by what
means the (...)at VVisbitch was published.
against your heresies. It was not set forth for any such cause as your malice
pretends nor by him: it was written to a private friend, as a report of it,
and procured to be published before master Fulke knew of it, and was also
sufficient to witness, how distrustful they were of their cause, or at least
that they are not at concord with you in the opinion concerning disputing with
us, whom they deem, (as you do) heretics. I have said of this before, and
therefore now speak the less of it again. But in your wise Censure those
reverend and learned fathers, as you call them: did very wisely in contemning
his pride, comraing thither upon vanity, without warrant: and yet it is
evident by good testimony that he went by commission from the Bishop of Eley:
and had better Conference betwixt D. Fulke and the papists at (...).
warrant for that his so dealing then you, who for ought that we know have no
warrant thus to provoke us. And if you say that Campion had a commandment
from his superiors: we answer, that the acknowledging of those foreign
superiors and powers, contrary to the prerogative of our prince, and laws of
our country brought him to the gallows, and so it will you, if you come not
with better privilege. But you say the falsehood of that scroule has been
discovered to you since by letters from the parties themselves, and that there
is nothing in it, that makes not to our discredit, that it is confessed
therein, that after we had deprived them of all books, yea of their very note
books (which to learned men are the store house of memory) then we asked when
there they would come to Cambridge to dispute, if leave might be procured. And
because they contemned so pearte and cockish a (...)etc. Therefore we say,
they refused disputation, etc. For the first, I would have it marked, that
where you are wont so to complain of straight and hard dealing by your own
confession here, there is intercourse of writing betwixt, which because your
lavish pen has not spared to utter, it may be a mean in good policy, to
cause them to be streightlier looked unto hereafter, and your self to be
sought out, seeing their letters can find you out. But if it be false, why is
it not confuted, and the truth from themselves declared? Perhaps you will say,
they have written: in deed so I have heard they have, but as much to the
purpose and according to the (...)in deed as it was, as men that had never
heard of it. And though their followers that hang upon men's persons without
looking to the verity, may be carried with such poor devises, yet you must
consider, that we are not to believe them in (...)own cause.

As for taking away their books whereof they and you so often complain, it is
answered, that they were such as had been lately written by those of your
heresy. The books of the holy scriptures and ancient Doctors were never
denied you: and though they made a show of Upon what co^ ditions the papists
in VVisbitch would have disputed.
readiness to disputation, yet they added such conditions, as were not in any
subject to perform. For they would be all set at liberty, they would have
all their scattered army gathered together, and then they would pitche the
field: the rather that they might get that by strength, perforce, and with
multitude, that they could never win by truth, knowledge and learning. And
yet these men, of whose readiness and suite now to dispute, you make so much
vaunte, at the first they would none of it, and your greatest forefathers (as I
have said) have utterly Conference at Westminster, and as is alleged before.
showed themselves against it. Master Fulke therefore neither went of his own
head, nor for any such matter as you dream of. This you and those of your sort
have always hunted after, as men pusfed up, that make more reckoning (like
hypocrites) of a little praise and vain glory before men then of being
approved unto God. And therefore you carry all men, their persons and learning
with the tempest of a proud What the papists specially (...)by disputations.
spirit, condemning us of choler, impatience, and heat, if we speak but
plainly, and yet swallowing up in your selves the greatest sharpness and
filth of speech that may be: and namely against such, whose shoe latchettes
you are unworthy to loose. For what speech is this to be used to a reverend
learned man in deed, to call him a pearte and cockishe merchaunt: who in
comparison of gifts, travail and labor in the ministry of the Gospel, has
done more then any one or all the pack of them ever did, for the maintenance of
their own abominable popery?

Again, he plays upon another word used by master Charke, when he says
(and that truly) that they have nothing to uphold their popish religion and
to defend it, but lying, tyranny, hypocrisy and rebellion. Here he leaves
the very cause, and looks back to his own aim, and asks where those
(...)and hypocrisy are. As for tyranny, that he returns upon us, because
that justice is executed upon such rebels and traitors as Campion and his
companions were: His part had been to have cleared Popery from this just
charge and to have cast it upon the Gospel. As for that justice which
undutifully, and like himself he calls tyranny, because traitors are
racked and quartered, he might have remembered that as well their executions
against the like transgressors might have been called tyranny. But what their
tyrannical dealing has been in Read the stories of France, Spain,
Flaunders, (...)Inquisitio^. etc.
deed (...)for and in regard of religion, while in so few months, they not
only burned quick, but hanged drowned and killed, more then have been
executed amongst us these many years: Let (...)tyranny witness, in the
Inquisition of Spain, in the murders of France, the blooddie slaughters
procured by their means in Flaunders, and all the dominions and kingdoms else
where in the world, where Antichriste their Pope has had any dominion. As for
his gentle admonition to us who^ in contempt he calls Ministers, wherein he
does so friendly advise us for our good, to confess our fcare in plain
words: we will consider of that at further leisure. In the mean time, if he
find us (...)away and leave our places empty, let him hardly possess them
and keep the^, if he can: and if he and all the rest of the^, as many as shall
write, dispute or contend for their Maozim, and false religion, shall find us
too few to match them, or too weak to answer them, yet let them not fat
their hearts in their sin, and cry out a victory against God and against
his truth, who is Almighty, and which stands fast, and shall in the end
prevail against all their cursed treachery.

Another thing he (...)at, is master Charkes modest and honest defense of
master Hanmer, he having charged them that nothing could be had either from
the one or the other but words: and why forsooth? Because the disputation
cannot be procured and performed by them, being private men, upon whose
warrant, yet if they would like to come, it is like they would be ready, to
encounter them, and perform the disputation in deed. But because master
Charke will defend master Hanmer, who^ by a Rethoricall diminution he
labors to abase, with some praise of the one, and disgrace of the other: he
has raked together, and laid out of an heap (as he says) of his fooleries
and falsehoode patched (for sooth) after the fashion of our (...), some few
things. But surely if a man would but take a little pains, to rake in their
dounge, I mean not only in the foolish writings of many their worshipful
writers, that have written in controversies against the religion of Christ,
but much more in their patched confuse sermons, he should find nothing else
but ridiculous absurdities, blasphemous opinions and fooleries, such as would
make a man's ears to glowe and to tingle either in heating or reading them. I
refer the Reader for controversies, but to Eckius, Blyndasinus, Aloysius,
Lypomanus, Topiarius, The worshipful writers of Papists.
Grenewith, Friar Perine, Tefflerus, Marshall, and all the rest of that sort
not reckoned amongst the best learned: and as for their sermons they are well
worse. He may be ashamed to (...), that we patch our Sermons: For his
patches use nothing but patcherie, whilst their preachings are nothing but
pratings, toys and fancies of their own denising, as far from the taste of
Gods spirit, and the knowledge of the word of God, as them selves are from
all spiritual feeling and taste of godliness demne it, unless it be done
warily. Sometime they say, if the Pope be (...)1. (...). 4. 7. Papa.
found negligent of his own salvation and of his brethrens, if he be found De
concess. pr abendae tit. 4. cap. 2. ad Apost.
unprofitable, and remiss in his business, and altogether without any
goodness, so that he hurt himself and others, and lead the^ by whole heaps
Did. 37. cap. relatum.
into hell to the devil: yet it is not lawful for any mortal man to reprove
him, or to say, sir why do you so? the reason is, because he is to judge all
Did. 16.
Causa 27. q. 2.
men, and to be judged of no man etc. And yet their Rubricke gainsayeth Ca.
ter. di.
that same blasphemous Canon, as also the Canon admonendi, and Causa Did. 2.
de poenit.
2. quest. 7. It were infinite and tedious to followal, but as they are one Cap
Cbaritas.
Did. 5. de Co^se. cap. (...).
against another, so they are against themselves: and against their other
general doctrine, in many things confirming that, which they so persecute De
consec. distin 2. cap. Quid sit sanguis.
with fire and faggotin us: as for example. Clement the Pope says: that the
holy scripture is to be interpreted by it self. The canons of the Apostles are
Also ca. Comperimus.
rejected out of Isiodore, because they were made by heretics. It is said,
nothing is to be forbidden that the scriptures forbid not: They teach that Cap.
22. q.
finnes are forgiven through faith only, and the promise of pardon may be Did.
99. cap. 1.
obtained. Again, they affirm that we being the sons of wrath, cannot Also
did. 4. cap. multi.
be saved but through faith in Christ the mediator. And they allow the Glossa
did. 23. cap. prae terea.
Sacrament to be ministered to the lay people in both kinds, and the gloss
Did. 93. Ca.
is not against it. Against their counterfeit supremacy also, Cyprian the
Hadrianus.
pope says, that the other apostles were of the same authority that Peter
Did. (...). (...).
was. The supremacy of the pope is rejected in the Church, neither has Ca.
21. q. 1. (...)and cap. 10. (...). 3. Vnio.
the Pope al things in the closet of his breast. They (...)also the right of
choosing the pope, and appoynting the apostolical See unto the Emperor. Did.
43. cap. Si rector.
(...), they take away the plurality of benefices, and ordeine that one Did.
38. cap. Ignoran.
priest, shall not have many churches committed to his charge. They teach as we
do, that all the duty of priests (as they call them) consists in preaching,
Did. (...). cap. Presbit.
and that this duty also belongs to Bishops. They forbid their Clerks to
be present at marriage feasts, or to haunte ale houses or ta Did. 44. cap.
Non (...).
uernes, they must have no conversation with women; the mass of a priest Did.
81. cap. Non (...).
which keeps a whore may not be heard. Their (...)that have not the gift of
chastity may marry. Their monks according to their names must Did. 32. cap.
Nullus Ca.
be solitary: they may not buyld their monasteries in cities: they must not
Cap. 33. 9. 2. (...).
be vagrauntes, but get their living by the labor of their hands: their
Nuns must not cut their hair, they must devise no more new orders, Did.
28. cap. (...)Syracus.
but rather keep one of the best approved. Their auricular confession is Did.
(...). cap. (...)etc.
Did. 30. Causa 27. quaest. 2. Did. 31. cap. Quoniam.
Hieron. cap. Si cupis. De consec. Did. 5. (...). 30, cap. (...).
Sub Innocentio 3. 12. 15. Greg. in decretis lib. 3. did. 1. de (...).
(...). 13. q. 2.
not necessary to salvation, but rather an ordinance of man. And as their
canons are, so also are their councels and their interpretations one against
another, as has been showed before. The council of Basil condemns Eugenius
the pope, and he again condemns the whole council. The contentions and
brawles of Monks and Friars, they are infinite and known, their schisms long
and horrible, during many years: the mendica^ts against the university of
Paris, and al other orders, and now the lesuires (...)the bell a way, and
ourgoe al others. The Sententionarists and schoolmen, they also agree like
cattes and dogs: the writings of Catharin the Archbish, are against de Soto,
Caietane, is against others. Tapper both a against Pighius, Catharine, and
Durand, and all the rest. Sometimes they teach concerning justification, that by
only faith in the passion of Christ (...). 2. de (...). ca. (...). (...). super
4. (...). did. 15. Ambr. Catharin. de (...).
our sins are forgiven, and the promise of pardon to be laid hold of by
this only mean. Another time they teach that Christ has satisfied for
original sins and actual sins going before baptism: but that we must satisfy
for the rest afterward. Again Christ has satisfied through sufficiency;
(...).
but not by efficiency and participation of fruit: Christ has satisfied Tapper
art. 6.
for the fault but not for the (...), for we must satisfy for that. Faith
does justify initiatiue but not consummatiue, that is, it begins to justify,
but it does not perform it. Also precedent works prepare to justification,
but works consequent make it perfect. These are their dissentions, and
horrible disagreements, which they cannot discern in themselves, not begun
yesterday, but such as have bin continual amongst them as touching their
greatest matters; and yet they can see into our differences in small matters,
and to make us at the greater odds, they can match us with such here tikes
indeed, as we no more allow of then themselves, nor so much neither, no party
protestants, or rather christians with us, but with them against Christ and his
truth. But the majesty of Christendom, in comparison of our poor faction, as
he calls it, does much comfort him. Thanks be to God though the least that
yet are best, cannot compare for multitude with the worst that are most: yet he
may remember, that we are not such a poor company as he would have us. For
God has caused his people to grow and increase not from Paganism to popisme,
the mother of al here sies, as they boast to have done in the Indies: but from
paganism and false religion indeed, to true christianity, in (...),
Flaurders, Germany, Spain, England, Scotland, some whole countries having
utterly abandoned their idolatries and corruptions. And this not (...)Master
Charke (whom he dreameth to sit by the fire in his personage, wherein as in
great matters, so in this also he is taken with a foul So he charge him with
taking tithes which he (...)the (...)do not, wherein appears upon what
(...), he neither having personage nor (...)which yet were lawful enough for
him. page 2.
lie) may see, but al other christians, whose eyes God has not shut up in
(...)to their own destruction.

Now being grown to some conclusion, he sets down what order he will
keep. And for (...)he will set down his own censure wholly again. For the
man (...)to hear himself speak. But he pretends to do that because M.
Charke is obscure. But the truth is, he provides to have that which he
sets down red fully of his Catholic brood, but as for M. Charks answer,
he knows that none of his confederates must once touch it, upon pain of the
black curse, unless he be licensed and authorized thereunto. This is the way
that they take, when all the world knows that we read their books, and
answer the^ thoroughly, and they like butchers curres (...)at the worst morsels
of ours, and never mark the whole drift of the matter, as Sit Parsons, or what
parson soever else be the defender, has done, through this defense of his
censure against M. Charks reply, and in all the rest of his books.

Thus I have answered these prefaces, minding not to deal so particularly
with the book: only I will hereafter deal with those things that are
personal, which this runnegate prodigal Parsons, (as he is commonly taken, if
he be not a parson of another parrish as some think) as a heap of filth, has
raked together to discredit those excellent instruments of God, which the
Lord has reared up in his church, for the edifiyng of his Saints. And
although it could no whit prejudice the truth, as their own writers witness,
though men had their notorious faults, yet because the holy ghost will have the
ministers of God to be blameles, I will mainteyn their innocence, by examining
his reasons and witnesses, in order of each, as they have lived in their
several times, and as occasion serves, I will lay out of their own stories,
the lives of some of their chiefest popes, the heads and pillars of their own
popish church: and this also I will do as briefly as possibly I can.

(...)An Aunsweare for the time, unto that foul, and wicked defense of the
Censure.
IN that you set down your whole Censure, and do but croppe here and there
out of Master Charkes replye, without either replye or aunsweare to Master
Charkes reasons and arguments, you deal with such equity, as a man may
look for at a Papists hands, that use neither Faith nor sinceritye in any
their dealinges. But you have done it for good causes, as I have noted before,
to wit, that you may be sure to broche out to the world your falsehood, and
conceal the truth of God. If there had been any Why the adversaries publish
their own works so often, and conceal, ours.
purpose of plain dealing, you would as well have set down full and wholly
your adversaries replye, as your Censure and defense. And if you had made as
short work of your own, as you have done of his, we should not have had
after so long time, but a first part, in steed of both first and second, nor
in so many sheets, that might have been comprehended in a few. But you
neither make conscience what you write, nor how you write, how often nor how
weakelie, so you may seem to your deceived followers, and superstitious
Idiottes still to have somewhat to say. And in very truth you set down
nothing new: All is of that worm eaten store that was long (...)spent, and
have received as often aunsweares as they have been objected unto us. Of all
M. Charkes replye to that proud challenge of a Runnegate Jesuit; ye take only
a word or two for your entrance: What is Campion, or who are the rest of these
Seedemen, that they should auow popish religion etc. Here you exclaim even
being out of breath your self, that Master Charke entered in choler: and if
his beginning or entry were so hot, what would the ending be? Belyke you
(...)have men to speak to you as Angels, when you are devils. In our answeares
you are watching to catch every sharp word, that yet is ouermilde,
considering who you are that set your selves linesse and true religion: Let
paretts sermons de tempore, and all the rest of their legendes and festiuals,
their scholasticall and Lombardicall histories which are more then a good many
testify: which are so full of lies, toys and inventions, that a man can find
no truth in them. And albeit these late pedling Jesuits, seem to come with a
greater florishe in this last encounter against the truth, yet they are void
of all truth and sincerity. Among these may be reckoned also Sir Sonius,
Hermannus, (...), Quintius, Poligranus, and a thousand such like pedling
proctors. And no marvel, for they were never acquainted with the holy
scriptures, to preach for the glory of Christ, and to edify his people.

Alas, they never came where it grew, neither know they what it means, The
popish (...)ner of preaching.
but they patch in deed together other men's sayings, kicking and flinging
here and there without all good method and order, never looking to the sense of
the scriptures, never caring what the scriptures of God teach but they can tell
us some Canturburies tales, and lies of Robin hoode, and many goodly miracles
wrought by relics: of our Ladies milk, of Saint Hubertes key, of Saint Loyes
horse, of Saint Gabriels feathers, and of Saint Georges spear. Read their
Gesta Romanorum, Vitas patru^, their Speculum bistoriale, and you shall find
such stuff enough. That I say nothing of Saint Frances conformities, of S.
Bridgets revelations, of these goodly things set out by Lypomanus, Sophronius,
and such cou^ terfet Doctors, who are as full of such holy frauds to help the
peoples devotion, as their golden Legende is full of Leaden, nay loud lies.

But here Master Charke has drawn upon himself a needelesse charge, to
answer for Master Hanmer, who is old enough to answer for himself, and if
he find it hard, he must thank himself, for meddling with matters which
he might have avoided. But good master Parson (let me be bold to call you so
though perhaps you look for an higher title) what are the few things of many
you have observed to declare master Hanmers constitution? The first is, his
ignorance, who has alleged out of Lyra: Ab Ecclesia Romana iam diu est, quod
recessit gratia, which he interprets: It is long sithence, that the grace
of God is departed from Rome: whereas the word is Graecia, not Gratia, Greece
and not Grace: as the whole circumstance of that which went before and
follows after does declare. But herein Sir Defender, you do not so much
strike master Hanmer for ignorance, as your own Dunces and Dorbels through his
sides, that not only have printed it so, in all the copies that yet I have
seen, and I am sure I have seen above twenty, but also your own fellows,
that so have taken it, and have been in as great rage with Lyra about this, as
for his opinion (...)the sacrament. Quarrel not therefore with Read him in
1. Cor. 11.
us about your own slippes, but lay the fault where it is upon your own
backs, bay at those whose ignorance in time tofore has passed all others,
among whom knowledge, learning and judgment, has had small account and
entertainment, howesoeuer now Satan (...).
furnishes you his instruments, with some more knowledge, or rather (...), that
you may do the greater mischief. But let this by the way be marked by the
Reader, that the supremacy of your pope, by Lyra his confession out of your
own interpretation has been greatly ecclipsed, seeing Graecia, as he says,
was long ago departed from the Church of Rome: whereas he might rather have
said that Rome was departed from Graecia.

The second thing you charge M. Hanmer with, is as you speak in your foul
mouth, a foul lie, that he should say that the Jesuits held that all and
every the things contained in holy (...), are so wrapped (...). 2. (...). 12.
in (...), that the best learned, can gather thence no certain knowledge: This
(you (...)) is impudent, for they have the plain contrary, and specially And
radius, in the very self same (...)by him alleged. I know not whether M.
Hanmer referred you to Andradius or no, but I am sure that even in the
(...)article of the Censure of (...), there is a special tracte, to prove
generally that the scripture is full of (...), and therefore not to be read of
the common people, and to that purpose are al those same authorities out of the
Doctors set down by them, as also by Bellarminus, to deter the people from
meddling with them, whereas in deed the ancient fathers have no such meaning,
but rather What the sathers mean when they (...)of the (...)of the (...).
teach men, to be more diligent in reading them, to pray more heartily and
earnestly, that God will give them understanding, and how hard soever they may
seem to be, what difficulties soever are in them in regard of the wicked and
such as are separated in his just judgment from the know ledge of them: yet
God does vouchsafe to (...)his secrets to his chosen, that hearing they
should hear, and understanding they should understand, and so attain to
(...)and be saved. Therefore Paul magnifieth his office, being the Apostle of
the (...), to provoke the Jews Romans 11.
his own (...), that if it were possible by any means his miuisterie might be
effect (...)also to them, and he might save some from amongst them, as also he
(...) Timothy, to attend unto reading, that he might save himself, and
those that heatde him. The fathers therefore when they speak of the hardness
of the scriptures do it not to fear the children of God at all from reading
and hearing the word of God. Origin. in (...)hom. 9. bo. 4. In 12. cap. Epist.
ad To. (...). ad (...). (...). (...)hom in (...). 4. (...). bom. 9. in (...).
ad Col. ho. 14. (...). in (...). ad Threnos. Hiero. in Epist. ad Cor. 2. cap.
13. Ad Furiam. ad (...). (...)ade^ (...). (...)riam. Viduas.
(For they exhort them here unto continually, through out their whole writings)
of what calling, condition, or sex soever they be, we have not therefore to
regard what the Censure of Colen, their Antididagma, their coun cell and their
College at Rhemes have patched together, to disuade from the reading of holy
scriptures: we know that the Ministry of the Gospel, is the only ordinary
way perpetually appointed of God to continue in his church, from whence must
flow the instruction of every sort, and building up of every member thereof
unto godliness and righteousness. And though to the blind beetles and
spiders of the world, light be darkness, and the sweetest and most fragrant
flowers, yield matter of poison: and to swine Acornes are fitter then pearls,
which that new Testament set out of late does therefore insinuate, that the
common people should fear to read them. yet his will being his last Testament
is commended as the (...). Marcellam. (...). etc. Virgins The ministry of of
the word the ordinary means that God has appointed for the salvation of his
people.
pledge and evidence of their inheritance in the same word, and whosoever shall
go about to keep his Church from it, consisting of all sorts, they do but
hood wincke them, and so lead them whether they list, as they have done all
the princes and nations in the world. They are therefore in deed those
thieves of the Scriptures that Origene mentions, that have not right unto
them, being not the Church of God, because they renounce obedience to the will
of God, and hear not his voice. And thus much for this point.

The third thing you charge him with, is, that in his eleventh Assertion he
should charge the Jesuits to hold, that there be many things more grievous
and more damnable, then those that repugne the law of God, and yet the law
condemns them not: namely traditions, man's laws, and precepts of the Church.
Here also you play with a fethar, and would catch the wind in a net. For you
say the Jesuits do teach the quite contrary to wit that what souer is sin
is condemned by the law of God: which none but wicked men and past shame can
deny: but you dare not say that whatsoever is contrary to the law of God is
sin, least concupiscence which you defend, and some have not been ashamed to
maintain as a virtue, (...)assuming that if God should command the (...)not
to lust, it were as if he should command the Sun and Moon not to shine, and
the fire not to (...), much like as Campion in the disputations at the Tower,
(...)that it was a special virtue, that being in the Queens Jewel house,
and being suggested to steal, did yet abstain from it, abusing that place of
Saint James: Blessed is he that is tempted, But say you: whatsoever Campian in
the disputations had at the (...).
offends the law of God (if it be done wittingly and with consent of
heart, for otherwise it offends not the law) it is sin: whereby you
establishe that whatsoever sin is committed, if he that commits it knows
it not to be sin, or if he do not approve it by (...)his seal of consent
unto it, it is no sin. And here also you shut out original sin in
infants, who are notwithstanding sinners by reason of their corrupt nature that
is in them, and subject to condemnation without Christ. But if Gods law be a
perfect law that reaches not only to the outward man, but to the inward,
and to the very thoughts of man, and therefore your venial sins (whereof you
make no accounte, and teach that in respect of themselves we need not to repent
of them, but as they make way to danger) if those (...).
(I say) be called sins for that they are against the law of God, it must
needs be, that they which are committed against the first table, though they
be only conceived by lust: though the heart and will have not subscribed,
yet they are to be condemned. This is but a civil righteousness before men,
but cannot stand before God whose law is plain: Cursed is (...)one that
abides not in all things, which are written in the book of the law to do
them. Whatsoever therefore resists the law of God, in it self and by
nature, it deserves the curse of God. But sin in it self, and in it own
nature kindles the wrath of God: in him that transgresses in one, there is
giltinesse in all, and the (...)of the least jot of Gods law, sets a man
guilty before God in all. And what a beastly shame is this, in all your
Iebusiticall sort, that dare to lessen the breach of the law of God, and will
aggrauate the transgression of such traditions, as your selves devise unto your
selves, under the name of the traditions of Christ and his Apostles. But how
shall we know them so to be, either they must (...). Col. fol. 309.
be written or un written? If they be written show us the word, if they be un
written and have been delivered from hand to hand, let us see how they agree
with the written tradition, which is called the doctrine of the Apostles. But
if we can show you when they were hatched, who were the deuisers of them, that
they are against the purity of Christ's doctrine, serving neither for
comeliness nor edification, being besides impious in them selves, because you
advance them in equality with (...) commandments of God, (...)above them,
then M. Hanmer has justly collected both in this, and other points, noted
also by other learned (...)before him, that you make those sins, which the
law of God has made no sins, and which the law has condemned for sins,
those you make virtues. But say you, if they be traditions or precepts of the
church, then the breach thereof, (as also of our superiors commandments) are
offenses against men: but yet consequently also against God, for he has
commanded men to obey their superiors, which rule them, and fool wisely, that
they must do it of conscience, as Saint Paul proves. Romans 13.

But here first we deny that they are precepts of the Church, for though you
boast the church of Rome to be the Church of Christ, (...)that is the
question, and we have, and do still for good causes deny it. But to give you
somewhat to play withal, admit it were, yet we say that the church may
command nothing, either contrary, or besides the word of God. If it do, we
are not to obey it. The place of the Apostle is even understood of you, as all
the rest of the scriptures are, which you Of the 13. to the Romans. The new
Testament of Rhemes translated now into English by them selves, which in
(...)was accounted an (...).
(...)to your own destruction, and yet your new Masters of Rhemes tell us,
that this place is to be understood of remporall rulers, which you will have to
be understood of the Church. And though Chrysostom and others show you, that
whether he be a Bishop or of any other calling, yet he must be subject: you
will not be subject to your natural princes, no not in things concerning God,
that are commanded according to his word, but to maintain a foreign
(...)tyranny in a country: and church where he has nothing to do. You care
not what treasons you commit, that you may yet have the name of Martyrs, and
may be chronacled in his Chronicles, and have your names in his Kalenders. Of
the traditions and commandments of the church which without the promise and
commandment of God, you feign to be necessary to salvation: read before.

The fourth falsehood you charge him with, is that he says: That the Jesuits
say, that there is no other justification, then the seeking or searching of
righteousness, or to speak philosophically, a motion unto righteousness.
This you say is folly besides malice, showing that he knows not what he
speaks himself, and therefore out of Canisius you set down, another
description as though the other had bin sucked out of his own fingers. But it
is plain, what soever Canisius say, that Censura Celoniensis, has the same
words Dialogo (...). in the very beginning sol. 141. and this they say is the
Catholic doctrine, that is the doctrine of the papists, of whom I could
aduouch a number besides, if I studied not to be short.

The (...)charge is gathered out of the 19. and twentieth assertions: first,
that the Jesuits hold a twofold justification, which you confess to be
true, and therefore needed not to be set down in vain, but what more? And that
our works are necessarily required for the first, and do merit the
amplification of the second, this you say is clearly false, and here being
blind your self, you account him without reason besides himself, and marvel
what he means by this shameless behavior, surely your charity is overmuch
inflamed, that thus rage, when you are as justly charged with the one as the
other. Yea but they teach the quite contrary: and yet that is no reason that
they which are not at one with New Test. (...)in Acts. 10.
them selves almost in any point, should agree in this. For M. (...)has truly
gathered, and so have others gathered before him, that works are necessary to
justification: Therefore to the first as well as to the later. Thereupon their
own annotation is plain upon the tenth of the Acts concerning Cornelius, that
he did certain work; before justification, which though they suffised not to
salvation, yet they were acceptable preparatiues to the grace of justification,
and such as moved God to mercy. The like example they setdown of the Eunuch. So
also they say upon the 3. to the Romans that faith and works proceeding of grace
be dispositions and preparatio^s thereunto. They say justification is
reconciliatio^, and this cannot be without charity, which is the gift of the
holy ghost powered into our hearts. God they say foreseeth good things in us,
and so augmenteth them till charity be full, to make us the friends and sons
of God. And that is Gods righteousness, which gives to every man according to
their worthiness, and yet when we allege that place of the Apostle that
Abraham's faith was imputed to him for righteousness; they say in deed, that that
same infusion of (...)righteousness cannot be merited of any by works, but that
is given undeservedly by the merit of Christ, but the^ ((...)they) (...)is
imputed to righteousness, when God admits it, being found in men, and
estemeth it worthy to have the gift of inherent righteousness bestowed upon
it. This is their desperate (...). This is (...), that they should be endued
with charity and other virtues, which is the first justification, and having
received these new qualities, now man himself should merit a greater and
fuller righteousness, and so everlasting life. So that they say and unsay,
they affirm whereof they understand not, as men that grope at the wall in the
broad day. But if God pronounced of Abraham, when he had now walked
according to Gods commandments a good space, and was adorned with excellent
virtues, that he was not justified by his works, but that his faith was
imputed for righteousness, because he believed in him that justifies the
wicked, how shall your blasphemous and abominable doctrine stand? This
therefore is but a sly sentence of Canisius to dazel the eyes of such as God
has reserved to such judgments, for neither without grace nor with grace can
we deserve any thing, either to the beginning or ending of justification. For
before whatsoever our moral works may seem to be, yet being not of faith
they cannot please God, and when they are offaith they please not God for
themselves, but in respect of him, who is our propitiation, satisfaction,
righteousness, sanctification, and all in all.

As for the Lords prayer which you say unto your Saints, nay I (...)me to
Diuelles, because you have no certain testimony of their being sancted to
God, as also that their relics, may be woorshipped with the worship that is
due unto God; which they call cultus (...): I need not to stand upon it. For
the first it is more clear then the noone day, that whenever they pray unto
any Saint (as they call them) or to any image of a Saint, they are wont ever
to conclude with so many Auees, Paternosters, and so many Credoes, or a Credo
at the least. Look in their (...), offices, hours and pies, and you shall find
this so true, that you may (...)marvel at the impudency of this (...), that
has taught both tongue to utter, and pen to set down nothing but shameless
and palpable (...), and for the other it is clear that they bestow nothing so
much cost upon God, as they did upon their Saints and specially upon the
Virgin Marye: and as for S. Francis, and (...), they had more orders, rytes,
and ceremonies, then ever had Christ or any of his apostles. Concerning that
he charge M Hanmer with (...)the council of Trent, by (...)to their words,
seeing it is their doctrine, he needed not to have been so (...), neither is
that to be accounted a perverting by addition, that is added for explication
sake, their doctrine being as M. Hanmer has (...)gathered and set down.

As for that he adds concerning voluntary sin, and triumphs against him for
condemning that opinion of the Jesuits, because he (...)the like sentence in
S. Augustine, and that twice (...)in two several books, the answer is, that
M, Hanmer justly condemns it in the Jesuits, and yet justifies it in S.
Augustine, whose vnderstauding and meaning are as far at odds, as their
religion is disagreeing from Augustine. For Augustine held rightly, that
actual sin is voluntary, that is, is done with the will willingly, according
as man is corrupted, not only out wardly but in wardly: even in those most
principal faculties, that do consist in the mind of man. But he (...)will
here of conclude, as these Jesuits do, that there is no siane committed, but
where there is a will and consent joined thereunto, they conclude against the
word of God. For there are many sins of omission, committed through
ignorance, for which also the law of God has provided: Yea many Number. 15.
times we offend, when we think we do well, and we have our secret Genesis 21.
sins. Before we have strength or any will to will, there is in us that poison
and corruption that sets us in our selves, guilty and condemned before God, so
that from the womb, we carry in us that wooluish nature that prepares us to
the spoil, although we never yet worried any sheep. The Scorpion has his
sting within him, though always he strike not, and a serpent though he may be
handled whilst the cold has benumbed him, yet when he is warmed, he can
hiss out his venom; and this is verified of us, though always the vices that
are in us appear not, till we have grouth and strength to bring them forth.
And if you will call this voluntary, it must either be spoken in respect of
our first parents, or else in respect of that pronenesse that yet is hid in
us and not otherwise. And therefore you might have spared Master Hanmer in
this, seeing also that this has not only been noted by him (and is not
denied by you) but also by others, as appears in your Censure of Colen.
Printed 1560 (...).
Fol. 44. 46.

The like we aunsweare for that saying of S. Hierome and Augustine, concerning
the fulfilling of the law, that you and S. Hierome and Augustine agree no more
in this then in the other. For you say, that the commandments are so
possible to be kept, that every one may keep them that will: and that this
is the keeping of them, if we do as much as lies in us: then we attain the
full perfection of the law, and keep it in this life, when we are renewed and
have charity. That Hierom and Augustine had no such meaning, concerning our
fulfilling of the law, that is, that it was possible to be fulfilled in us, it
is plain in other places of their works. For in his dialogue against the
Pelagians, he says they are possible through grace, but impossible, to the
strength of nature, as Paul says. I (...)do all things, in him that
comfort me, and again of our selves we cannot think a good thought. In
Christ the commandementes of God are absolutely fulfilled, but not in us,
whether we be regenerate or unregenerate, that in him, we may assure our selves
of all righteousness and salvation. For this cause he came to fulfill the
Hier. in Dialog.
Aug. de (...)Ser. 63.
Law for us, and to take away the curse thereof, and therefore Aug. gives
this counsel: if a man (says he) think that any thing is impossible or hard
in keeping the commandments, let him not dwell in himself, but run to him
that helps, who therefore has given the commandment; that he may stir up
our desire, and so may give help. And again, this then is to fulfill the law,
not to lust; but who is there that lives and can do this? The Psalm (says
he) helps us, that was even De lib. (...). cap. 16. super (...). tract. (...).
now (...). O Lord hear me in thy righteousness, not in mine own etc. I am
sure the Pharisie had as perfect a righteousness, according to the law
without Christ, as any Papist in the world could have, and the publicane as
little in himself, and yet the one was justified and the other rejected in his
hypocrisy, because that which the one had, was without Christ, and the other
with Christ, that is, by faith in him; and not in him self, quite contrary to
that doctrine of your conspiracy of Trent, who teach with the rest of your
faction an inherent righteousness, whereby you and they both plead
justification before God of deserte and merit, which is no less then
blasphemous against the death, passion, and satisfaction of Christ: and of
like sort, is that you bring for the mayntenaunce of that counsel out of Saint
Augustine concerning Council. Tried. sess. 5.
Baptism, of taking faults utterly away, and not racing them. Saint Augustine
against the Pelagians aduoucheth truly, that the Sacrament of Baptism to the
children, is the seal of their ingraffement and adoption into Christ, and is
the undoubted token of the forgiveness of all their sins.

But hereby Saint Augustine does not confirm with you, that after Baptism
there remain no sins in the children of God, or that the Sacraments of
themselves, in the very administration thereof, as of the work wrought do so
confer grace, and take away sin, as that whosoever is baptized with outward
baptism, forth with is saved, or receives that grace which they had not
before or afterward, as you blasphemously teach, when as rather Baptism is
the ratification of those graces and gifts that are bestowed upon us. So that
this neither declares M. Hanmer to be a man of small reading, nor your self
of any sincere judgment, reading or learning, that thus pick unjust quarrels
against his person, when no occasion was offered. And thus much for M. Hanmer,
whom albeit you pinch now and then afterward, yet this being the greatest
gripe you give him, when your nails were at length, I trust you shall do him
less hurt hereafter, seeing now they are payred and made more short.

In that you pick also a quarrel both with Master Charke and him, for
passing over your uncomely iestes, concerning his good fellowlyke dealing, it
deserved no aunsweare at all: as neither this defense of yours does, from which
if there were taken, the railing, lying, and vain repeating of things
objected and long ago aunsweared, wherewith you have enlarged and adorned it,
it would carry but a very small bulk. But you say these things are not
personal, but concern his falsehood and folly in doctrine, and yet you cannot
in truth set down any one point of false doctrine, but are driven to
shameful beggerie, which is, that because you account them false and foolish
(which you do the truest and wisest set down by us, that teach not as you
do) therefore forsooth it must needs be so. And farther to witness what a man of charity you are, you could be content to wish him as good a
parsonage as (...)desires, so it were without the hurt of his Parishioners;
wherein yet your charity is mixed with such gaul, that you insinuate him to
be as ambitious, as you perhaps would be, if the time served, ambitiously
to seek that whereunto you had no warrantable calling; and if of your
liberality you could affoarde him such a living, yet it should be with the
renouncing of the truth, and so to his own condemnation.

But yet that you might seem to speak upon some ground, and not to have given
your proud Censure without cause, You run through his whole first book:
and to bring both your adversaries into hatred, sometime you commend Master
Charke in respect of Master Hanmer, to have aunsweared to the purpose, and
sometime commend Master (...)in respect of Master Charke, to have answered
more plainly, and more quietly, with less railing, and more goodfellow like,
sauinge forsooth a foul lie or two. Thus (...)turn and wind, and please your
self trimly in your toys and follies. Where you are justly touched, that with
you is called railing; and if you be familiarly dealt with, why then we are
presumptuous; if we exhort you we flatter you; and if we (...)you your
own, we rail. As for Campions credit and woorship in Oxeford, when M. Hanmer
was a ladde, it may be aunsweared that M. Hanmer within a little was as old
as he; and though he came to place of countenance, yet he had more then ever
he deserved: and what if he had had the greatest that might be? when he came
once to be a Traitor, enemy to GOD and to his country, all those things
were justly lost. As for Master Hanmers persuasion, that he should have
left his vows to be performed by others, and have joined with the ministers
of Christ, abandoning that Frierlike life, and have tasted how sweet the
Lord was, it was a more friendlye and faithful persuasion, then he had grace
to hearken unto. If he had harkened unto it, he neither had died so shameful
a death, nor been such an offense to the Church of GOD. And one thing I
warn you of, that vile spirit that opens your mouth in such Expositions as
you (...)upon those places of holy Scriptures: Taste and see how sweet the
Lord is, which scoffingly you expound to be thus much: Take a Wife and a
Benefice, and other sweet morselles, which commonly fall to Ministers lottes
in England: will (I am afraid) unless GOD turn your heart bring you to the
same end. Indeed in regard of God it is a sweet thing to live in his fear,
for avoiding fornication, every man to have his own wife, and every woman her
own husband, and to have a charge whereunto they are appointed of God,
wherein they may walk dutifullie, and live fruitefully to the edifiyng and
buylding up of many, though they have their cares and difficulties so annexed
to them as are sufficient to make them look up to heaven: but the sweet
morselles you speak in regard of the flesh, is to live at liberty without
all lystes, as your irreligious rabble do, that think it sweeter, to have
many whoores, then one honest wife, to have no one charge, but many; that
like the Caterpillars devour and eat up all the sweet morselles of the
earth, follow all the Lecherye and lusts that sinful flesh leads unto,
and under the name of an austere life without travel, care or labor, enjoy
all: which commonly are the lottes of that proud and wicked generation
through out the (...)world, to which the whole earth has been lay de up, and
so wasted, as kings and Princes have become their vassalles and tenants to
depend upon them and to be ordered by them.

As for Master Hanmers being none of the Disputers in your conjecture, and
verified now, because there has been as you call it a (...), it can no more
prejudice him then any others, that have been fitter to dispute then either
your Champion was to aunsweare, or any of the rest shall be able. Concerning his
notes, where, whencesoeuer they were gathered it makes no great matter; you
yourselfe, if you were cut off from the furniture, that you have spoiled others
of, out of Canisius, Belarminus, Melchior Canus and such like, you would be but
a poor and naked Parsons, that say nothing (as I have said) that has not
been often said; and which declares your beggary, you scarsly give it the new
burnishing or trimming over: and as for speaking to the purpose, you fight with
more framed adversaries then M. Hanmer does, who says justly against your
Pope, and against you papists, that the place makes not a man holy, that under
your pope holy garments and sour count na^ces there is shrouded many a deep
hypocrite. And besides he had great need against your greased generation to
prove the authority of the civil magistrate, seeing they cast of that lawful
yoke, and cannot abide at any hand to be subject unto them, but would advance
a false and traiterous usurper that false priest of Rome, to intrude upon their
authority, not only to deprive them of the chiefest part of their office for
duties concerning God and Gods service, but for mere civil affairs, and
therefore they give him that which Christ never did, to wit, two swords.
Lastly, seeing he had such a benefit by entertayning Campions Lybell under
the color of that book, me thinks he might in silence have passed that, if
it had been such a benefit; but of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks. For the Papists are such flesh flies, that always they light upon
the corruptest and worst things. Indeed I suppose it be their property, when
they have foysted out their villainies, then they look that we should by
privilege publish their draffe, which like swine they always like to welter
in, but the sweet waters they will never come near, but this warning is
worth the taking, that we may learn to provide for them against another
time. Now he has done with Master Hanmer, and runs with all his might
upon Master Charke.

First he defends his own method, which he feigneth to be done for
Master Charkes ease and the Readers commodity, although in very deed he
only nippeth and catches here and there for his purpose, and leaves the
weight of the matter altogether untouched, in a Popish policy, cropping at
words, and ouergoing the matter, neither setting it down, as yet he has set
his own wholly again and again, But here to discredit the whole reply he
lays about him like a mad man, laying out the only pith, and bringing that
into order which was dissolute, environed with long and bitter inuectiues,
embrewed with spiteful and contumelious speech, and every way cast about with
odious accusations, light suspicions, insufficient collections, and vain
surmises of treasons, rebellious dissimulations, practices, and what soever a
fond malicious head could object besides. Is not here rouling Rhethorick to
discredit his whole book, upon a bare asseueration? The order being kept
according to Campions disordered occasion, no bitter inuectiues being used,
but where they were well bestowed against popery, treason and rebellion,
without odious and unjust accusation, light suspicion, or insufficient
collection, the issues answering the conjectures, and both agreeing with their
desperate and wicked practices usual in their popish profession and godless
religion. And now Sir Robert Parsons with a great vain in his forehead, he
must sit as a Censurer upon all men's doings, and discern between wise and
foolish: he must judge every man and be judged of none, as if he were in the
Popes chair already, when howesoeuer he knows not himself, all men know
him sufficiently, to be such a one as the Papists themselves may be ashamed
to auowe for a common honest man. But such Carpenter such chippes.

Further he raueth against master Charke, for laboring to discredit those
bottomless Locustes the Jesuits, and here he snatcheth at him for accusing
the papists property, which is to discredit the men for the doctrines sake,
he would have said the doctrine for the men's sake, and for that he
confesses that he labored to bring them into discredit, and acknowlegeth
those speeches in all hatred of popish practices uttered, he collecteth that
hatred was the cause against their persons. As though many of their own side
have not detested, that new devised order, who yet never hated the men, and as
though a man might not utter sharp speeches in detestation of false doctrine,
and yet his charity be saved toward their persons: But here no learned or
common honest man, and much less a pretended Preacher of Gods word, can
justify such uncivil and outrageous terms against his brother. Alack good
man and why so, what waste of such speech can there be against such scome and
reuedge of Antichriste? No pretended preacher, but a Preacher in deed as
master Charke is, has good warrant out of the word of God, to call those
sowers of sedition, and (...)of all religion, that now are thruste forth, in
this last rage of Antichriste, by Sharp speech where it is right ly and best
bestowed.
their right names. Neither is the comparison a like, no more then the cause
is, that you should give one for another. For you in opening your mouths in
an ill cause, you speak with the mouth of the Dragon against Christ, against
heaven, against the Saints and children of God: but they speaking against you,
and flinging your abominations in your faces, they speak (...)Gods enemies,
against perlecutors and tyrants, for Christ and for his church, against the
corrupters and betrayers of all Churches and kingdoms. His bitter speech
therefore justly bestowed in weight and measure upon you, was bestowed where it
should be, and is no warrande for you to bestow it, where you ought not: and
yet it is all that which you can say, where with you gorge your books, and fill
up not your lines, but your leaves, and great volumes to. But howsoever you
bear it amongst men, a day shall come, when you shall answer it to the Lord
whom you strike: then you shall know what it is to have opened your mouth
against the Almighty, and against his blessed and holy truth.

But here you will not pass over this heap, which like a dounge farmer, you
have laid together out of the writings of the Protestants, Mat. 12.
which you set down as a token to know their hearts and their spirits Acts.
8.
by, abusing that place of our Savior, and comparing them with Simo^ Magus: as
fitly and as truly as you are wont to allege the Scriptures. But if you had
turned it on the other side to your selves, and those scourilous railers of
your sort, you had fitted it better. For in deed that (...)and furious
backbiting and slaundering spirit, agrees with all popish heretics, and
such as not being able to prevail against Gods everlasting truth, fly
always to that devilish and serpentine kind of dealing. But I wonder at your
folly in interpreting that place of the Acts concerning Simon Magus against
us, seeing your late young masters of Rhemes, acquit Simon Magus in respect of
us, that blasphemed not, but prayed the Apostles to pray for him: That same
gaul of bitterness, and budde of unrighteousness, which Peter saw in that
Patron and forefather of yours Simon Magus, was that same root of
bitterness, that budded forth gaul and wormwood: a Metaphore declaring that
the fountain was corrupt, and the very heart teynted Deuteronomy. (...). 18.
with malice and venom. But what makes this, against bitter speech, and
sharp dealing, against hypocrites, such as your self is, and against the
enemies of God, and seeing also in the same place Peter Act. 8. 20. 21 22.
uses asgreat sharpness against Simon Magus, as might be? Of like fitness
is that allegation out of the eight of the Romans: He that has not the
spirit of Christ is none of his: Seeing it stands well with the spirit of
Christ, which came upon the Apostles in (...)tongues, to reprove the world
of sin, to reprove errors and falsehoods in me^, with the zeal and heat of
God. And as for Papists they cannot challendge this text to them, seeing they
make a mock of us, when being Christ's, we assure our selves to have the
spirit of Christ, which they are wont to blaspheme, and accounte it an
heinous presumption, that any man should so think. I grant that as the holy
ghost appeared in fiery tongues, so also he had the for me of a Dove, which
settethe forth the simplicity and softuesse, wherewith the children of God
are endued. But as God has soft ones, so he has sharp ones, and both
necessary for the building up of his Saints. And you, your self give us a
plaster together with the wound, whilst you allow heat in respect of the
matter: and you say, that it is not the question, seeing Christ and his
Apostles and after them many holy fathers, amongst whom you name S. Anthony,
have used very hot and sharp speech. We answer you, if there be any heat
in our writings that becomes not Christ's Gospel, it is meet, as coming
from man's corruption, that it fall to the ground: but if there be heat,
sharpness, and biting Corziues, that gnawe upon your proud flesh, and
Sharpness not against the mildness of Christians.
is as a searing Iron to your festered botches and soars, in respect of the
matter of truth, not of any hatred to your Parsons whom for the most part we
know not: You must be content to abide it. If Christ come with his whip, and
will chase you out of his house, as he did the Jews: if he will drive you out
headlonge, and overthrow your Tressels and Tables, making his house, that is,
the house of prayer Matthew. 3
a den of thieves: whilst you make it a markette and a place of Luke. 3
sale: who can resist him: Herod may be called Fox, and Esaias. 1.
the Scribes and Pharisees generation of Vipers, the Princes of Judah, Princes
of Sodom and Gomorhe, thieves, and compapanions of thieves: and yet this no
spirit of error, but the spirit of Christ.

Now then for M. Charkes words against the Jesuits, whom he calls
Scorpions and poisoned Spiders, they are Metaphors in respect of the matter,
lively setting out their cursed practices and (...)and are rightly given them.
I will not stand upon the application. The first foun der of the order of
Jesuits a lame soldier one that had li ued wickedlie, and was brought to this
touch, by reading the Le gend. Laurent. Surius de (...)gest. fol. 455.
It is apparent to all the world, that they are such in truth, as those
noisome and venomous beasts do set them out to be in nature and condition. And
also in regard of their pettigree and of spring taking their beginning of a
late obscure soldier, master Hanmer might well enough in such a case, to set
out the madness of such monsters use those excessive speeches, and that with
more warrant a great deal then you might call him shameless slouen, whom I
know to have dealte a great deal more clenly then your self, or any those
filthy sottes of your side in many their writings.

And as for master Fulke, they that know him better then you know him, to
have no ruffianlike spirit, although when he is provoked by your unlearned and
doltish dealing, he has that courage, that becomes a professor and
Preacher of the Gospel, to give you fit names, and to provoke you again,
according to your dealing. And albeit these speeches severed from
circumstances, that went before and after, and from the occasions, that made
him to set such words down, seem odious: Yet they that are wise can
consider, that they are much mitigated, when they are considered, as I have
said. And surely I am persuaded there is no man, that carries flesh upon his
back, and lives as a man amongst men, that can be so patient, especially
with papists Gods sworn enemies, whose religion as it is gross, and
altogether built upon superstition and folly, so when they will confirm it, by
gross abusing the scriptures, by palpable ignorance, and wresting the holy
scriptures of malice, which they pervert to their own destruction, as they
do in most of their writings, (though Gregory Martin unjustly charge us
with it): then must needs fall out of our pens and mouths some such names
as agree best unto them, whether we will or no, when we think least of them.
I write not this, to the end to defend every word that is uttered by us. We
are men, and because the Lord builds by us, and mainteineth his work, it is
our special comfort, that we build upon the foundation. That which is ours,
we desire not, that it should stand like stuble, it shall perish but we
shall be saved. If I should to requite him, gather all that dung and filth
together of raylinge and scurrilitie which is in their books, I should even
choke the world, and infect the uery air with their filthe. As the cause is,
so are their words: and therefore the comparison that he makes betwixt D.
Fulk, Allen, Stapleton, and Martial: is very unequal, and whatsoever such
lewd lossels and spend thriftes as Parsons is, with the rest of that popish
crewe, think of such cubbes, yet we know how to esteem of them: we by
the grace of God can discern of them, and what credit soever they have with
the world, with men that are blinded and partial, that are wont to praise them
in those things that are most unworthy of praise, and have their Parsons in
admiration, wonder at their gifts, and extol them above the Moon, as if they
were dropped out of heaven yet we know that this is a plain argument of
their corruption, and of their shame wherein they so much glory. Neither is it
of any credit with us, though like Mules thty rub one another, and dub one
another sayings: though they have some good gifts: seeing they are abused by
them, and their illusions made the stronger to deceive others. And in deed the
Gentiles of whom this Parson Parsons prateth, had a greater measure then ever
they had, but all were nothing without Christ.

As for that he calls us good fellows, we desire no fellowship with such:
and as for calling M. Fulke Minister in derision, whom also from the Censure
of one of his own hair, he calls the post horse of the Protestants:
agreeing to that popish railing spirit, whereby he is lead, shall receive no
other answer but this, that M. Fulke may rejoice to be so reviled for the
defense of Gods glorious truth. This deserves no shame, but praise amongst
all Gods people, if in the zeal of God, he be carried with a swift course, to
answer their peevish and pelting writings: neither does he it as post alone.
For God be thanked he knows, and you shall find that there are a great
number his inferiors both in years and in the labor of the Gospel, and after
him in Christ, that yet may be your masters, and can answer you well enough.
He does it not therefore of penury, as a man being left alone and would
carry the burden himself, but of a ready and forward mind to serve the
Lord and his Church. And if he alone and so swiftly do it, belike, if all
the Lords army should come upon you, and with preparation and furniture,
where then would be your glory? I know your proud Philistinians heart, and
the contempt wherewith you reproach the glory of the Israel of God, but be
assured this reaching to God, he will be avenged of it. The name of Minister
being the name of his office, he thinks no reproach to bear it: but the
name of a Popish Priest, instituted by Anticriste, that has no ground in the
word of God, but has written in the forehead of it the name of shame and
blasphemy: this name, if they were not past blushing might make them ashamed.
As for Martial the last of the three, the argument was so gross, and the
defense so blockishe that he took in hand, as might not only provoke M. Fulk
to call him by those names, but they might blushe (that I may use their own
words) of such worshipful writers. The other contumely of attributing this
to the pot, is justly returned upon his own head. For their Doctors are
commonly fitter for the pot, then for the pulpit, and for an ale benche, or a
stage, then for the Church of God: with whom when railing is done, they are
mumme, and the tragidie is ended.

Now having done (as he says) with the scholars, he lets drive also at
the Masters, and here Calvin is set in the first rank: and yet he might
know, that how soever we esteem of Calvin, as of an excellent and notable
personage, yet we have but one master: neither did he in regard of those
excellent gifts God had bestowed upon him, ever challenge any such
prerogative or authority: That is only common to popery, and what are his
sharp words? forsooth his ordinary term, against the Papists is knaves.
Surely as fit a name for them in the highest signification as can be, and
specially if a fit Epitheton be joined to it: and yet who knows not, that
has any skylll either in the Latin, English, French, or Scottishe tongues,
that it carries no such odious contumely with it? If malice had not blinded
this man's heart, he would have looked upon his godly and great labors, set
forth with so notable profit of the whole Church of God: he would have looked
upon his zeal for the glory and maintenance of the truth of God against such
enemies and resisters as himself and the Papists are. And what? Bishops
forsooth are his Superiors. Still this Parsons will be a beggar, as though M.
Calvin should confess that the Pope and his Cardinals are the Church, and
such as he has proudly advanced and appointed, were his Superiors, which
for his heart he cannot prove, either by the law of God or man.

As for Staphilus, when he will forsooth dubbe a counsailour, and dare sausily
compare with some of ours being men of Staphilus a runnagate, so far from
honor, that he was ne (...)honest.
honor: all the world knows what an Apostatate and runnagate he was: first
falling from the truth of God, and then afterward for the glory of men,
embracing false religion, and following this present evil world. What his
spirit of railing was, he that shall This book was translated by Surius; one
of his own (...)written against Smidiline.
read his works, especially his book against Andreas his Hyppodromus and
such like see at large he was one of the first deuisers of those notable lies
against Luther, after whom followed Cochcteus, Eccius, and the rest, such
another as that wretch Bolsecke is, of whom we shall speak afterward.

Now as though he had taken his leave of Calvin, he passes forth, to see
what he may find in Luther, whom they call the Dutch Bear: This man he
calls our father, as he did Calvin before our Master, and we are new
ympes, who have received from our father, the first fruits of his spirit, as
the Apostles had of the holy spirit. Thus does this profane wretch, with an
impure mouth, and an unholy spirit abuse the most comfortable and holy word
of God. But as we answered even now for having any man to be our Master in
matters of God, so we acknowledge but one father. And though Papists have
many fathers, of whom they receive religion by imitation and tradition, and
depend upon them, being men, they are new fathers, and new imps, (...)of that
old father of ours, which was before all times, in whom we were beloved,
chosen, called, regenerated and sanctified, even bofore the foundation of the
world was laid. And so far forth as Luther taught this old and first, and
therefore true (...)trine, we receive him and admit him. As for that which like
a Spider, he has sucked out of that book, he wrote against K. Henry, and
urges, that he might bring him, and the doctrine which he taught, which was
not his but Christ's, into hatred with some great personages of authority: I
answer generally unto it, that wheresoever he has not kept that modesty,
that became one that was careful for the salvation of them with whom he dealt,
we do not, nor will not defend him. But I cannot think but that Luther knew
well enough that king Henry was not author of that book, he was wise enough
to consider, that though the book did carry the kings name, yet some pelting
popish Proctor was the author, whom he repayeth in the same name wherein it
was published. It is plain that not long before that, he had written very
gently unto him.

And if he being misseled, by such as he gave credit unto, did over (...)set
himself against the truth, in which we ought to respect no man's person:
Luther could do no less, but looking up to God set himself against him.
Neither is this gathered by Parsons, or objected by the rest of the Papists,
for that he or they have any regard to the Matestie of a (...), or for any
love they did bear to that famous king, but to bring this excellent man and
the truth which is far worse, into hatred: for all stories are full, how
their Pope and they together, Read (...) the sixth letter to the princes of
Germany against (...) and his instructions given to his Legate. Frideric.
primus. Gregor. 7. alias Hilde brandus ex Auentino.
have offered violence from time to time against Princes, Noblemen and
Gentlemen of all sorts and degrees: They have not only defaced them with
evil words bearing Gods person, bearing his swoorde as being his Ministers,
when they have stood for Gods truth, and in their lawful right and liberty:
but they have plucked their crowns from their heads, stamped upon their
necks, and hunted them to death. This pelting Parsons keeping his old nature,
is still upon the soars, and the offalles and reuedge pleases him best. The
matter being sound and good he passes over, he considers no Honorius.
circumstances, but like a malicious wretch, as far from duetifull regard
(...).
of (...)and authority, as any might be, yet he will (...)a regard in him,
and those of his sort. And yet they loved king Henry not so well as the
(...)their holy water (for being his own invention, and devised for the
better furnishing of Idolatry he could not but love it too well) but as well
as the wicked are wont to love God, which is never a deal: For of all the
Princes that ever were in England, king Henry was he, that gave the Pope the
wound. And no doubt had he lived but till these times, wherein the light of
the knowledge of God does so abound and break forth, he would have seen
all their treachery: and as he abandoned the popes authority, opened a
passage unto the holy scriptures, ouerthrewe their shrines and gross
Idolatries, brought down their Abbeys and dens of filthiness and knauerie,
so would he have chased out all the rest of their abominations. But if in a
modest spirit, this heat of Luther The Papists honor not king Henry the 8.
had been found fault with, with no disfavor of the truth, I would not for
my part have found great fault with it. But considering Luther wrote for the
truth and not against it: considering also that this (...), and those of his
fether, neither honor the name of that nobleking, nor his memory for the
causes aforesaid: I trust I shall find favor, of those that are in
authority, to speak the more plainly in it: and (...)report what their
speeches also have been of him.

In all their books and writings where they mention his name, they account
Read (...)Duraeus in Whitakerum Genebrardus in hist.
of him as of an (...)fallen from their church. They had it once in
deliberation, whether they should have taken up his body from the place where
it was interred, to have burned it to ashes, as they did Wickliefes, long after
his death; and that in the time of the reign of his own In Queen Mary's time.
daughter. In his life the Pope excommunicated him, and sought all the mean
she could, to set all the Princes of the world upon his (...). It was his
practice, and the practice of his shauelinges and prelates, to make that
breach, betwixt him and the Emperor, that had been at such concord. Cardinal
Poole was the instrument to stir up the French king against him. They are
wont to allege that place upon Amos, out of M. Calvin against him and against
others, for taking the name of supreme head of the Church. But is it because
they would give it? And yet themselves gave it king Henry, and subscribed to
it, and wrote books in defense of it: when not wihstanding those good men that
professed the Gospel were deceived, not knowing in what meaning it was either
given or taken. And those kings that took it never challenged it as the
Papists gave it, neither was it ever given by Protestants, to the end that
they should be heads of the Church by any absolute authority, to give it
new laws against the word or government, as some home Pope, to (...)it
according to their own wills against the truth of God but as was meet being
Gods Lieuetenauntes, they were acknowledged to be the chief, and that the
care both of the Church and common wealth did belong unto them, that it was
their duty (as did good Ezechias, Iehosap hat, and other kings) above all
things to care, that the religion of God (...)be established and floorishe
according to his written word. And if the Papists made king Henry head of
the Church in their sense, or if he took it otherwise, they neither gave him
that title aright, neither did he take it as he ought; and in truth it was
themselves I mean the papists that gave it as I have said before. But our
Sovereign now Princess, does neither receive it, nor take it in that
meaning, for this were to make the Church a monster, not subject unto her head
Jesus Christ, but subject to a mortal man, which were indeed to erect a
new Popedom. But if any thing were so amiss then, they should not much
marvel at it, seeing those that were reformers then, were such as were but
newly called from Popery, and therefore could not but smell of that
corruption. Again, the truth was not discovered at the first dash: King Henry
was not a Prince of a years standing, Many things fell out in his (...), and
upon many occasions, that brought him from the worse to the better, and made
him see and know also much more then he could put in practice for fear (as his
own proverb was) of bringing an old wall upon his head. No doubt he had a
singular courage, yet these monstars were then so big, so were they harnessed
with power, and such poyso^ had they in their (...), that they must be
vanquished by the grouth of truth in time and season, and not upon the
sudden. And which of us I pray you, were ever so bold, malapert or vnreuerent
in the reign and ears of his own daughter, to compare him to an ape at
Paul's cross and in other places; as one of your whelps did, for pulling down
of Abbeis? We never conceived secretly that which they have rung out alowde in
the ears of al, and through out the whole world, concerning that worthy prince
by whom God gave the pope such a deadly wound, as I trust he shall never revive
in that strength and power that he had in this isle again. We never practiced
treasons and rebellions, when he was sharpest set against us, but always with
(...), endured whatsoever was laid upon us, when upon small occasions diverse of
our brethren were put to death by the instigation of such as were about him;
when the six articles were procured, and according to the faction that then
was, some were burned as they called it for here sie; and others were executed
for the supremacy and conspiracy. In their Cronologies (...)de reb. gest. S
and de (...). (...). (...). fol. 564. fol. (...).
and writings, they evermore call him beast and tyrant, and not withstanding
they are home borne men which Luther was not, they speak a great deal worse
against him for good things, then ever Luther did who^ we make no prophet (as
you say,) for setting himself against GOD Loquens de Episco po Roffensi.
and his Gospel. As for his terms of Ruffians and Rakehels, they agree When he
(...)the death of Abel, Poret and Forest, and in his preface upon that book of
Images, read 75. 76. 77. 78, division etc.
not to the Gospel, but all know that Papists are Rakehelles. For their Popes
are the Gaylers of hell, and they canfetch them thence with their Trentalles,
masses, Diriges, and such other tru^peries which are the rakes indeed and
harrowes that they have devised to rake and harrowe hell. As for Ruffianrie, it
is proper to poperye, to their straightest and holiest orders: Example of
Campion and others, who were found in their apparel as Ruffianlike as might
be. As for that which he obiecteth afterward of Luthers bitterness
against his brethren for the matter Duraeus.
of the Sacrament, whom he calls Caluinistes, speaking of it there and
afterward in the seventy two, seventy three, seventy four, seue^tie five,
seventy six, seventy seven pages under the Title of Protestants (...) fol 7.
dissension, I shall need to say little in it, it being but a quarrel
(...)of them to discredit the truth, wherein, howesoeuer men vary, yet
that is always one and like it self. Neither ought the brawles of men to
discourage any from the love of the Gospel. (...)we see even amongst the
Apostles themselves, as they were men, sometimes that bitterness that showed
them to be men, and yet was it no breach of that unity of the Spirit, and of
that agreement which in an holy profession of doctrine was held amongst
them. And as I have said before, their contentions were not for matters of
weight and substance, but either for ceremonies, or else for some such errors,
as notwithstanding they were errors, yet the foundation of faith might be kept
(...), and they might be saved: of which sort we take the errors that were
amongst the ancient Fathers to be, and these of the Lutherans. Amongst whom
of late, though some intemperate spirits have gone further then ever did their
forefathers, of whom they would seem to hold, as Smediline, Brentius,
Kemnitius, (...), Hamelmanus, Holderus, and the rest that maintain grosser
things, and gather greater discordes then indeed there are, or then ever
Luther did, and are (...)bent to maintein al Luthers writings and doctrine, and
namely that first confession called the Augustine confession offered to the
estates, as a rule of faith, from which none ought any whit to depart, which
yet was written in a time wherein they could not have so mature and ripe
judgment; when they studied to carry those points of Religion, which
(...)not best lyked, nor received of those chief Princes, more darkly and
closely then was (...)yet being but a few, and very raw, writing it, as
should appear but for an interim, until the Lord should give a clearer way
and make a freer passage for it: What should all this prejudice the truth
which we by the grace of God, always indeuouring to maintain, have and do
set our selves against those that gainstand it? And why should those that fell
into manifest heresies be iumbled in amongst us? For as well you might match
Simon Magus and Judas with the (...), and Augustine with Manicheus, with
Pelagius, and the rest of those heretics against whom he wrote, and cried out,
Dissension, Dissension: and as well you might gather the bitter tauntes that
passed between him and all the rest, as to gather these, and thereupon so to
insult over us, as though it were not lawful for us to write against errors;
be they little or great; at home or abroad; but by the truth must be
divided: Nay therein it is one, and they are one that profess it, when it
discovers error, and they that profess it stand for it and not against it.
Error and (...)is not at one, because they are many and all against truth. If
we set our selves against Heretics, why should we be accounted amongst
them, or they amongst us? And though those iarres that fall out amongst
brethren (as many times we grant there may) be bitter and egar, yet what make
these to help you Papists, who agree not, as has been noted before in the
greatest and waightiest points of your religion? As for our agreementes in
substance of doctrine, I refer them Harmonia Eccle. (...).
unto that harmony published of late of the confessions of those reformed
(...)a (...). in (...). (...). Io. Cas. fol. 16. 17. 18. etc.
Churches that profess the Gospel, as Heluetia, Basil, Bohemia, England,
France, Scotland, The low Countries, and many other places, and to that
learned admonition, written as an answer to that book of Concord set out by
those called the Lutheranes, wherein you shall find one and the same
everlasting truth, which was from the beginning by us and them mainteyned and
professed. Read also that pithie and short Treatise, written in the Latin
tongue by Hieronyme Zanchus and dedicated to M. Henry Knoles of the dissension
about the Supper. I leave to speak of your contentions amongst your selves
innumerable and implacable, between Thomists and Scotistes about meritum
congrui, and condigni: between your Friars black and white about original
sin in the blessed virgin, about solemn and single vows, auticular
confession, Transubstantiation, and a thousand other great points: in
discussing of which, there never passed greater heat betwixt Zwinglians and
Lutherans, (as they will needs call us,) then has passed amongst them, who
have so thundered and lightened one against another, as if they would have set
the whole world on fire, and these brawles and contentions have occupied their
churches many years. Their unity therefore is in nothing else, but in that
they conspire against Christ, as Herod and Pylate did. I name not their
nominalles and realles, nor other light matters between Franciscans and
Dominicans, and betwixt those that were of sundry orders, amongst whom there
was, and are many bitter emulations, contentions, raylings and strifes, not
only about apparel, difference of meats, observing of days, diversity of
orders, but also about the waightiest matters, not one teaching like another,
nor the same things, but quite contrary. Though therefore Luther in over great
heat writes against the Tygurine Church, and they reprove him again for it
sharply as he deserved: yet wherefore was this? It was not about any such
matter, as could shake them off the foundation of faith: neither does this
burden M. Charke with any shameless lie, in defense of Luther. For Luther
might be very well called by him an holy and Divine manne, and by M.
Whitaker, a man of holy and blessed memory, and yet carrye the skarre of his
rough and intemperate heat against so blessed and holy a Church as Tigurine
was, and specially in such a matter. And whereas you speak affirmatively and
simply, that they called him an Archheretike, it is not true: they gave him
warning, he having unjustly called them a damnable sect, that he should take
heed least he declared him self an Archheritike. And whereas you farther
conclude, that Luther had Diuelles, which M. Charke denied, because they wrote
that he betrayed himself in these outrageous speeches with his Devils, because
they were (...): you show your self too too malicious. For they speak only
of those intemperate spirits that had so inflamed him against them. It is
therefore no dissimulation in them to blind the people, to give him that praise
that was due to him. For howsoever he failed as a man in some points of less
moment, which was no marvel, darkness having then covered the face of the earth,
and the church of God being grievously ecclipsed, and he being in a Friars
cowle, to the end, it might humble him and those that would depend to much
upon his person, to make them rest upon that infallible rule of the truth of
God; yet in truth he was both an holy and Divine man, of blessed and holy
memory, whose praise we neither can nor will envy; endued with most rare and
excellent gifts from God, of an excellent understanding, being enlightened of
God (...). Tbeo. palate. fol. 198.
himself with the light and knowledge of an heavenly doctrine, a man of as
exquisite learning, wisdom, eloquence, courage and zeal for the glory of god,
as that time might yield: and yet it is not meet, neither do we make his
writings, or any other men's since which have been more excellent, equal
with the word of God, or rules of judgment to stand upon, to the prejudice of
that. This honor we give and reserve to God, and to his holy word alone.
Neither does this gainesaye Master Charke for Sleidan. lib. 6. lib. 13. 14.
their care of concord and unity in the Gospel. For it may appear by Collo
(...)VVormaciensco (...). (...). Smucaldense. Asteburgense. In Rates proto
collo (...). and (...).
their sundry meetinges, yeeldinges, and great toleration, that at (...)first
they showed one toward another; the study and endeavor they used for
avoiding of terms when they agreed upon the matter, and taking such as might
best fit and express the truth; by their sundry meetinges, and presence
of Princes on both parts; and afterward when heates grow sorer and sorer,
from sparks to flames, and from flames to fires, yet were there sundry books
written by men of more temperate spirits, if it had been the will of GOD to
have quenched the flame, that that hurtefull contention might have ceased: and
as for the reformed Churches, so far forth as they might, without (...)boni
viri and sundry others.
the betraying of the truth, it is certain they have evermore kept peace, and
accounted them as brethren, howesoeuer some amongst the others have rather
choosen to join with you Papists and you with Read all their books written in
his matter.
them, as they have been (...)in Religion to you, and you to them. The rest
concerning this matter, I leave to Master Charke himself. And so do I those
Treatises whether the Jesuits be (...), and of Friars and Nuns which you will
needs have Religious, seeing they are matters of doctrine, only I will note some
weak collectio^s, and a few uncomely and slanderous speeches uttered by you,
and so pass it over, as filth unworthy to be ouerturned, having also touched
them as much as I thought necessary.

Here you cauil again at M. Charkes confuse order, when he is compelled of
necessity to follow yours and not his own, which in very deed is nothing
but a confuse heap without all order, and wholly besides the matter. For what
a reason is this to prove a different life from others, from the examples of
Elizeus, Daniel, John Baptist and such extraordinary Monks and friars drawn
by sro^ Parsons, Elizeus, Daniel Ioh. Baptist.
persons? Because they extraordinarily called of God, fell from the common
course of men, to live extraordinarily. Why therefore the lives of Monks,
Friars, Jesuits, and the rest, leading a different life from the rest, do it
by their authority, and lawfully according to the word of God. But if it be
plain and evident, that these extraordinary things which were in these
extraordinary men, that measure of the spirit, working of miracles and manner
of life be ceased together with the^, and have not bin found in any of that
sort; it follows that they are ceased, how soever such brainsicke heads,
shall boast of them. This argument of yours is like the rest of your arguments
Elizeus to make the water sweet, cast Popish argume^ (...).
in salt, Ergo we must have holy water. God said, let us make man according to
our image, Ergo images are to be made in the Church. These extraordinary men
exempted from men led a different life from the common sort of men, Ergo they
were Monks and Friars, ergo a different life is set down for us; which is a
Non sequitur, unless you can prove that Jesuits from Elias, from Elizeus,
John Baptist, and Christ, have that spirit of theirs doubled upon them, so as
they have the same testimony from God of their calling, and the same gifts to
warrant their calling by. And what though Hiero^ setting before these that were
in the beginning (far better then these later wicked ones and idle lossels,
that consume the fat of the earth, and are as the plague of caterpillars) does
stir up those that in his time lived in out places, labored and were vigilant
in studying the holy Scriptures, not me^ of any professed religion in the
ministry, but such as endeavored to be made fit for the ministry of the
gospel by some things that were in those singular and extraordinary men? must
these therefore be drawn in Rule, and by and by make a new ministry and
order? so we should not have so many notable men, so many names, and
professio^s, but indeed so many orders to hang upon them as upon their patrons.
And in deed this has always been the patcherie of Popery, not to look to
Christianity, and to follow those things which are to be followed of us, but
to look to men, and to bear their profession and order from men, so that
among them in truth Christ was utterly lost and forgotten, and this they
received from the Gentiles: as they did most of their things besides. Neither
is M. Charkes argument absurd, that if Elias, Helizeus, and the like had bin
patrones and patterns of Monks, and Friars: it is like the holy men before
Christ, and in Christ's time, would have found out these orders, and have led
these different lives, they would have vowed voluntary (...), abandoned their
possessions, and provided as holy and straight rules as ever Francis Dominicke,
or Layolas could have done. Again, that which you cite of Adam for marriage,
of Abell for Shepheardes, of Caine for husbandmen etc. They are not proper. For
though these things began in them, yet they were not the beginners, al these
were the ordinance of God, and forth with after them, they were imitated and
followed of men, as gifts of necessity fit for the preservation and
maintenance of men.

For John Baptist, M. Charke collecteth right, and grypeth you to the heart,
and that without any wilful mistaking of the question. And if it be now a
thing indifferent, and not of necssity, I cannot see why you should urge with
such toughnes, those abominable orders, as if there were no salvation without
them. Neither was John his austeritie and order of life, volu^tary, but
necessary inioined by god, and he sanctified to it, from the womb of his
mother. We say it is not lawful for any to vow to do that which God has
not commanded. God has not commanded any man to live in any extraordinary
course without a vocation, begging at every man's door, and wilfully to
deprive himself of the moderate use of those gifts, he has vouchsafed to
bestow upon us for the necessary sustentation of this life. The profession of
Christ overthrows no vocation that has a foundation from the word of God,
seeing therefore that a man in marriage, as well as out of marriage may be, and
is the Lords, seeing in the ministry and without the Lord has his servants,
in the state of (...)amongst men and freedom, why should any draw such a burden
upon (...), that God never laid upon them? If God lay any such thing
extraordinarily upon any, he gives them strength, and specially annoynteth
them to such a work: so he did to John Baptist, who if he be a monk of the
new Testament, and a pattern of your Monks, I am sure your Monks are as like
him as flies and Elephants.

Whether an heretic or a Sectarie be all one, let Master Charke and him
try. But for Master Charkes argument which yet this corrupter of al things
frames after his own fashion, he does nothing but (...)at it. For as there is
a true difference betwixt a Sectary and a sect, the one being spoken of one,
and the other of many, so every Sectarie is not an Heretic, because he is a
Sectarie that has divided himself by some singular opinion from the common
profession of the church: but not an heretic, unless stubbornely he stand in
it, and maintain it. The like is to be said of Schism, which sometimes is
taken in the good part: and so they call us Sectaries from their Romish church,
and Schismatiks, because by the grace of God we are departed from Babylon, and
from their errors. The exposition of Augustine concerning the schism amongst
the Corinthians, fitteth the papists right. For they hold one man's baptism to
be better the^ another, and one man's profession to be holier then another. They
divide the seamelesse coat of (...)Christ: and therefore your examples from
the Archb of Cantebury, and the rest, are not only fond and malicious, but
knauish and slanderous.

For that which he says of the Pharisees, he aunsweareth him self, for
though they were Heretics indeed, compared as Master Fulke notes with the
Apostles, yet they are not said to be sectaries divided from the church in
respect of the Jews. For they were the chief, and occupied the chaires, as
like the papists, as if they had been spit out of their mouths.

That also is foolish, which he brings in against Master Charks definition
of a sect, when he says they are a company that differ in matter or form
of profession, bringing in Bishops, Ministers, Judges, Lawyers, as if they
were Sectaries: when as he purposely left out the chief difference, to wit,
that they differed in matter of religion. For we hold not that every one
ought to go alike: there are and may be civil differences amongst men of
sundry vocations, which yet notes no sects, and though papists have
distinguished their greasy ones from others, and to put difference among
(...)both in form and matter of provision, yet I know no such difference in
the Gospel, and what is this in respect of the^ that are of one hair and
calling? He might as well have alleged that servants go not like their
masters in apparel, (...)women like men, therefore they are sectaries. But if
he had reasoned truly: we differ from others, and one from another, in form
of apparel, in diversity of rules, in matter of religion, disagreeing in
great points of our own religion, admit it were truth: but in deed from Gods
word, ergo we are sectaries.

Whereas he trifleth in deed childishlye and ridiculously against M. Charke
for holding that a sect is a company of men, etc. comparing it with an
heresy, with frenzy, abusing those places of the Acts, of the Galathians,
and the second of Saint Peter, chap. 2. they deserve no answer, for the
comparison is unequal. A sect in our tongue, signifies a company of men
that hold erroneous opinions contrary to the truth. An heresy is the error
it self toughly maintained, received by common speech in the worse part, and
frenzy notes the disease it self, as it might be in Parsons or Heiwood or
some such like, whom of frenzy we would call phrantike, as being of a
sect we would call a sectarie, or of (...)popery, which is an heresy, a
popish heretic: and he himself (...), though (...)will not abide it in a
definition, that it may signify improperly a company of men: and yet his
young masters of Rhemes are content to use the word against us, although they
can never prove that we have cut our selves from the Church of Christ,
howesoeuer we confess that we are departed from them, and themselves are
still sectaries, who have cut themselves from the body of Christ.

Now against M. Charkes collection in proving the Jesuits to be a sect,
because they are severed from the rest of their confederacy, by apparel,
order of life, yea and matter of religion, making a peculier vow, preaching
every where as the Apostles did (as you say) of free coast, whippyng and
tormenting themselves, conceived of Loyalas a creeple, and (...)hatched out of
the shell: you say it is a conclusion fit for a man of his making, I know not
well what you should mean by twyting his making, unless you would strike at
God the Creator and maker of all Gene. 1.
things, who has done al things exceedingly well, except Jesuits will
blasphemously even also in that, take upon them to put to their hands for the
bettering of his glorious work, But you say, it is such a (...)as he made in
the Tower: surely, both this and that in the Tower, thanks be to God were so
twisted, as your greatest Gordian could not otherwise undo them, but by a
plain hacking them asunder, as also you do now. As for Campions conclusion at
Tyburne, it followed rightly of those premises where into he was entered: For
being a traitor, he received the reward of a Traitor, and so did the rest
that suffered: and I beseech God that such conclusions may follow to all the
sort of you, that shall enter into the like practizes. For it is meeter that
they dispute with the gallows then with their pretended disputations, to bring
the truth into doubt, to disquiet the state, and to practice the overthrow and
destruction both of the Church and common wealth. But you ask, what there is
in this illation that can prove the Jesuits a sect, if all were granted.
That they vow to preach herein (you say) they do but as the Apostles did:
that they did it of free coast, why he may be ashamed to find fault with
that, seeing Christ commanded it? As for whipping and tormenting themselves:
why Paul chastized his own body, he carried the brands of Christ in his
flesh, and there is much talk in the scriptures of mortifiyng the flesh? Surely
all these do prove them no table sectaries as like the Circumcelions as can
be and show most lively unto us, how wickedly you pervert the scriptures to
your own damnation. For will you make that commandment given to the Apostles
stretch to the maintenance of a gadding ministry Mat. 28.
in all places and for all posteries? in your order of Jesuits? which yet is not
reckoned amongst any the Ministers of Christ: Was the office of the Apostles
temporal, their extraordinary gifts ceasing, their office Mar. 16.
of Apostleship also ceasing, because they must be called immediately of Mat.
10.
God, be conversant with Christ, and seehim in the flesh, whose ministry
was the wide world without all limitation, as appears by the same
commandment that you allege? What bussarde but a Papist or an (...), would
ever allege the scriptures so? The Apostles forsooth vowed to preach.
Therefore Jesuits, that are no Apostles, have no office place, or calling in
the Church, they must vow to preach: The Apostles were commanded to preach
every where and of free coast as you say, therefore the Jesuits will become
new Apostles, and they will preach every where, and gad up and down of free
cost. And yet further as these arguments are false, so these scriptures
whereupon they are grounded are wrested. For where can they prove that the
Apostles vowed to preach, seeing preaching was laid upon them of necessity,
and was not voluntary as they (...)? Again, how can they out of these prove
that they must preach begging, seeing they make nothing against the taking and
possessing of those things that are necessary, for Christ in the same places
teaches that the labourer is worthy his New testament of Rhemes in Mat. Chap.
10.
reward, and themselves expound it: that preachers may not carefully seek
after the superfluities of this life, or any thing which may be an impediment
to their function. But for necessaries they deserve them at their hands for
whom they labor spiritually: yea the Jesuits themselves under this color of
free cost, receive double the value of the stipends of painful and godly
pastors: whereas in deed they have no right so to do, having no ordinary
calling in the Church of God. As for the chastising that Paul used it was such
as was enjoined, and is necessary for all Christians. Mortification of the
corruption of old Adam is taught, and ought to be put in practice to the
humbling of all, to bring that under the obedience of Christ. This makes
nothing against that cherishing and maintena^nce of our (...), which is meet to
be done in sobriety. Paul speaks therefore of taming the corruption of the
flesh, and would not have men to hate their flesh. It is written in the law of
nature, that no man hates his own flesh, but rather cherishes and nourishes
it. For this is the reason of the commandment: That hushands should love their
own wives because they are one flesh with the^. He meneth (...)not that outward
exercise of the body which brings little profit, but the inward. Moreover,
the marks of Christ that S. Paul carried in his body, were the (...)of his
stripes, laid upon him by persecutors and tyrants, and such you were wont to
lay upon us. But what makes all these to prove whipping of your selves? The
examples of John, and of those holy men mentioned in the 11. to the Hebrews
prove no such matter: the example of Baals Priests that launced themselves,
would have proved it better. The one was extraordinary in John, the greatest
though the last amongst the Prophets, the other (...)that holy men endured,
laid upon them not by themselves but by others, when either they must have
forsaken God or else have lost their lives. As for Marcus Marulus, when we get
his book and read it, we will then tell you more of it, but (...)it be of
your religion, we persuade our selves that there is no great (...)or
foundnesse in it.

But if whipping cheer be such a good cooling to your flesh, either your
Popish Votaries use it not, or else it has not that effect. For in truth all
the world (...)of (...)and wicked (...), belike they lay not on hard enough.
If it be so good a remedy, why do you not use it oftener? Why do you not
suffer others to lay you Harding against Apol. Fol. 162.
on, that will pay you more surely then your own partial hands? Certainly if
you had done it in good earnest, your kingdom would not for shame have
Discovery of John Nichols, fol. 40. Pope (...) builded the stews for both
kinds and gave leave for Sodomitrie.
stood so for the stews as it has done, nor for the maintenance of simple
fornication to be no sin, neither would your monsters have written in the
praise of Sodomitree, and have been found so filthy in all their ways as they
have been.

Concerning Hieroms practice and others punishing their own bodies so
immoderately, we give them no farther credit therein, to follow (...). a Casa.
their example, then we find them warranted by the word of God. Our lives,
are not our own no more then our bodies are, and therefore we must cherishe
them by those means that God has appointed. No man has hated his own
flesh, but cherishes it. This is written in the law of nature, which is the
law of God. Mortification respects the killing of the corruption of the old
manne, it teaches us not to kill our bodies: ye may as well say, you will pine
your selves, hang and draw your selves, cut and slash your selves, as whip your
selves. As for your (...)and ruffianlike speech, calling him runnagate Friar,
as also you do Luther, which I marvel, considering it is an abasing of your
own order, it is a fit cover for such a cup. And yet I think you fail in
your quotation. For Peter Martyr never wrote upon the third book of the Kings
and sixteenth Chapter, he wrote only upon two books, and the last was ended
by Wolphius. But as in this, so in all the rest, you bring us very little of
your own reading, but that which others have scraped together for you.

As for our Eatons, and Hinshawes, if such were as well punished among you, as
they are amongst us, you would have as few such loose livers as we have, and
if both you and they were punished upon just conviction so as we desire and
the law of God has appointed, you should never trouble and pester the world.
The more we have, the more is our sorrow, and yet you have no cause to hit
them in our teethes since they are punished amongst us, and therefore not
justified by us. You tell us of one or two, but we could tell you of
thousands, and those not punished but maintained, because forsooth they were
anointed, and by that privilege exempted from the hand of the Magistrate.
Your other profane and filthy speech, would rather be corrected by the
rod of correction, as in an impure and malicious (...), then be confuted by
writing as in a civil and honest adversary. Your conclusion in deed makes up
all and shall stand: that the Jesuits (whatsoever they prate of chastising
and whipping themselves) yet they are no fools: who have not bodies of iron
but sensible as ours are: and therefore will lay on soft enough for hurting
them selves.

Your answer to the last reason, has no reason nor truth in it: for neither
is their order grounded upon the holy scriptures, nor upon the practice of any
ancient fathers, no more then these superiors whom you name, are superiors of
the Church, or have any ordenance from God: therefore the Jesuits order is a
sect, separated from Christ, and has no part of that communion of Saints.

Whether the Jesuits vowed or no, after the example of those heretics that
whipped themselves, I leave to M. Chark further to discuss, but I take it,
howsoever you deny it, that in such hard works they would be loath to add
that, unless they were bound by the vow of their profession. And herein you
cannot deny but they whip themselves as those heretics did, thinking to
attain thereby a greater perfection then others. But you laugh at M. Charke,
and I say you may laugh at your own folly, and your laughter is madness: for
there were heretics long before these were bredd in your boweles that whipped
themselves, long before prating Prateolus or Alphonsus were borne, and you
learned to whippe your selves long before, even of them. Baals Priests not
only whipped themselves but launced themselves. For the name of Jesuits, you
stumble at your own straw, granting that which is in controversy, and yet
wrangling, as though some wrong were offered you. And it appears plainly in
M. Chark, by the places quoted in his book, (...)in those Chapters, that he
uses the same word. And yet you say he is to impudent to attribute it to
Turrian, and because he justly calls it a blasphemy, for drawing to
themselves the name of his office, ye call him (...)gentleman, and communicate
that name unto him, which is none of his but yours. For none have Syrs added to
their christen names alone, but either knaves or popish Priests, and yet you
tell him: he may have his part in that comfortable name of Jesus, if he
exclude not himself: wherein as you do but tell us that we knew before, and
overthrow your rule of perfection, so also you witness some freewil with the
Pelagia^s to be in us: and of your liberality grant more the^ in truth you
mean for I suppose your meaning is not that all that have part of salvation in
the name of Jesus, should enter by and by into your new devised order of
Jesuits, howsoever otherwise they be christians, which yet makes them not a
distinct order from other Christians as Jesuits of yt name of Jesus do. But
you say this is no injury to others, and that you show by fumblet examples of
serving yt Q. only with more devotion then others: whereby you insinuate that
Jesuits are more devout forsooth then others. And that the Jesuits taking this
name properly unto themselves, do no more but testifio, that they are deuouter
servants of his then others, even like as they that serve the Prince, leaving
all other things: wherein the comparison is unequal, the one being lawful,
when one is lawfully called (for else none can be a Pentioner or of the guard,
without injury to the^ that are of that office) the other being utterly
unlawful, from the essential name of Jesus, to draw into an order: and
howsoever you jest at ryming Elderton, which is one of your common places,
both in N. Discovery and in other books, as also in this? yet you cannot so
easily avoid it: For if you that will be Jesuits ought to do as Jesus did,
in all things to follow him, to preach freely, to work miracles (which you
hold still to be necessary in your Church, and if in any your devised orders,
then ought it to be most especially in that principal and high order, for I
think you will not suffer S. Francis to go before him, howsoever you bear
with the virgin Marie for your new Annuncianists): Why then you must like wise
walk upon the waters, raise up the dead, cure the lame, give sight to the
blind, etc. as Jesus did? Neither can that be alike, that Christians must do
the like too, if they will be called christians. For the name Christian is a
name common to all that are baptized into the common name of Christ, and no
name of any sect or order, as is your proud name of Jesuits: For so your
order should have been (...)in upon, and you would not be contented that every
one should have part in your hypocritical sect, and become fathers. For if
every one that is a christian were also a Jesuit, why, then the children
borne and baptized within the covenant, both young and old that are
Christians, should be Frierly brothers and fathers both at once?

Concerning your religious orders, so much has been said by many learned men,
as I need not to stand upon it. A great difference has bin showed betwixt
those ancient religious men as you call them, that lived in times past, and
yours: They sorted themselves into private places, into (...)Rusti.
Woods, Deserts, for the sauegarde of their lives, where after wards (...).
lib. 13.
as it were in (...), they might take opportunity, not only the better to
serve God, and to be from the having of those common corruptions, that were
amongst men, but followed their lobours, laboring for their maintenance with
their hands, so far off from being any sect, or challenging any ministry
in the Gospel, that they neither bear any man's name, or took any man's office
upon them: now what likeness is there betwixt them and your vermin? In deed
afterward the world growing from worse to worse, that which they did, in
some good affection, in danger and not utterly unlawful, the other that
followed without any ground of the word, did institute as a vocation, which
was the cause that as many of the ancient fathers wrote highly in the
commendation of the^, so some wrote against the^ and through a blind
(...)growing to great superstition, they took on so with those that salling
from that good beginning as they thought, lived after wards either
licentiously, or else could not continue in it, without that lawful remedy
that God had appointed for them. Your hypocrites that ensued, these grew so
from worse to worse, till there was no more likeness betwixt the first and
yours, then there is betwixt and a man a monkie, then betwixt light and
darkness.

As for that you bring in, tending to perfection, by the counsel of Christ,
it is a counsel general, not only belonging unto sects and Math. 19. and
16.
sectaries, but to all Christians, that they should renounce the world, strive
to perfection, be holy, even as Christ is holy: whereunto if all Christians
All (...)must renounce the world.
do not strive, forsaking the world and all that is in it, to take up the
Cross of Christ, and to follow him, they do not as they ought to do. But
whereas you dream that this cannot be done, but by abandoning our possessions,
by forsaking wife and children, by casting off those several duties wherein God
has all sorts of Christians: you are far deceived. And otherwise seeing the
best is best, and the head of the church, which you blasphemously make your
Pope to be, is the highest, me thinks he should cast off his golden coape,
renounce his triple crown, his liuelode, and large possession, and become a
Jesuit, so should al your popish kings, dukes, Earls, Barons, and knights, and
all that favor and love your religion amongst the people. If your order be the
order of perfection, wherein appears such strength of chastity, that you
ca^liue purely, such contempt of the world and worldly things, that you choose
to be in a volu^tarie poverty, and always are chastising those carcasses of
yours that your souls may be saved, why should not all the rest of your
beggarly orders embrace this order as the highest and perfectest? But I see
whither you go, and so may all the rest that will not be blind: In boasting of
perfefecto^, you maintain all corruption, in steed of voluntary vowing of
chastity, having not that gift, one of you amongst a thousand, because our
Savior notes it as a rare and extraor dinarie gift, you follow all kind of
whoredom, fill thinesse, and other unspeakable abhominatio^s: all the world
stinketh of your chastity: and as for voluntary poverty under the color of
that, as all the rest of your prededecessors did, you possess great riches,
where you have all things richly provided for you, the goods of your fauourits
at commandment and whatsoever in a manner they possess. Yea, you have so
handled the matter, through your deep hypocrisy and dissimulation, that
wheresoever you have become, you have marred the marker of all the rest, and as
yt curmuggians and cormorants of the world, you have gotten into your hands
all that, where with the rest were wont to be maintained. How beggarly so ever
you com at the first, yet within a while al others of these bottomless So did
the Friars before the Franciscans, Dominicans, and others.
Locusts, Dominicans, Franciscans, Augustinians, and the rest may go shoe the
gosling, if once you get in a foot. This has bin seen in Parise and in other
Cities, and is justifiable by the complaints and whinings of them selves, so
that the Lord makes you as vipers to gnawe out your own mothers belly, and as
Tigers one of you to devour another: such volu^tarie poverty, I think any man
would be glad to undergo, if they might do it with a good conscience, to
handle no money, and yet to lack none, to have nothing, and yet to possess all
things: and yet this is not that, that the Apostle speaks of, though you
shame ignorantly and wickedly else where to abuse that place to your purpose.
And so also he abuses that In the description of their Seminary of Rome,
wqich was taken before it was fully imprinted.
place of Peter, concerning those which are called the lot and inheritance of
God. For albeit the first council of Nice, Origene, Hierome, and others have
specially attributed it to those that have bin, as it were the Lords peculier,
being consecrated to his service and honor, as those first fruits that were
offered, and other sacrifices, that were set before him being separated as it
were to his service: yet what makes this to ground that foolish distinction
upon, of Clergy and Laity, making the one holy and the other profane, the
one as gods portion, the other as devils: when the people are no less the
Lords the^ they, nay when they are none of the Lords because they yield him
not that homage that does belong unto him, nor obedience according to his will.
We know that the ministry of the gospel, with all the maintena^ces and
prouisio^s thereof is the lords, but it is so his, as it is for his people,
appointed as a means to bring the^ to him, and to testify, eue^ as the first
fruits did, that he has interest in all, and they belong unto him, and they
who^ he vouchsafed of that excellent honor, should be partakers with him of yt
everlasting inheritance. M. Chark, not like a wra^gler, but as one yt
mainteineth the everlasting truth of God, takes not exception against the^ The
Papists use their own Names in derision.
in this point without cause. As for reproching him with a title of their
priests, calling M. Charke, Sir William, he shows what estimation he has of
his own priesthood, being a proud Jesuit, ywisse against that popish
devotion (if he be the author of this book as I take him to be) which he
would seem to have in the first part of his resolution, set forth of late upon
false grounds, to bewitche men, to draw them from faith in Christ, to works
in them selves, whereby to be justified, that when by the law of God they shall
find how far they are off from that perfect obedience, they may be swallowed
up, and utterly despair. That of the Apostles, is far (...), and serves
nothing to his purpose. For though they were sent, and their sending lets
not others also to be sent; that are distinct members of the church of Christ,
being members under him, and in him, drawing life from him as from their head,
and having a distinct office, such as Apostles, pastors, elders, and deaco^s
have, yet all that are sent are not apostles, nor al are not pastors, elders and
deacons, no more then all that are sent from the Pope, which is the head of the
Antichristian church, are Jesuits, because they are sent. Again being sent
from the pope, that proves not that they are sent of Christ, but rather the
contrary, that they come from the Devil whose minister the Pope is.

Concerning these that are good and evil religions, and that M. Chark says: he
speaks not against the good but the evil, as Augustine and other of the
fathers does, he aunsweareth so do they also: but he would not have their good
offices to be condemned for their evil lives, Surely no more would we. But in
that he matcheth Bishops and princes with Monks and Friars, as though they
had a like warrantable calling out of the word, he is besides the cushin. For
we know that the office of princes The Pope, his Cardinals, Friars, Monks and
Iesuitss no (...)in Gods church.
whatsoever their lives be, is of God, so is the office of Bishops or
ministers: but let him prove with all the Logike he can, out of the word of
God, that his Pope, Cardinals, Jesuits, and Friars of al sorts are officers
in the Church of God, that is, have their places in Christ his body, which is
his Church by the appointment of God, and then the controversy is at end. That
concession of M. Fulkes does not hinder this cause, for he matcheth the old
Mo^ks with the new, but he speaks not of the lawfulnes of their calling, and
though he did as being lawful in them, who like Stude^ts lived for the supply
of the ministry, yet these latter do not so, unless it be to the supplye of
a blasphemous priesthood against Christ and his Church. Neither does the name
always warrant the vocation, no more then the name of Popish Bishops who are
Lords, and ouerrule the church like tyrants, does warrant their office to be
agreeable with that of bishops and pastors in his church, or to be that very
office, wherein they have nothing but the bare name. As for that he boasts of
their learnednesse, painfulnesse and holiness, iustifiyng them against M.
Charke; he remembers What the lear nimg, pains, and holiness of Papists are.
not that this makes little for the justification of their office: besides he
shamefully beggeth at our doors, that which we will never grant him. For their
learning leading themselves and others from God, makes them never the better
Christians; and as for their painfulnesse, if they take any, it is not to bring
any to God but to the Devil, and their holiness is no true holiness but
hipocrisy, because it is without the holiness of Christ, from who^ they derogate
in the greatest point of his glory, even in the matter of salvation. As for
their being preachers, they of who^ M. Chark writes were preachers of the
truth, and these of whom you write are preachers of lies, running from place to
place, where they have no calling in the Church of God, because the Church of
Rome is not that church of God: neither does M. Charke, nor any other of us
judge of them, otherwise then we ought, and as the scriptures have taught us:
we judge the fruits by the trees, and we condemn them as they are and
continue in their errors. Mat. 7.
And for laboring with their hands, we do not bind all men unto it. For we
know yt he that laboreth in his calling does please God, though he hold not the
plow. You might as well have brought in their scullions, cooks and gardiners:
but we say that these old Monks labored with their hands to show a difference
betwixt the^ and you. They were not the Lords of the earth, they had no such
fair houses and possessions as you have gotten through your hypocrisy and
wrong, from the just possessors. Again, though Pius 5. and other your popes
should have thousa^ds of the^, out of their houses and his erected seminaries to
supplye his church as you say, not as M. Chark does, to serve, but to govern
the church within so little space, yet all this helps not your caufe. For
their head is Antichrist the pope, that is that adversary and not Jesus christ,
into whose body if they were justly knit Ephe. 4.
and co^pact (as the Apostle speaks) they should draw their life and being
from him, but that they do not, they are but of yesterdaies hatching, and when
that king of glory in the day as it were of his coronation, ascending into
glory, did give gifts unto men for the full furnishing of his church, these
were not found in his band, nor a many more besides, which the Pope has
since devised by the counsel of Satan, for the (...)of his kingdom. As for
that girde at M. Charkes benefice, the truth is he has none: and if he had
as he is well worthy of one, yet (...)might have missed in such an obscure
place: belike he understood this in some Barbers shop among other news,
coming as disguised thither in his apparel as Campion did when he was taken,
and whether he did or no, for the truth of it, there he might have had it.
Besides he still boasts of that he has not, for though Christendom contain
al such places and countreies as are separated by the profession of Christ,
from the Turk and other infidels, yet neither is popery or Iesuitical Monkery
christianity, and therefore he judges no otherwise of them then he ought.

As for his three sorts of vows, to wit, of poverty, obedience, and Of
wilful chastity.
chastity, which he makes to be the essential points of a religious life; he
might have remembered his own answer, that they who have not made these vows,
have yet their places amongst the religious; and it was necessary; Mat. 19.
page 32.
for Christ being asked of one that stood upon the keeping of the law and would
be saved by it, that he should know the perfection of it, though he could not
do it: that he might have sought unto Christ. And howsoever those old Monks
vowed poverty, obedience, and chastity, which yet rests to be proved by
that authority that cannot be replied against: yet it follows not because
they did naught, therefore we must do so. For good men have done many things
amiss. And what warrant had they, or have any now to take upon the^ to do that
which they cannot perform, or which they ought not to do? Christian religion
in the greatest perfection lets not men to enjoy the commodities of this
life: neither did these votaries, and specially the later abandon them, but
rather under that pretense, enjoy the^ more and rob all the world besides of
the^. And as for obedience, if it be not in all christians, their profession is
in vain: but if you mean it of submitting themselves to their rules that are
ye devises of me^, why the^ it is a slavish subjection to men against God and
his word in those things wherein God has set the^ free. The other of chastity
is no more in any ma^s power to perform without those means and lawful
remedies yt God has appointed, the^ as if a man would vow to fly without
wings or with Read Aug. (...)Psalm. 75. in medio.
wings of his own making It is a rare and special gift of God. And whilst men
have attempted that, which was not in their power; in steed of chastity, they
have even filled the world, and teinted it with all impurity and villainy. And
this was the complaint of those fathers, whom you bring in for the maintenance
of your forgerie, calling it by an uncivil name, better becoming your mouth to
utter it considering your parson and quality; the^ to be verified by M. Charke,
who uses neither cogging nor foysting, that is, under shadow of a truth to
utter two or three lies together. But he that cannot catch a sishe is glad of
a frog. M. Charke quoteth those places out of Augustine to prove what the
Monks were in his time. First, that they were far unlike ours: And then that
having vowed, and yet living lecherously as some of them did, not following
that whereto they De morib. Eccle. cap. 31.
had consecrate them selves, but running with others of the world De opere
(...). cap. 14. and 15.
into lewd and lecherous life, he put (...)them in remembrance thereof. But if
he had seen that which we have seen sithence, he would have cried out upon
such filthy Votaries as yours have been, who under pretense of their vowed
virginity have been the very goats and boares of the world, and worse
too, committing those sins that are not to be named. Augustins telling the^
of their sin, does not impeach the remedy of their sin, which is that which
God has set down in his word, He that cannot contain let him marry.
Besides you clyppe S. Augustines sentence: For though he put a difference
betwixt them that have vowed and others: yet in the same place he teaches
that these are not the best vows, but he would rather that we should vow our
souls to God: answearing an objection, and telling us how to do it by holy
manners, by chaste thoughts, and fruitful works, by departing from evil Aug.
in Psalm. 75.
and doing that which is good. I grant that good and holy vows are to be
performed; but if this be the way to perfection, and a thing that pleases God
best, more to live unmarried then married (although I deny not but it is an
excellent gift of God, and a thing that may make a man to go more cheerfully
through that service, God has laid upon him, and specially in the time of
persecution) why the^ it ought to be followed of all religious men without
exception: but this cannot be. For even amongst the Apostles some were married
men: so were diverse holy men since, both mynisters 1, Cor. 7.
and others. And though you cannot suffer by any means this holy ordinance
Heb. 13.
of God: which yet you make a Sacrament, which God has appointed and
sanctified for the preservation of mankind, and for a mutual help and
comfort one toward another, and a remedy against sin, to all men and
women, excepting none, to be in place: yet me thinks it is De bono (...)cap. 9.
horrible that you should either prefer whoredom before it (as you Aug.
(...)lib. (...). 10. and lib. de bono Coniug. and (...). 27. quest. 1. (...).
Nuptiarum. Epiphan. lib. 2. (...). 1.
have done) or account it sin, when such as cannot contain do takt it. S.
Aug. though you allege him afterward, that though a Nun (...)not marry,
but only have a will to marry it is damnable: yet he says in the Chapter
following and else where, that such a marriage, after such a vow, is yet a
lawful marriage: and he blames them, that call them adulteries. And Epiphanius
also though he blame such breaches of vows, and complain of their rashness,
yet he says that judgment is better then condemnation. Those that play the
(...)secretly, or live in whoredom under the color of sole life and
continency, to the end they be not shamed before men, yet he says God
sees them, that sees al secrets, and will find out all their abominations.
But he concludes that they were better to marry against their vow, and so
after repentance be reconciled to the Church, then to add sin unto sin.
As for Basil (...). de (...).
though he were over partial in this point, making Adam to be of a mortal
seed by marriage, and Jesus Christ of an immortal seed by the incorruption
of Virginity, as though heaven were prepared for none but for virgins, (which
yet should help your rabble of Friars and (...)but very little, because under
the color of virginity, they were filthes and brothels) yet in the same book
he would have such rather to marry and in the fear of God to govern their
families the^ to do as they do. And therefore he exhorts the^ to avoid these
wanton baits, whereby they were allured and taken. He would not have the^ to trot
up and down to bridals, nor to give over themselves to filthy lusts. As for
Chrisost. authority and Hieroms, it is meet that when God speaks, they should
hold their peace, and herein they were marked and known to dissent from the
holy scriptures, as men Al these places are set down by others and long ago
have received their answer.
erring, whilst they durst affirm that the marriages of such were worse then
adulteries: and therefore M. Charke need not to blush at any thing by you
alleged. It is no new stuff that you bring, but such as has bin worn out
long ago. As for the lie you lay upon M. Charke, it is your own and not his.
For he speaking of the old Monks only: says, they lived in their houses
without superstitious vows, but he denies not simply, that they made vows,
and the question is not whether they made any: but how well they did when they
made them, having neither ability nor warrant so to do from God.

Concerning that, whether Augustine the Doctor were a Friar or no, which you
would seem to prove out of the 94. Sermon of Ambrose, where mention is made of
a black cowle, and gyrdle of Lether, your note book deceiving you (For it is
the 92. de Baptismo) it proves no such thing: but rather that he being
changed from an Infidel, and becoming a Christian, his garments were also
changed.

Besides, that there is no mention in that place of the name of Monk, and if
there were both in that and others, yet it proves not that Monks were
Friars: and if Augustine the Doctor were the founder of any monasteries, yet
these monasteries were far unlike those Abbeyes, that superstition erected
afterward, If any such were, they were schools and Colleges for the
rearing up of a holy seed, that migh (...)afterward supply the work of the
ministry. As for the other Friar Augustine if you will needs have him a Friar,
and a fou^der of Friars, it appears by the book of their order which I have
seen, that it is of a later brood then Aug. the doctor: and it is plain by
histories written by men of your own, that the later Augustine which you will
have to be our apostle, was as ill a man in every respect, as M. Fulk has
reported him to be; therefore I will blot no more paper about him. But if it be a
virtue to have been a Friar, me thinks you should not twyte men with it so
repochfully, no more then you should charge Paul to have been a Pharisey: and
if it be a wicked order (as it is) it is no shame to have left it, and rather
to have chosen in the fear of God to be coupled with an honest wife, then with
a lewd strumpet, and thus much in defense of him whom you call my L. of
Hereford.

Concerning Christ's spirit of voluntary poverty, which you are so Of
voluntary poverty.
often in hand with, your exception against M. Charks reply, is nothing. He
asks, when Christ whipped himself? Your Reply is he needed not because he had
not concupiscence. But if Christ be the author and patron of your sect, (which
yet were (...)to make him a sectmaister) why should you not follow him in all
things? If you leave some things undone that he did, and do some things that he
did not; are you not your own choosers to take and to leave? It is not indeed
denied, but Christ is an example of perfection not to be followed of any sect,
that they should counterfeit him in all his doings; but that they should follow
him in those things, which he specially and plainly commanded. And where does
he command (...)any should be called after the name of his office, a part and by
themselves to take upon the^ to do whatsoever he did in all things, being the
son of God, as an exempt person, whom none might follow, sent of God for the
execution of that ministry of mediation and salvation, which rested in
himself and in no other. And unless you had the gifts that he had, how ca^
you do the works that he did: Have you the gift of continency to live chaste
as he lived? Can you fast without either eating or drinking as he did for 40
days together: or can you do the miracles that he did for the confirmation of
your doctrine? And if he lived as other men, and was found as a man in all
things, sin only except, whereby he was only separated from others, what
extraordinary thing was there in Christ, set before us to be followed in him,
and what ordinary thing not to be followed in him? His great and long fasting
for so many days without any sustenaunce was extraordinary, so was also his
praying in respect of his person, his volu^tary refusing of al, who was Lord
of all to make us rich, and his using of all, to teach us that all the
creatures of God were good, and his own blessings not to be refused as
unclean, worldely, or vile, as you Wretches would teach and insinuate to the
children of God. And in these things that are to be followed, other where
commanded in the word of God: We trust that we the ministers of God, shall by
his assistance sollow him in true mortification, when we shall feel that
powerful killing of the corruption of the flesh, which you papists pamper and
rear up to the full, that you may commit all iniquity, howsoever you prate of
the matter in the ceremony, not coming near the thing required in deed.

As for that example of Christ's going, being bidden to feasts, which with a yea
marry you twite M. Chark with, as though he spoke for good cheer, and loved it
better then you, which you say was more pleasant then the doctrine of the whip:
howsoever you talk of the whip which you would seem to love better then
cheer, it is well enough known by your praceise, that good cheer carries a
better taste with you, then the whip: you Remember Pope Iulie that would have his
pecocke in despite of God.
were and are the veriest belligods that ever lived in this world. And what
sharp strength soever your whips had in outward show (being sensible me^ as
you say) they were either not laid on to the purpose, but some fox tails as
it were, put in their places, or being laid on in some hipocritical mask and
procession, you were so gorged and cra^med before, that the whip could not
greatly annoy you. Indeed your religious locusts, bidde^ to associate princes
and peers, might go by S. Francis order to such feasts, but In S.
(...)orders.
otherwise when both Franciscans and Dominicans, Benedicts and Augustines got
once under pretense of religion, teaching that filthy doctrine of satisfaction
by works, the good deeds they did for other meriting heaven by your
hipocritical prayers, whereof they (...)made partakers, I say Example by the
Monks of the Charter house.
then you were wont to keep the warmest kitchins of al others: whosoever were
provided for, your provision must not be neglected; If it were not had before
the kings, yet it was next, and al other noble men must give place to you. And
if fulness of bread, pride, idleness, and not reaching their Ezech. 16. 9. The
pleasures and commodities that were in Abbcis and Nu^neries.
hands unto the poor, were ever occasions of those sins that were found in
Sodom and Gomer, it was no marvel though the same sins were found lodged
within your Walls and Cloisters, where you had al commodities, pleasures, and
ease, where your fare was excessive, your idleness famous, your pride without
measure, and your mercilesnes intolerable: How soever you would seemeto have
been the mainteiners of the poor: under your prerenced vowed poverty, you
were possessed as has bin noted (...). 47. 11.
even of the land of Goshan in Egypt, the fattest and most plenteous that
might be affoorded in every nation and country. Your exemptio^s, immunities,
and privileges were wonderful, so that under the color of forsaking the
world, you possessed it wholly: under the name of poverty, you were the only
wealthy, who robbed the poor indeed of that comfort which should have bin
yielded them. We deny not but even those that (...)most religious, may frequent
feasts, but we deny that you are religious. We call none Belligods, that
sometimes upon occasion have greater plenty, then at other times, but we call
them bellygods, who have no other care but to pamper and cramme the flesh. The
Style therefore is not changed, but malice is blind and frantike in you, who will
make the world believe under the visard of some little ceremony, that you lead
the austerest lives in the world, when if ever there were a wallowing in all the
pleasures of this life, both in the one sex and the other, it was found in
your Abbeies and Nunneries.

Concerning the estate of Christ, which he took upon him, abandoning those
things whereof he was Lord, which he used, and sometimes Of selling all, how
that place is to be understood.
refused according to his own will, it makes nothing for following any such
vow, as you would establish. Neither did he by that con^cel of selling al, and
giving to the poor, counsel men to cast of and (...)their just possessions
and vocations, which might well stand with the prosession of his truth, but that
they should cast off the love of those temporal things so, as they did not in
regard of keeping them, forsake his Gospel: no more then he meante by
forsaking father or mother, that they should withdraw any duty which his
law had laid upon any; or by forsaking the world, whereunto we are so often
exhorted, mean that men should therefore shorten their lives, or lay violent
hands upon them selves to rydde them selves out of it. Neither does that
example of the Apostles in time of Persecution, as has been often noted, take
away any man's propriety, and therefore, in that your order will have all
things to be common, and no propriety pleaded, you iumpe with the Anabaptists
wherewith you have often charged us, not understanding the power of the holy
ghost, that being done in time of persecution, when the whole body was to be
cherished and mainteyned. You dream therefore of the example of Ananias and
Saphira, making that (...) (...)5. 3.
resigning of their own which they might have kept, against the hair: who
were punished for lying to the holy Ghost: through hypocrisy, and not for
breach of any vow, which you terriblie (...)out to fear all your votaries, to
keep them in the obedience of their rule, contrary to the rule of Christ and
his Gospel in things not in their power, whereas this was in the power of
Ananias and Saphyra concerning their own, which they might have kept. As for
the authorities: whereby he would prove that Christ and the Apostles vowed
that voluntary (...): they have been in part considered before, and we have
to leave that to them, being too much addicted to that kind of vowing
without any warrant or ground out of the book of God.

The other of the blessings of God wherewith he says the Jews in the old
Testiment were deceived, and we in the new dandle our folowers, tickling
fleshly hearts: which he says ( if he be not deceived) proves Master
Charke to be one of those, of whom the Apostle says, they serve not Christ
but their own belly, etc: It is an impudent Romans 16.
slander: we teach men to esteem of these earthly blessings as of those, that
god in great goodness, has vouchsafed us for the maintenance of this
transitory life, and being good in creation, and made for man's (...): we
teach that they are lawful by Christian liberty to be used soberly, which
liberty yet we hold, ought to be so moderated by charity, that we use not
our liberty to the offense of any, but that we forbear even of our right, to
the end to do good, and to draw others to Christ. As for pleasures and
commodities from which men are called so (...), and wherein none cleave faster,
then such flesh flies as himself, and the rest of that carnal generation,
that wholly follow this world and their sinful lusts, as if there were no
other heaven, using things not as (...)and ladders to heaven and to spiritual
things, contenting themselves with titles and names of holiness, and deniyng
the true practice of it. These without all doubt are such, of whom the Apostle
speaks: that serve not the Lord Jesus but their own bellies, and under
their sheep coat New testament of Rhemes in Romans Chap. 16.
being yet wolves, come in upon the (...)and devour them, having sweet
words, and blessing in their mouths, but the gaul of bitterness, and death
in their hearts: because they lead men from Christ, and from his Gospel: and
specially of all others, these hypocritical and counterfeit Jesuits, whereof
this Parsons has showed himself most Parsons book of resolutions the prim.
cunning, by that desperate and poisoned book of his resolutions, which he
has lately sent abroad to make men build upon their own righteousness, and
to forsake the righteousness of Christ. Of Luther, of (...).


Of Loyolas and Luther, whom this slanderous mouth coupleth together, not
withstanding their difference be known, and testified to the world already,
and M. Charke has sufficiently set it down, yet he is still in hand with it,
fetching large strides, that he may pass over the things that pinched him
most, and being most material, and cropping at words where he supposes to
take most advantage, he may bear the Reader in hand that nothing lay in his
way to hinder him. But these arguments of M. Charke which he so over hippeth,
of Loyalas beginning a asect and M. Luthers faults (if any such were as they
say he had) whether they might distaine the Gospel, these he leaves as poor
devises to solace himself in his miseries forsooth, who taking upon him to
make a book, and his promise being passed thereof to his friends, for lack
of matter must run out to such imaginations as never came into his
masterships head. Alack seely shifte, when he cannot answer them, then he
quarrelleth for propounding the arguments, and though he in the pride of his
own heart have not only taken upon him to write a book, but to write many
books, and as he calls M. Fulke with an impure mouth, the Post horse of
the Protestants is in truth become not only the packhorse, but the Ass of
all the Papists, to bear their burdens, and to defend all their absurdities
be they never so gross, having in deed (as it should appear) vowed to his
friends and others, to deface Christ and all his servants, and to open his
foul wide mouth against heaven; yet must he judge M. Charke, as taking upon
him either that he could not do, or else starting from that, and seeking out
occasions, not to be furnished with sufficient defense of the truth. But he
knew his own disease, and that makes him to judge so of another. It is the
manner of all papists, to quarrel when they are pressed, as though they were
ouerladen, and like (...)men, when they can not either swallowe, or keep in
their corrupt stomachs wholesome medicines, (...)they gulp them up in other
men's faces. And here he will needs yet justify his branded witnesses: Cocleus,
Hosius, Lindanus, to whom he adds (...), (...), (...)with (...)enough.
Bartolomaeus Latomus against Sleidan, and might have added infinite others of
like sort against that excellent man of God M. Luther, all which are not only
known to be parties, such as being enemies, and no indifferent men, ought not
to have credit, but being bored through the ears, their railings lies and
slanders against the truth of god, and him for it, known and approved by their
inte^perat writings, ought no more to be regarded the^ ye ling of geese, or the
snarling of butchers curres. Neither does that shift of his hide his shame, or
prove his innocence, no more the^ the breaches of our first parents, as being
done not in a matter of controuerfie but of fact, For we say, there was never
any such matter or fact: they were all the sworn enemies of god, who made no
conscience to lie, because there was no fear of God before their eyes. What
might not Satan suggest unto the^, they standing for false religion and envying
this man above all the men in the world, by whose ministry in the strength of
the gospel, the foundations of their babylonical building was so shaken, their
crown and their belly, so ravished and spoiled, yt they cared not what they
said or wrote against him. And we see by common experience, that godly men and
the holiest ministers, have not the most friends, nay the more they love and
embrace the truth and follow righteousness, the more does yt world and wicked me^
rage against the^, because they will not run with the^ to the same riot. And
what though they were Germans, and that foolish Cocleus took upon him to write
his story: does that prove that he was so privy of Luthers life and doings,
(...)he must know al things truly, or being not reprehe^ded, that therefore he
deserved no reprehe^sion? still this beggarly Jesuit stands with his basket
begging that which will never be granted. For these were neither reverend,
(...)and (...)no bishops, neither learned nor reverend.
nor learned bishops, but spiteful wretches and hypocritees, no true bishops,
but cou^terfet crancks of Antichrists creation, and therefore spared not to
utter with damnable wickedness, and open shame and reproof of all ye godly,
slau^derous and false lies against gods saints, namely against Luther And first
he will examine the reports with a perhaps: that they will yield some occasion of
iustifiyng their reporters: nay surely not a whit. For if the reporters be such
branded knaves, their reports must needs be suspected of al good men? This
Parsons is no Eagle, for he is still catching at flies, and yet he misseth
the^, or else rather is become a fly himself: for he is always upon other men's
soars. For that which M. Chark thought he had omitted of modesty, wherein he
was yet deceived: Concerning Prateolus report of Luthers being begotten of a
devil, he follows as though it (...)needs Do you not think that it was
Catella that entertained Canisius so bravely, who for the affinity (...)their
names went together as dogs, in (...) (...).
be so, because Prateolus was so impudent to set it down, for sooth by the
report of as very knaves as himself, and by a matrone of Lipsia, that belike
was some popish drab, that loved rather the company of such lecherous (...),
the^ the asseblies of the righteous. And yt which is shameful in Prateolus, to
set down reports in print, especially against Luther, a public person, is yet
made a virtue by him, in co^pariso^ of us Protesta^is, who are wont as he
says, to set down things, as absolutely done, when we do but (...)the^: and
he set this down but by hear say.

But what impudency is this in M. Charke, to say that Prateolus (...)uoucheth
it when he does but set it down as reported? but first (gentle Sir Robert) tell
us where M. Charke says he does aduouch it: and then (...)us also if to set a
thing down in print by report be not as much as to aduouch a thing by report.
his meaning is plain that he would have it left in the mind of the hearers,
that Luther being begotten of a Devil, his doctrine and all his doings was from
the Devil. But where should Antichrists state have been then? This had been
to put the pope out of his inheritance, and to do him open wrong, who though
he be not begotten of the Devil, in any corporal generation, yet he is his
eldest son in nature, bearing his image in himself and in his members, even
as Christ is the image of his father, and being the only head of his Church
bears his resemblance in him self and all his members. As for that he
leapeth at, out of an Epistle of Erasmus, ad Epistolam (...)non sobriam, which
his sobre spirit englisheth, to Luthers drunken (...) Of (...)Epistle.
whereby he would insinuate that Erasmus, should confess some such thing,
or seem to be privy to it, it is but (...). He that shall (...). lib. 2.
(...)ad Frideric. (...)ducem, ad (...), ad Campegiu^ Card. ad (...).
read that Epistle, cannot but think him to be (...)that will gather any
such thing out of it. Besides it is well known that howesoeuer Erasmus
houered between the gospel and popery, and kept him self close, that he
might retain his liberty, yet he thought, wrote, and spoke honorably to
great princes of Luther, and justified his doctrine so far forth, as the
Papists themselves disclaim him for an heretic, which (...). 1519.
he would never have done, if he had thought that he had been begotten of the
Devil.

And because (Sir Robert) will prevent all dangers, upon his own
imagination: he deemeth that M. Charke will deny it, in regard not so much of
the fact for sooth, as of the nature of the thing it self, to wit, that
spirits can so abuse lewd women, etc. I think if I should deny it, I should
put him to his shifts to prove it. For although there may be strong delusions
of Satan: yet there cannot be any generation or com mixtion, of such unequal
substances. I know that not only Augustine and Ludouicus vines upon him, but
many others tell strange things of Incubi and succubi of such filthy
spirits: but does this follow, such a thing may be, therefore it is so: or
such strange things have happened among Paganes, and infidels: therefore
Luthers mother was oppressed so, and he was begotten by the Devil, or else
prattling Prateolus says, it was reported by a woman. For as impudent as he
was, yet he durst not say it for shame, and from him and from others deadly
affected (...)the truth of the Gospel, others have received that horrible lie
by tradition: therefore it must needs be true that these enemies to God, and
all good men, affirm to deface the truth. But for farther answer herin, I
refer him to that learned book of Wierus de Praestigiis demonum: and also to
his book de Lamiis, Chap. 13. Wherein he shall find plainly proved against
Malleus Malleficarum, and all the pack of those fools that it is a phansye:
and when he has answered those reasons, he shall hear what I can say farther
in that point both against him, and all the rest that are so (...)to defend it.

The like may be said of the Thunderbolte, which whether there were any such
thing or not, it neither helps, nor hinders the cause. It rather shows by
what means, Luther being then ignorant, and yet desirous to serve God, as he
thought, first after the study of the Law, bent himself to enter into a
Monastery. And this being done in an unsettled state, when he knew not God,
and yet favoring his judgments, was desirous to enter a religious life, as it
is to his special praise, so it disaduantageth your superstitious religion,
and your whole faction: that by such devised and voluntary service that has
no warrant or ground in Gods word, think to please God. As for (...)credit
and Coclaeus, and the rest, M. Charkes reasons stand yet un touched, which
has broken their heads, and yet Sir Robert has not healed them. All men who
have any spark of Gods fear, whom the God of this world has not blinded,
may easily see in all their books and writings, that they have written (not
only against Luther, but against Linda. de (...)Idolis. (...).
others the servants of God) that they make no conscience of lying. Let them
but read Staphilus Apology against Smideline of the dissentions of Lutherans
as he calls them, and that same pestilent book of Pratcolus, entitled
Elenchus Heraeticorum, Staphilus his Table of heresies, and Coclaeus seven
headed beast, with Fabius Antiologies, with this book of Lyndanus, and the
rest, you shall find nothing but horrible lies, gathered either directly
against the meaning of the authors, or else craftily and colourably against the
truth, to bring it into discredit.

And yet this monster amongst men says, we belie Lyndan, when we say, that
he charge English men that profess the Gospel, to worship the Devil, when
yet it is evident, that he says: casting down other images, we yet favor the
Image of the Devil, telling a tale of a (...)that in Paul's Church, looking
about for images and finding none but the Image of the Devil, (which was
brought in by Papists themselves, and placed amongst their saints) drew out
his sword and thrust the devil through, bidding him to pack with the rest. The
like tale is that of those in Leyden, and the note in the margent out of
Lynda^, insinuating plainly to the world, that Caluinists worship the Image of
the devil, and maintain and worship that together with the images See page 110.
of the thieves hanged with Christ, but abolish al other Saints, both he Gods
and she Gods. But the truth is, and does appear to all that fear him, that
the whole lump of Popery is nothing else but a heap of Idolatry, and having
no commandment from God, either for the setting up, or adoring of Images, it
must needs be, that they adore their own imaginations suggested by the
Devil: and so honor not God in truth but the Devil, from whom is all
falsehood and lies. And from that spirit proceeded those monstrous and
ridiculous lies, wherewith he has filled his whole book, as that Luther,
under pretense of keeping some few ceremonies, has consumed all the flourishing
Fol. 10. 11. of the same book.
(...)of the Lords garden, and that retayning the others, he has done it, to
deceive the simple, that (...) (as he calls them) become Turks, that
Calvin, Beza, and Marlorate, were Arrians, denying Fol. 40.
the Divinity of Christ, and therewith also they charge Luther, In professio.
(...). (...). (...).
affirming him to have trusted more in his Kate and Philip then in Christ. So
they beg at our hands, that we hold that the Gospel of Christ, and the
word of God, has failed in the Church of God, and been a stranger from it,
as though they were the Church of Christ: (...). de vero (...). (...).
and that Calvin and Luther teach, that God compels men to all kind of
iniqeitie: that Melancthon would have all the liberal arts (...)lib. (...).
fol. (...).
utterly taken away, and only (...)to remain. It would weary a man, to
reckon up all their abominable slanders and lies, which no man will believe,
(...)it be such as God has given up, that (...)in (...).
forsaking the truth, in his just judgment being lead by lies, they may in the
end receive with their father the Devil a liar from the beginning,
everlasting damnation.

But admit, that things had been set down by some particular Particular men's
faults ought not to be objected against the Church, or against the (...).
few men, yea even by the best men, that might have been controuled by the
word of God: what reason is there to charge our Church or us with all, that
neither maintain nor hold, nor by the grace of God will maintain or hold any
errors, in them or in our selves, if we shall be convicted by the word of GOD:
Which seeing it is so, why should we be driven to defend the errors of
men, standing against your falshoodes for the truth? and why should men's
faults prejudice the truth, which, whatsoever men shall be, the truth of GOD
shall stand, against which whosoever set them selves, they shall know that
they fight not with men, but against God?

But (he says) that for the Devils crying out in Luthers mouth, M. Charke
brings not one syllable to disprove it, Cocleus having affirmed it, that
lived in Germany with Luth. and no Lutheran ever having been able to reprove
it. The reasons are set before, and handeled more at large by M. Charke, why
Cocleus should not be credited in such a case no more then Lyndan,
Staphilus, and the rest. Besides, though Cocleus lived in Germany, yet I am
sure, he lived not so with Luther, as he could say he heard it: and
therefore his master that taught him and the rest of his fether, to lie in
that, taught him to lie in the other. His modesty in other of his works
stand as a scarre in his forehead, or rather as a hole in his care, to declare
what credit he ought to have in this, and so do these ruffianlike words of
yours in this place and else where of coping with Nuns, set forth of what
spirit you are, calling lawful matrimony, (...)letcherie, which the Lord
has ordained as a remedy against sin, to all men that have not the gift of
continency, either in the ministry, or out of it, of what calling soever
they are, as may appear by those places set down before out of the
scriptures, far above the credit of any councels or doctors whatsoever.

As for Luthers doctrines, whereof you have not been the first gatherer, but
have stolen them out of such as were before you, and therefore are answered by
such as answered them, and need not so often to be repeated: yet that you may
see our mind to be as it was, we say concerning Luther, Melancthon, (...),
Beza, and all the rest, that howesoeuer we esteem them as rare and singular
instruments of God, whom he has used against your Pope that Antichriste,
for the work of the ministry to the edifiyng of his Saints, whose praises
shall endure maugre your beardes, as long as Christ's Church shall endure, yet
we esteem them but as men, and this honor we give only to God, that he is
only wise, and absolutely holy, without sault, and his word without may me
or impersection: and therefore we say that all men's writings are to be
examined by that word, and if any gooe from it, therein we leave them, as men
that might be deceived.

As for Luthers doctrine, which you have so often charged, we protest in the
fear of God, that the most things wherewith you charge them, are maliciously
gathered, contrary to the true meaning of them, and otherwise then ever Luther
intended, As first in that doctrine of incredulity, though M. Charke have
cleared the matter, by conferryng How infidelity may be called the only sin.
other places of Luthers writings, yet Sir Robert this blind bayard, kicketh
and wincheth as if he were mad, and will needs have it, that Luther must
say, there is no sin but incredulity: that no other sins can damn a man,
and that the poor man must say somewhat for credites sake in there broken
cause. This you may see though Bayarde be blind, yet he is bold and in deed
past all shame. For whosoever will read M. Charke shall find that he has
cleared Luther both in the one and the other. Neither are M. Chark and M.
Hanmer at such ods in this matter, but that the poor wretch in deed, must
needs say somewhat, though it be not to the purpose. For M. Charke denies not
Luthers words, but shows his meaning by other places, and M. Hanmer says
truly, that you have maliciously racked Luthers words. But that all other
sins lie soking in the root of infidelity, it is too fine for your gross
head. Surely I think so, who are disposed to understand nothing as you ought
to understand, but above that you ought, which has carried you so far
beyond the listes of truth and true religion. But it might have pleased you to
understand, if God had opened your understanding, that infidelity, as
Augustine calls it, is the mother of sins, that it is the only sin that
separateth from God: and though there be many sins, all which fall in
account in the wicked, yet in the elect of God, if they believe in Christ,
though all sins are sins in them, and they are condemned by the law, and
to be condemned both in them selves and others, yet they are pardoned and
blotted out in them: which is a most comfortable doctrine, in deed far of
another nature, then your desperate doctrine of justification by works. The
repetition therefore of Luthers words, which you might have spared together
with the rest, you have stolen out of Staphilus and others. How the ten
co^mandeme^tes (...)to (...).


The second concerning the ten commandments: whether they appertain to us or
no? how they appertain to us and how they do not, is sufficiently declared
by M. Charke, how and in what sense Luther spoke it: but what will satisfy a
wrangling Jesuit, who has sworn to gainsay whatsoever is said by us, be it
never so truly said? For I appeal to all the Papists and Jesuits in the
world, Did not Luther; Do not we teach the commandments of GOD? Do we
not expound them in our churches and schools, and set them as rules of our
obedience? But what will not such (...)instruments do, that theye may
deface the truth, and bring the teachers of it into hatred? O blind malice.
We never blotted out one of them, as it is plain they have done in all their
Breuiaries, Mass books, and Catechismes. Of the (...)Gospels.


The like is that of the four Gospels: (whereas in truth the gospel is one)
contained in those prophetical Promises before the coming of Christ, as in
those Eua^gelists, that were the 4. notaries thereof, as also in Paul's
Epistles. And if he have any such words of S. John's Gospel, he speaks it
only by way of comparison not to discredit the other, as this Sycophant
would employ: but to declare how divinely S. John wrote of the Divinity of
Christ, and other profound matters of our religion. As for that he cauilleth
because M. Charke cannot find every thing cited by him; The truth is that
himself (as should appear) never read Luthers works, Touching Luthers works.
but has stolen these accusatio^s from Staphilus and others that wrote before
them, and only has a little smoothed them as though they were some fresh
merchandise never offered to the sale before. True it is, that Luthers works
have been often published, and some I think that he wrote were yet never
published: but what makes this for his excuse, in not setting down places out
of known books quoted and directed in their several editions, for the better
trial of the truth, and ease of the Reader? Is there any book extant of
Luthers, that we, who are more conversant in the^ then they, should not find
out, if they would but direct us to them? But I guess, and I suppose truly,
that Luther wrote more, as lecherous and godless a man as they would make him,
then the most of the^ have read, and those, that are extant, may be found and
had, so that if there were any sincerity in them, they should not lie by
tradition, or send us at adventure Luthers works to be considered according to
the times, wherein they were written.
to find them we cannot tell where, which is a token of their ignorance, and
taking things at the second hand, not seeing them themselves. The like is to be
said of their cauil for the diversity of editions, between the soft and the
rough Lutherans. We deny not but Luthers works may be subject to men's
affections, as other of the ancient Fathers have been, and he may be made
father of many children that are most unlike him, as was Augustine and other of
the Doctors, but what helps this their cause, when he and his works both,
are no farther allowed of us, then they agree with the word of God? We
know, that even as there is difference in fruits and metals, of wines, in
the first and latter vintage, so we know, that Luthers works are to be
considered, according to the times wherein he wrote. He writ many things being
(...)in his cowle, and soon after he had cast it of, which (...)somewhat
(...)it: and GOD gave him grothe according to that measure of grace in
knowledge and understanding, according as he saw meet for his church, and for
the bulding of it. He saw not al at once, neither had he that sincerity in the
beginning whilst he would scarce come from among you, (...)afterward by the
grace of God he attained unto. If therefore his works were filed by himself, or
by others with his consent, during his life, or after, I know not why he should
not enjoy this priuiledg, as well as al other authors and writers, who are
wont, as they grow in knowledge, either to add or detract, enlarge or abridge
their own works, as they have seen good: and yet ought not hereby to be
therefore esteemed inconsta^t or not like the^ selves. As for the co^playnt of
John Alusco, concerning the confession Confession of Auspurge.
of Auspurge, perhaps too toghly and too much urged, and stood upon by Libro de
(...). Ab its qui (...).
Luthers scholars, afterward in respect of the matter of the Sacrament, as
it was first set out, it helps not your cause. For besides that it was found
fault with by some of our side, the often setting of it forth, was to better
it, being but written for a interim for the according of both sides, which
although it seemed a thing altogether impossible: yet for the greatest matters
and substance of Doctrine, it was in a manner brought to pass, had not some
intemperat spirits by the malice of Satan fought too too egarly and bitterly
against it, standing upon terms and tautologies that have in them no
edification at al. That which he adds out of that place That the Gospel is
one.
alleged by M. Charke, to prove, that he spoke in detraction of the
Eua^gelistes, because he says, Paul's Epistles may be called more rightly The
Gospel is the same glad tidings of salvation compre hended in the
wholscripture.
the Gospel, which he would make us believe to be done of some tooth against
the other, is altogether frivolous and foolish, which shows that he has a
tooth against whatsoever Luther utters. As though there were no Gospel in
Paul's Epistles, or as though al were not the gospel, of equal authority,
having bin indicted by one and the same spirit. It appears yt this man
measures the Gospel, by the titles set over those stories, written by these
principal notaries, making so many Gospels, as there were writers and Authors,
who cannot forsooth abide, yt Paul's Epist. should be the Gospel, or that the
Gospel should be one: And yet Paul doubts not to call it his Gospel. Here
you cry out against M. Charke for not finding out that, which you never found
out your self, but as you received it by tradition one from an other, as often
answered, as ever it was objected, which I suppose you saw not with your own
eyes, and that made you to refer us to Coclaens, from whom you took it at the
second hand, and the^ taking an hold of our hemme, by all edging Gesner, that
makes mention of such a preface, wherein by way of comparison only he speaks
so off. I am. Epistle, not denying the authority thereof, which you and Campion
falsely say, both he and we have cut off from the body of the scripture: and
yet Luther commends that Epistle in his Preface upon it, (...). (...)disputat.
and we openly protest, that we receive it as the word of God. Concerning
(...), in prof, in Iaco.
that which Duraey the Scot has farther objected concerning this matter, I
refer the Reader to M. Whittakers answer, which I hope shall shortly come
forth. But this you say, you have added, to show the impudency of M Charke,
and his fellows in the Tower against Campion, because he Campion chalengeth al
professors of the Gospel, and (...)in a chief matter, is ignorant where that is
written that (...)delivers.
could not presently show it out of our books, and especialy of M. Whittakers,
who to the admiration and laughter of al other nations, has set forth, that
Luther never called that Epistle so, etc. Surely first for Campion, it must
needs be a great impudency, to aduouch such a thing, charging our whole
Church of England also with it, that for his life, he knew not where to find
in the Aucthour, which he had never read himself, but as your manner is, had by
a lying tradition received it from others. He yt was so impudent to chaleng a
whole Church, and was able to say no more, when Read M. Whitakers preface,
aduersus (...). (...)ri.
he should have avouched his places, must needs be suspected, as you are.
Again, what has M. Whitaker set forth that is not true? For if those words be
to be found in Luther, yet are they not spoken simply, but as has been said by
way of comparison: and therefore that resolute desperatnes This concerning James
is one of their chiese strings; and yet not one amongst an hundred have felt it
them selus, but blind ly hit by (...), at they were directed by others.
to defend error, is to be turned over to your selves, that are wont to defend
whatsoever your Romish Church holds, be it never so (...)or contrary to the
word of God. As for not having read it, but measuring M. Whitakers by him self,
it is liker, that he had read them (...)then they, who indeed, although they
have often alleged it, yet they have done it, upon no other ground then has
been showed, and it is a very lie, beco^ming Friar Parsons or his aduocat, yt
he utterly denies it: but he says; that they report absolutely (...)has no
such words. As for the Dutch Testament, it was also there offered to Campyon,
and if he had taken it from thence, it is like that he would have remembered
Dutch (...).
it, which if he had done, there were there that understood it, and could have
interpreted it unto him.

Concerning that he says, to auowe his exercise and judgment in Scripture,
twiting M. Chark with pride and ignorance, alleging three or four places
far from the purpose; in steed of stopping that hole, he has made it wyder
and slily passing by Master Charks reason, yet in the end he grants that
which was in question. For if John's Gospel was written by the same spirit that
the rest were, and S. John has largely entreated of love, which is the
fulfilling of the law, it must needs follow, that he has also entreated with
as great specialtie of good woorks. And therefore it is a slanderous surmise
that Luther should praise S. John's Gospel, and bear a tooth as he speaks
against the other, either in respect that S. John speaks less of works or
the other more. But what will not Papists surmise? As though forsooth, we
thought more basely of good works then they, who teach the doctrine of the more
truly then they, and yet give that glory to God, that they cannot save us, but
that is only from his mere mercy freely offered and apprehended by faith in
Christ.

Concerning the fourth charge of Luthers doctrine (which he likewise (...). 129
has taken word for word out of Staphilus, and which he cites We neither
do, nor will defend any (...)private opinion further then it is warranted by
gods word.
out of the answer of George the Duke of Saxony, triumphing over M. Charkes
oversight in not reading that which follows, calling it extreme impudency of
a lying minister, and wilful and shameless dishonestie, and I cannot tell what,
as if the man were in the moon: I aunswear that every opinion of every man is
not to be defended by us. Why should Luthers opinion in some one point or
other, not of so great importance be laid to our charge to the discredit of
the mighty truth of God? I have said before that men had their errors, and
as it pleased (...).
God to bless them with a measure of faith, so they executed their ministry.
And though Luther were now by the grace of God returned from Babylon, and from
your whoorish church of Abomination, yet he might both in this point of
Divorce and in others, be to seek what council to give: you having not only
taught a divorce to be lawful for that thing, If any errors were in Luther,
he had them from the Papists.
but also for many others, contrary to the doctrine of Christ, so that that
poison was sucked from your own breasts, and therefore you have no cause so
much to triumph against Luther for that point, or against M. Chark, who is
ready I am sure wherein he has failed, to be lovingly admonished. But this is
your property, to leap at gnattes, and to catch (...)in other men, but
Elephantes in your selves are motes, and your fight is so dim, you cannot see
them. If your eye had been clear, you might have seen set down in read and
great Letters, in your own popish decrees, that for impotencie of body,
marriage is to be dissolved, yea for many lesser causes a great deal, when
our Savior has set down the only cause to be fornication: yet by the Popes
Pope (...). (...). quest. 7. cap. Quod (...). Error, conditio, (...), cognatio,
(...). (...)disparsbus, vis, ordo, (...): sisis (...), si forte coire (...).
law, your Gossips might not marry; nor the women that had been once
married, might not marry again. Neither does that help, that you will
permit them not to marry after such divorce, but rather it doubleth and
increases your sin, that first you dissolve, where you ought not, and having
dissolved them, you suffer them not to enjoy that remedy, which Christ has
left them, as it were leading them by the hand into the stews, to lead a
filthy and loose life ever afterward. This is that you might blushe at, if
there were any mite of Iolius Coelest. (...). (...). (...). Cap. (...).
shamefastnes in you. You that have therefore such gaps in your selves, and
such foul botches, you might have pardoned this scarre and warte in Martin
Luther, who was otherwise so sincere, sound, and painful in the substance
of Gods truth and religion, at whose honor though you swell, and burst your
selves for anger, to deface it, and bring it out (...), ad lib. (...).
of credit, yet it shall stand and remain, till it receive that full fyning,
that shall clear it from all human corruption.

That which follows, you borrowed not, because you concealed the Lender, but
you stole it out of Staphilus, and it is confessed to be Luthers error, and
meet to fall without maintenance: because it has no foundation in the word
of GOD.

As for your knauishe conjecture, that Luther belike had some kinsmen, in whose
wives he would have had interest, it fitteth rather a popish Jesuit, and a
vowed Votarie, that has not the gift of continency, and therefore needs
such filthy shifts. Luther was known where he lived, after GOD called him to
that holy state of matrymonie, to live chastely and in the fear of God, what
soever your Romish Priests, Friars, and Moonkes do, who were wont to be the
common Bulls of all the country, whereabout they dwelt.

And if thou could be ashamed, thou would never insinuate to the Reader,
that Luther should hold, that if a man should have ten wives fled from
him, that he might take more. For although he be too vehement against that
disobedience both in men and women, that submit not them selves to the
ordinance of God, yet it was never his mind, that any man or woman should do
that of themselves without the Magistrate, and the appointment of the church.
And as for Alberus writing against Carolostadius, that thereupon John Most
impudent (...).
Leiden should take many wives, and Kipperdolinge thirteen for his part: It is
an horrible lie, ye ever it was upon any such occasion. For as Luther resisted
Carolostadius, when he departed from the truth, so it is well known, and
testified in all his writings, that he was a sharp adversary against all the
Anabaptists, and wrote to the Magistrates, to suppress them: So that he
neither taught any such doctrine, neither was it practiced by his authority.
But such (...)writers care not what they set down to the world, so they may
deface the truth of God, and the true Professors of it: though this bird were
hatched in their own nest, and if Luther held it, he learned it in their
own school, and not in the school of Christ: and therefore, they have small
cause to cast it in our teeth, being their own filth and dounge.

The fifth doctrine, in the like case, is also answered as the fourth, and
differs not from it, being a case wherein Luther, one man, teinted with their
corruptions, thought that there ought to be a divorce: but M. Charke has
interpreted Luthers meaning, neither has this proud Parsons brought any
sound consutation against it. And as long as we allow no such diuorses, and
yet them selves do, they have no cause to charge us with it, or so to rave
against Luther, being not at one with themselves.

As for Sebastian Flaskes confession, it deserves no more credit at our hands,
then the confession of an (...)fallen from the truth, lyeing in a number of
things besides, and therefore like also to lie in this. And whether he lie or
no; concerning the matter perhaps much lasciuiousnes being in Germany, though
nor upon that occasion, yet was it no sufficient ground unto him, to have
departed from the truth of God, for the vices of men. But the truth is, those
opinions of Diuorsements sprung from Antichriste, with the utter rejecting of
matrimony in the Romish kingdom, and else where, (where such corruptions have
bin entertained, and maintained) have bin and are the causes of al
abomination. Therefore this being also their own, as the former, Parsons had
good cause to have laid his hand upon his mouth, and that he might have hidden
the shame of his own nest, not to have so declaymed against Luther. And if the
dutch (...)
Book were suppressed, he had the less cause to be grieved at us, that
either would have smothered such a monster, or were ashamed of it. And whether
Luther recanted it or no, that can no whit help his cause. For if he had
recanted, then he had renounced an opinion of their own, and so could not
please them, or if he did not which is uncertain, yet I doubt not, but the
Lord might burye it, amongst other his ignorances, as he does great and
many in his children, who holding the substance and foundation of salvation,
are not in justice separated, and cast down into everlasting damnation.

But here I would have the reader to understand, that these Papists now a
days, that come so freshly upon us out of their Seminaries, and make books so
fast, as if they had read all men's wrytinges both old and new, I say they
have nothing but such as they steal from others, Bellarminus having helped
them with his Dictates and common places, and this Apology of Staphilus having
been the very Storehouse of this railing defense.

As for the opinion which he maintayneth of Divorce from a bond woman, and
also from one being covetous, if thee should fall to steal, because they have
no ground in the word of God, I will vouchsafe it no confutation: Only this
may be noted, that if Luther had remained still in Popery, and then taught
their doctrine of Divorce, for inhabilitie or obstinacy of either party, he
would never have found fault more with the one, then with the other. It is
foul and lascivious in Luther, but it is good and maintainable in the Pope,
and his Church. Lo their equity, and Father Parsons honesty.

The last four doctrines, which you asfyrme M. Charke to aduouche as clear
and undoubted, and which you labor to bring into doubt, they are clearer, as
they are defended and set down by Martyn Luther, then that you are able,
with any the least color to blemishe them. For, for the first, whether
Matrimony be to Whether matrimony and virginity be equal.
be preferred before Virganitie, yea or no, or be equal with it: It is
certain, that in respect of GOD, and as you understand by merit, a
deserving of praise with GOD of congruence, there is neither merit in the one
nor in the other. It is clear, that Matrimony is the Of the honorable state
of Marriage.
ordinance of God, sanctified unto all that have not the gift of continency,
and of so great worthiness, the state being honorable, that your goatishe
Virgins, are not worthy to come near, and stand at the thresholde. Neither
do we (...)from the spirit of the (...)Church: who, when they preferred
single life before marriage, (...)preserred it, as it was sincere and without
spotte of (...), and incontinencie, which your brockish boares, and wanton Nuns
never attained unto: and then again did it not simply, but by way of
comparison, in respect of time, as when the Church was under persecution, and
other circumstances, they being true virgins in deed. As for Hierome against
Iouinian, it is well known, that howsoever he was over egar that way, and
waded in an argument, for which he had no such ground, yet we take him at the
best, and interpret him to have dealt against Iouinian, because he persuaded
some to marry, who had no need of it. And so, whereas August. in Haeresie 42.
speaks much of the merit of single life, and Ambrose in that Epistle to
Syricius etc. affirming that marriage is not of equal merit with virginity: I
answer, that you abuse your reader, with the doubtful name of Merit. For,
they meant not by merit (as was said before) any deserte, to make them more
acceptable to God, but a worthiness, whereby they were freed from those
encumbrances, that those that were married were subject unto: as Paul. 1. Cor.
7. And M. Luther, and. M. Charke do no otherwise prefer marriage then so:
Neither do those ancient Doctors that have written such volumes in the
praise of Virginity, praise it as a thing more acceptable to GOD in it self.
Beesides, the comparison, which M. Luther makes betwixt virginity and
marryage, preferring marryage as gold, and rejecting the other as dounge:
which has so vexed you, that you show your popish spirit, joined in
deed(...)with scurrilitie and vilanie: he makes it in respect of GOD, laying
these two estates together, nakedlye in themselves, without consideration, of
those circumstaunces mentioned: but of them selves, they neither commend us,
nor discommende us to GOD.

And yet if weelooke to their ends in the ordinance of GOD; and In what
respect Luther preferred marriage before (...),
also weigh the sin and abomination, that has been shrouded under the name
of Virginity, I see no cause why in respect of that, marriage may not be
preferred before virginity, as being the original and means of our
continuance, whereby not only commonweals, Cities and countries, in a lawful
sort have received their beeginninges, but also Churches and holy assemblies,
which albeir, they are borne as children of Adam, yet being begotten and borne
of godly parents, and within the covenant, are holy and holyly (...)up to
GOD. In that respect marriage is before virginity with all her (...). For as
true virgins live to God, and in the time of persecution, have less
incombrances to hinder them from the service of God, wherein they are said to
live the life as it were of Angels, so those that are married, that yet serve
God, and by his grace are strengthened to go through all incombrances, being
instruments of an holy seed to God, they bring him a double glory, not only
living to his glory, which is the principal end of their creation, whilst
they are made his faithful servants, but also having children, teach them the
same faith and obedience. And hereof it is that the Apostle comfort women
that are married against the molestations of marriage, saying: that if they
continue faithful and undergo that subjection, those pains, The fathers carried
with an excessive affection to the praise of virginity.
those duties with cheerfulness, which were justly laid upon them they
shall be saved. Howsoever therefore the fathers were carried with an excessive
affection of true virginity, into the excessive praises thereof, and the
Apostle commends it, as a rare gift in them, that in truth have it, for and
in respect of those circu^sta^ces, which I have mentioned: yet I dare, and do
challe^ge Parsons and all the pack of Jesuits, co^spiring together against
matrimoni gods holy ordena^ce, and the estate of it, that it is as M. Luther
speaks, the stateslaid together. Matrimony with their vowed filthy
virginity, the very sinck of villainy: matrimony is gold, and theirs is doung,
which whilst they have lewdly and wickedly gone about to take out of the
Church, they have filled it, Concubmariis, incestuosis, (...). in (...).
(...), (...)co^cubitoribus, and omnigenere immu^dorum: I will not English it,
they have filled it with all abhominatio^s: yea let the^ lay them together in
respect of men, and of those commodities that both estates do bring to men
without respect of God, and with those titles and privileges that God has
vouchsafed unto either, it shall stand also that matrimony is gold, and the
other dross. The married profitable, the other as it were unprofitable, the one
rejoicing in exceeding blessings, the other lacking exceeding comfortes, being
alone and already dead, howsoever he seem to be alive: And therefore if
Parsons had not an impudent face, hardened from a stony heart to dishonor
God, by casting his filth upon his holy ordenance, and standing to maintain
the bawdrie, Sodomitrie, and filthiness of that foul sincke, he would never
have condemned so worthy and excellent a man, who to avoid letcherie and
carnalitie, (...)himself to the service of God in holy matrimony. He would
not call matrimony carnalitie, as Antichrist his master has done before him:
when he said, Qui in earne sunt, Deo placere non possunt: They that are in the
flesh cannot please God: he would never have faced holy matrimony, with such
cursed virginity, that is defiled with filthy letcherie and Sodomitrie. Their
virgin Cardinals The filthiness of the popes virgins.
using it commonly, and writing whole books in the praise of it, so many being
found, in their Abbeies, Nunneries, and religious houses, where their honestest
(...), were to take (...)natural course, betwixt male and female, to which
(yet I quake to utter it) they did not only not keep themselves, but as the
Apostle says, man with man wrought filthiness, against kind, not in one but
in sundry kinds of abomination.

Concerning the 2. doctrine of these four last, though it has been
sufficiently said unto by M. Charke, yet he barketh still at the moon, like a
restless curre, and biteth not one whit, neither answers he M. Charkes
reasons. O but Luther says, that S Paul did not counsel but deswade
virginity, but it is plain: I have no precept of Christ, but I give
counsel: here to make Luther opposite to Paul, he will have it to be a
counsel, that other where he will make a commandment against himself, that
he may be against Luther, and yet he is not against him but with him. For he
says, and we all say, that S. Paul had no commandment of the S. Paul says,
he has no commandment and therefore it is a counsel.
Lord to forbid any virgin to marry, and therefore it is lawful for any virgin
to marry: but in respect, as if they have continency and constancy, the^ in
regard of the present state of the Church, he advises, but dares not
co^ma^d, that they keep the^ as they are, and shows that state to be better
in respect, and not otherwise. Therefore first, S. Paul's counsel, is not a
counsel simply to abstain: but as the other co^curre^ts which are named, are
found to be in the^: as also that preferring of not marying before marying, is
not Parents must provide for their children, they may coun sail them, but not
compel them.
spoken simply, but respecting those circu^sta^ces. For if a man's daughter have
that infirmity, that he see she cannot contain, he is in the fear of God to
provide for her, over whom, though he have the authority of a father, yet he
cannot compel her, nor restrain her from that remedy which God has
appointed. If he do, he shall be (...)of the sin, that she shall commit.
And wherein is this contrary to the doctrine of Christ or his Apostles?
Hieroms sentence.
As for Hieroms sentence, it may stand well enough, and never hurt this cause.
For no doubt the Lord stirs up all to strive to that excellent virtue of
shamefastness. And what, may not this be done in all estates, as well married
as unmarried? And yet does this enable any man to that rare and extraordinary
gift, that all men striving to be pure virgins, can or do obtain it? No no
Sir Robert, either you papists and Friars are extreme loyterers, that strive
not because you obtain not: or else forsaking that remedy when you have not
the gift, you willingly yet break out by the just judgment of God, without
conscience, to live most filthilie under the cloak of chastity in all
difhonestie. As for your frump concerning the preserment of M. Charke and his
wife before virgins, I say we might be all ashamed (as partly already I have
proved) If your virginity which is nothing else but lascivious letcherie, (and
therefore no comparison betwixt that and honest matrimony) should once dare to
look toward us. M. Chark and his sober wife shall stand in greater chastity
and dignity, with greater assurance of comfort and honesty in holy matrimony
(and all that are so married, in what honest state soever) the^ all Romish
votaries, Friars and Nuns established in the popes kingdom wheresoever. Perhaps
they may perke up as if they were honest: For harlots will have harlots
foreheads: but though they be shameless and impudent, yet they are ne (...)the
honester.

The other point, which you odiously stand upon, contains no such The third
(...)cleared from (...).
absurdity in it, as you would seem to infer by pressing it in every point.
For as the Lord has given food for the maintenance of this life, so he has
appoincted by marriage the mean of continuing it. As for your beastly
inference, that shows your knauish experience, in matters that should be
far from you (if you were that you would seem to be) it becomes such a
lewd losell and filthy friar. M. Chark defends M. Luth. modestly, and
Parso^s pursues him odiusly and unhonestly, and yet gains nothing for his
purpose. It is true, and so shall be found, that he that shunneth marriage
having not the gift of continency, as an unholy thing, and considers not
that God has created man and woman for propagatio^, he must needs be a filth,
and make no conscience to commit all kind of wickedness: example of Popes,
Cardinals, Friars, Nuns, Priests, and the rest of that lecherous generation:
who faring well, living idly, and prodigally, having used not only to keep
harlots, but to be harlots themselves and against nature, to (...)things not to
be spoken, not matching themselves in matrimony as god has appointed: but as
he speaks coupling themselves in deed like beasts and worse then beasts
with such as are no matches for them. And therefore his collections being false
concerning these words of Luther his co^clusio^ is violent, untrue and
dishonest, against those reverend and learned me^ the B. of Ca^turburie and
Salisbury whom he names, living in the fear of god, in that gift God has
bestowed upon the^. And alother holy B. of the primative Church, that had that
gift, as Athanasius, Cypria^, Ambr, Chrisost. Basil, and August. who though they
lived without marriage themselves, yet neither disdained it in them selves nor
others, but would have thought it a singular blessing if it had pleased God to
call them to that honor: so far were they off, by their writing of books in the
praise of single life, to condemn matrimony, either in themselves I say, or
in those that were married of their calling, whom they highly esteemed and
loved.

As for the last doctrine, whereas he would insinuate that estimation upon
our selves, to be as holy and just as the virgin Marie the mother of God, and
the rest of the Apostles: We answer that whatsoever God in mercy has
bestowed upon us, whatsoever be his gifts How we esteem our (...).
and graces, where with hehath beautified us, and whatsoever be the estate
whereunto he has called us: yet as we know and confess, that of all others
we are the veriest wretches and greatest sinners, vile in our own sight, and
thinking of all others better the^ of our selves, and especially of those
excellent servants of God, who had so rare and excellent gifts, such large
sides and strong shoulders, to undergo so great offices, yet we know and are
assured that in Christ by the ministry of his Gospel, the whole storehouse
and treasury of his graces are opened unto us, and as they saw that which
great Patriarchs, Prophets, and kings, desired to see and could not, so we
have seen that, which neither the virgin Marie being his mother after the
flesh, nor those excellent Apostles. which yet were examples to us of his
unspeakable mercy: could ever attain unto.

The doctrine of Luther therefore, whereat they cavil, Luther regarding that
they made more of the blessed virgin then they ought, putting her in the place
of her son, nay preferring her before him, whilst by her motherly
authority, they call upon her to command him: See their services and
offices.
nay whilst they attribute unto her a more special service and more large
then unto Jesus Christ: yea which is blasphemous, turning all the Psalms
mentioning God, unto her: therefore Luther had just cause to (...). (...).
say as he did, and M. Charke also to give that interpretation upon Luthers
words which he did. Is it not a blasphemous thing, that they affirm, that her
death proceeded not of any natural infirmity by reason Absurdities of the
Ros. of the virgin
of the (...)of her complexion? Is it not absurd that they say, that all the
Apostles came myraculously together at her death? Fol. 99. A. (...)13.
Of like sort also is it that they say: Christ descending from heaven,
associated with (...)celestial powers, entered into that blessed house where Fol.
99. b, line 10
she lay, and said to her, Cantic. 4, ver. 7. 8. What should I reckon Fol.
101. b. line 3.
up, their other blasphemeies in calling her the most righteous of all Fol.
106. a. line 19.
righteons, the most holy of alholies, the most gracious of all gracious? And
yet they compare her to Rahab the harlot: saying, that Whereas (...). 6.
Rahab the harlot, hydd the spies but one day, and her house was not destroyed:
so by greater reason, the virgin Marie lodging Christ niene months in her
body, should not have the same body destroyed and turned into ashes: and
therefore that it is more then likely, that like as our blessed God would that
the soul of this blessed Lady, (although it is known she was a very poor
(...)) should be free from Fol. 105. Line (...)
sin: so her most holy body should be free from all corruption. And
therefore they affirm, that howesoeuer her body lived in mortal flesh, yet
it was never defiled, or subject unto sin, but was so fair that it sufficed
to make God himself to take pleasure therein. And therefore they abuse those
same places out of Exodus the fifteen chapter, and out of Esaias the sixteenth
Chapter: I will glorify the mansion Fol. 107, line 10.
of my Majesty: saying, that it was fulfilled in the assumption of the virgin
Marie. These blasphemies and such like absurdities, wherewith they farced and
filled their books, were in cause that Luther writ The causes that moved
(...)there to write as he did, to bring men from the virgin to Christ.
as he did: that all Christians are alike holy, as the mother of God, yea that
we are equal to Peter and Paul, and to the virgin, and have all goodness as
plentiful as they had. And yet here nothing is withdrawn from them, to
dimnish those graces and gifts, which God bestowed upon the^, nor nothing
arrogated to us, which through his goodness, are not by the ministry of the
Gospel bestowed upon us. His gifts they were, that were in them: and his
they are, that are in us. They had singular prerogatives, and so have we: they
in their places being so excellent officers, had great measure of holiness:
We in our place being true believers, are made partakers and heirs in as
large measure to our glorification, to whom he has given power to be made
the sons of God: as she, (though his mother) was the daughter of God.
Besides: their prerogatives consisted not in those things which papists take
to be their greatest glory. For it was not so much for the virgin to have
borne Christ, as to believe in Christ: nor for the Apostles to have seen
Christ in the flesh, and to have been present at his miracles, as to see
him in spirit and faith, being assured that he was the true Messiah: Even
therefore, like as all the members of a The gifts of God equally dispersed to
all that are his howsoever it be according to measure.
body, being knit in the same body, are partakers of the government,
direction, grace, righteousness, and glory of the head, to that whole body: so
the members of Christ are alike directed, governed, justified, sanctified, and
saved, how soever their places be different in that mystical body, the grace
and merit of Christ, are equally dispensed to all that are his.

The saints that were then, the saints that are now, are alike sainted. And as
for our merit, we know none, nor claim it, howsoever the saints of God have
difference of gifts, do differ by offices, by times and places, and according
thereunto, shall differ in glory, one from another. And this is the
inequality, that the Doctors which you speak of, do Every member has not a
like place nor (...)
mention. And therefore Christ our best scholemaster has taught us, which
also is to be learned of you, when the woman cried out that the womb was
blessed that bare him, and the paps that gave him suck: he replied, Yea
blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. Again, when they
told him that his mother and brethren were without to seek him: he replied,
they are my mother, and my brethren, that doethe will of my father: Even as
they are the right sons of Abraham that are his sons, not according to the
flesh, but according to faith and the promise of God.

And as for your Dionisius Areopagita, whom you would of a forrenner, Of
Dionisius (...).
make a free (...), by the bare mention of his name in two general councels,
and yet name but one, and infinite other testimonies, whereof you name none: yet
it is plain by the star in his forehead, that (...). in 17. Act.
he is not that Dionysius, but some bastard and stranger in deed, far from
(...). Tbeod. Gaza in (...). Proble. (...)
that native knowledge, sincerity, judgment and religion, that the other was
like to be of. As for the place out of the first Epistle of John, the third
Chapter, whereby you would prove, that they only are holy and righteous,
which so work righteousness, that they comprehend all righteousness: If
this be true, then not only Peter and Paul, and the blessed virgin, but also
all the saints of God, are without this working justice, and so not just. But
if this be true righteousness to believe in Christ, who fulfilled all
righteosnesse not for him self but for us: who by faith, communicated the same
righteousness unto us, which is not of us nor cleaving in us, but in him, who
is made Our righteousness is the righteousness of Christ.
our righteousness, then no: only they but also we, do exercise that
righteousness, and walking as the children of God the time that we are here,
fighting against (...), and expecting his glory, we shall be glorified together
with him for ever.

Thus you might see, (if God had opened your eyes) what small cause you and the
rest have had thus to storm, and unjustly to carp against the doctrine of that
excellent man of God Martyn Luther, whose flaunders how you have justified: I
leave it to the judgment of the Church of GOD: and how M. Charke has
dealte, it is set Truth shall pre uail. It is as impossible to pluck the wings
of the wind, that it should not blow, as to stop Gods everlasting truth.
down, and cannot be carried with the prejudice of an adversary, with
blustering and storming, lying and facing, to deface it, but being the truth,
shall clear it self, and stand, when such poor devises and beggarly
shifts shall fall and come to nothing. For the truth being of God, must
needs be true Divinity, against which, though Satan rage, and bestirre
himself never so busily to overthrow: yet the more he sweateth, the greater
glory shall be set upon it, till it be beautified, sined, and cleared from
the corruption of man, and all his (...).

Again, that which is from the Devil, though it come into the world with
strong wings, and as a mighty stream, with great beauty (as he is Falshod,
though it be beautified and have many followers, yet it shall be destroyed.
a very cunning painter) and that which is naught needs greater curiosity to
set it out: That whore is a rose colored whore, and that which is in the
cup, though it be a cup of gold to allure the wicked: though the mouth of
the beast speak great and terrible things, and the whole world be taken with
the hew of it, yet in the end, it shall appear from whence it came, and take
such foil and fall, as truth can give. If the doctrine that M. Luther taught,
had been such black Martyn Luther taught (...)truth of God, because it was
from God, and ouerthrowethe al false doctrine and heresy.
divinity learned from the Devil, (which this blasphemer aduoucheth) it
neither had proceeded from God, could have stood so long, nor have endured
such trial, nor have so overthrown Satan's kingdom, nor weakened the power of
Antichriste, as thanks be to God it has done, and shall do daily more and
more. All heresies that have proceeded from the Devil, and from his
instruments, carry with them a sufficient mark, who was their father. As they
had a beginning, so they have had and shall have an ending: but the truth of
God, which is without beginning, which is not learned from man (as the author
of it) it cannot The truth is everlasting.
perish, because GOD cannot perish, and whatsoever man build upon it which
may perish, yet the foundation shall remain sure.

Therefore, to call this a licentious and carnal doctrine, is to blotte The
(...)no (...)doctrine.
not Luther, but God, seeing it has been proved, according to the truth of
God, that incredulity is the roots of all finne and iniqnitie: that true
christians truly believing in Christ, (howsoever they sin) there canbe no
damnation unto them: that (...)soever the (...)of god belong unto us, and there
is no justification but by the keeping of the^, yet forasmuch as Christ has
fulfilled the^, satisfiyng ye righteousness of his father for us, we are
discharged from that yooke of death and condemnation, so as their power cannot
come near us. As for the other things heaped up in the conclusion, the
premises being confuted, they are also confuted. And therefore this is but a
country Bagpype, whereupon Sir Robert still blows, and as it were, is still
twanging upon one string like a Jesuitical Friar, to delight those that
follow the devils dance to bring them to utter destruction.

As touching that which follows, concerning other absurd doctrines, which
M. Charke thought that Parsons passed over by an hyperbole, that he may not
be found a (...)as he is, he takes upon These absurd doctrins (...)ed
together by (...)out of Luther.
him yet, to (...)many gross absurdities, first generally accusing M. Luther
that of all other writers he has written the most absurdly, Which by
threatening some kindness upon M. Charke having read some of his works, he
says he must needs know. In deed the truth is, that the nearer he was unto
his Friars coule, the more appeared his weakness. But as God drew him further
out from him, and from that popish brood and infection, the clearer and
sincerer was his doctrine.

Luthers writings therefore generally for all, (seeing we are so often Of Luthers
drawn in to speak of them) are not all (as I have said before) of one
birth, nor of like judgment. But this appears plainly, that after God
discovered unto him, that the Pope was Antichrist, he evermore set him self
against him. And if the writings of their side, be laid with his, and measured
by the word of GOD, which ought to be the touchstone of all men's writings,
there shall be no comparison of absurdities, rybauldries, scurrilities,
shameless sclaunders and impudent lies.

The things of impiety, that he notes, which he says are condemned How
the adversaries are wont to (...)our assertions contrary to our true meaning.
by the Church, (which yet is a shameful begging of the question, as though
their Church were the true Church): which he says cutteth the very sinews of
all virtue, which he has stolen out of others, having never read the places
themselves, nor considered the circumstances; they are nothing so, as he
sets them done. For some of the assertions, they are catholic and sound:
others are so wrested, that they are made to speak that, which Luther never
purposed. As for example: When he holds, that the very just man in every good
work does sin, Every just man sins and there ar imperfectio^s in our best
works.
(as he says) mortally: This article is both collected, and also condemned by
his adversaries, who have wrested it unto their purpose.

Luther indeed teaches that the very righteous man does sin in every good
woorkebecause that in every good work that he does, there is imperfection;
and though this doctrine be contrary to the Popes doctrine, who in the
Tridentine council accurseth al them that hold it: yet neither he, nor his
adherents, nor sir Robert Parsons, with The doctrine of the council of Trent.
all his power, shall be able to mayntaine it. Neither is it a cutting of the
sinews of virtue, to draw men so from good works, but an establishing of
them in the righteousness of Christ. We are no right measurers what is well
done, and what is evil done, because there is in us a certain self love, as
long as we live here in this world, which is wont to make great mountains
but molehilles, and molehilles mountains, that is to say, accounts great
vices to be but small things, if a man may so speak; and small faults, it
makes many times virtues: yea Satan abuses this, to shrowde vices under the
names of virtues, and virtues under the names of vices. But the eye of God is
as a flame of fire, as we read in the Apocalipes, from which no imperfection
can lie hid. Besides, God dwells in a light that is inaccessible, so that
we cannot come near unto him. Further, al our actions proceed from our will,
and our appetite; now these were corrupted, and altogether depraved in Adam,
therefore also in us: so that what soever flows out of these corrupt
fountaynes, as it comes from them, they must needs be corrupted.

Again, if our actions were simply pure and good in them selves, they should
be for themselves acceptable to God: But there is nothing that we do but it
needs the patronage of Christ, and for It cutteth not the sinews of virtue,
to draw men from confidence in them selves, to trust in God, neither does it
hinder good works, because we teach, that we are not justified by works.
Christ it is to be accepted: therefore even in our best works there is
sin. Also if our weakness be such as we cannot endure the light of Angels,
which is less then that same inaccessible light of God, how can it be, that
our works in themselves should abide that trial? Esaias says, that our
righteousness, is as a filthy cloute: and the Apostle adds, That we cannot
think a good thought, less desire it, and least of al perform it, being by
nature the children of darkness and of wrath, how therefore should it so
be, that in our good works, there should not be sin and imperfection? And
if Parsons will except, that we were sometimes darkness, but now we are
light in the Apocalypse.
Lord, and that therefore there can be no sin in our good works: Again,
that God woorketh those good actions in us, and therefore, if there be any
fault in them, it is to be imputed unto God, as they blasphemously gather: the
aunsweare is at hand. For the first, that we are in deed light in Christ,
but yet as long as we remain in this vale of misery, we are not such light,
as has shaken off all darkness, those same remnauntes of sin being still
left in us. For the second concerning every good action in it self, there is
no fault in it, as it proceeds from God, and is ordered and governed by the
spirit of God, but as it is ordered and governed of us, so that every good
action, although it be the gift of God, yet because our will, and our powers
have a hand in it, in that respect it is vicious. And thus much concerning this
xxxiiii. and xxxvi. article. Wherein yet, if this Momus, that has received
this at the second hand from others his predecessors, as malicious as him
self, would but have looked back into Luthers answer, he might have been
satisfied, if the truth could have satisfied him. Concerning How a man has
in his power to do evil.
the second, where he charge Luther to say, that man has not in his own
power to do evil, he wresteth the place contrary to Luthers meaning, who
proves, that it is not in man's power to do good. And yet this is the comfort
of al Christians, that neither in men nor devils, there is not any such
freedom to do evil, but they are moderated and governed by the power of God.
For he has the Devil in a chain, and al wicked men, so that they can go no
further, then he shall slacken it, and loose it unto them. Against free will
therefore, he alleged, not only the scriptures, but also the Doctors, first
proving out of the scriptures, and then out of the Doctors, that there is no
free will in man, especially to do good. Without me ye can do nothing. He that
says (...) John. 15.
thing, shuts out al preparatiue works, and moral virtues, to make way to
grace. He that abides not in me as a brauneh, wythereth and is cast out, etc.
S. Augustine says, free will without grace, avails to August. lib. de spiritu
and litera Cap. 4.
nothing but to sin Now, what liberty (says Luther) is this, which can do
nothing but in the contrary part, and the worser? Is this to be free, In resp.
Luth. ad Articulum. 36.
not to be able to do any thing, but to sin? Now, how agree these words with
Parsons accusation? I leave this to the consideration not only of all that
fear God, embracing religion: but even to the Papists themselves that have any
conscience, what a shameless and notable impudency this is in a lying
Jesuit. Concerning the fourth, where heechargeth Luther to Of fighting against
the Turk.
teach, that to fight against the Turk, is to resist God him self; he deals
in this, as in all the rest, having borrowed it from his own brothels, that like
How we fight against God, (...)we strive against his judgments.
flies corrupt the sweetest ointments. For Luther adds, that it is to fight
against God visiting our iniquities by them, which have brought upon us the
hand of the Turk, and al other infidels. He speaks it not simply, as
though Christians, setting themselves against the Turk, and fighting against
him, do therein set them selves against GOD, and fight against him. But he
says, that unless Antichrist be ouerthrown, and brought into order, unless
we forsake our sins, and turn unto God, we strive in vain against him,
being Gods rodd: and not couching The Popes impiety, who under pretense of
waging (...)against the Turk, has kept in his own tyranny and infidelity.
So he did in the time of Henry the 3.
under it, we fight against God: he shows that by our wars, which have
been made, as couers to maintain the Popes Cup, he and his forces have
been mightily increased; and the Pope has established his tyranny by his
often consultations, by his often prouocations to war against the Turk; and
by gyuing out his Bulls and Pardons, he has sucked from all Christendom the
fat and wealth of it, and so has weakened it against the Turk; and hindered
al reformation, when it has pleased God to lighten the hearts of any Princes to
see the truth. And good S. Robert is this to make a path to the Empire of
Infidellitie?

The fifth absurdity also is set down with no less malice then the former.
Concerning the Popes pride in taking upon him to make new articles of our faith,
For whereas Parsons would bear men in hand, that Luther should dislke the
Pope, for holding that the soul is immortal: the truth is, that Luther
disliketh, that he should take upon him beside the scriptures, to make any new
articles of faith, amongst which he reckons this to be one, as though it had
no ground in the scripture, that the soul is immortal, but only rested upon
the Popes authority. So the Pope does also This is commonly set down in all
Popish writers.
in other great matters of our faith: as in the mystery of the holy trinity,
in the proceeding of the holy Ghost: in the (...)of Infants: In all which he
bears us in hand, that we have no scripture, because we have not their very
words set down, though the matters be sufficiently confirmed by it. These and
such like Luther indeed calls (...)of the Romish dounghil. And as for the
last, which he cites (...)of his book, De captiuitate (...) in the title of
baptism, this he has taken (...) How laws are not to be laid upon
Christians. He means not (...), but Canon and spiritual laws (as they call
them) made equal with (...)word.
of railing Staphilus: for in that (...), there are no such words in Luther,
and thereupon I will gage my credit. For, whereas he says, that neither
(...)nor angel on earth, can lay any law upon any Christian, further then he will
him self: whereby he would insinuate the (...)of al politic laws and commonweals by which they stand, the truth is, that Luther speaks of ungodly
laws, brought into the Church by the Pope, and such like, besides the word of
God, superstitious in them selves, and against Christian (...): whereof having
reckoned up some in baptism, at last he comes to this conclusion, and these
are his words: I say therefore, neither the Pope, nor the Bishop, nor any man,
has any right of ordaining or establishing any one syllable over a christian
man, unless it be by his own consent, and what soever is done otherwise, is
done by a tyrannical spirit. Therefore prayers, fastinges, donations, and
whatsoever other things else, the Pope has established in all his decrees,
not so many as wicked, he has ordained them and exacted them by no right at
all; and as often as he does attempt any of these things, so often he sins
against the liberty of the Church, etc. We may therefore here see, the
monstrous malice of these wretches, that thus pinch Luthers works, to bring
him into disgrace with Christian Princes, as though he were a subuerter, and
Whether Luther bodily co^ferred with the devil.
an ouerthrower of al wholesome laws, and good commonweals. Whereas he will not
be answered, but will needs have it so, that Martin Luther had bodilye
conference with the devil, because lying Lindane, and the rest of that Popish
crew having received it by a lying tradition, one from an other do aduouch it:
and because by a certain Prosopopaeia, Luther him self, (in that same book,
De Missa Angulari, translated by Iustus Jonas, (whom he calls Luthers Cook,
(though he were a Doctor of Divinity;) Whether this were so or no, I must
leave it, to the judgment of all that fear God: neither does it any whit
disaduauntage the matter, though Luther had had even such a strong assault,
that the Devil might have made semblaunce, to have appeared unto him in some
shape. For he has not only assaulted many notable and godly men, but also
has in some sort appeared unto them: before our Savior Christ, and even
since to Christ himself, and to others he has appeared sundry times, but
yet he could never vanquishe them. Why Luthers assaults many. Read his
Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Galathias.
therefore should they object this against Luther, who sets out but the
spiritual conflictes that he had with him, which by the grace of God, he
overcame? And therefore always keeping him self fast unto the truth, was
neither possessed nor vanquished of that foul and wicked spirit. It is not
denied, but that Luther, according to his own report, had many a sharp
combatte with the suggestions and tentations of that foul and wicked fiend, as
all the godly have had, have, and shall have to the end of the world. But what
makes this to prove a real and sensible conference together with them? Or how
stands it, that therefore Luthers knowledge in divinity, should be from the
Devil, when being shaken of the Devil, in those false grounds, wherein he
had stood of Popery and Idolatry, he betook him self to the word of God,
and to such a ground, as put Satan to flight: Wherein he found rest, and peace,
and exceeding comfort to his soul, which he has left in his writings, as a
favor of life, unto many that have been likewise afflicted: His comfortable
Commentaries, upon the book of Genesis, upon the Luthers doctrine, not from
Satan, nor from man, but from God.
Psalms, and specially upon those Psalms of degrees, and upon the Epistle to
the Galathians, wherein, as in a myrrour they may see the man's spirit; shall
testific to all posteryties, that that which he learned, he learned not from
the Devil, nor from man, but from God, and his holy and blessed word. And
therefore Parsons, advise thy self well, and take heed, least in speaking
against a man for man, that is, to uphold the kingdom of Antichrist, thou do
not open thy foul mouth against G O D. Though Luther be dead, and man cannot
requite it, ye God will be avenged of it. If malice had not blinded thine
eyes, and hatred sharpened thy tuskes, to strike against the truth, thou
would have been ashamed of the foam that has fallen from thee. Thou Read all the histories that make mention of Pope Martyn Siluester the second, of
Boniface the 8. the 9. of Greg. the 7. 9. 10. the 12. of Heldeb. Iobn Stella.
myghtest have seen, that thine own Popes, not one, but many, have had
familiar acquaintance with the Devil, have had him at their commandment, to
help them to their Popedoms, and to assist them in other their accursed and
abhomynable attemptes, for the confirmation of their false and abominable
relygion. And in truth, I do not only say it, but by the grace of God, will
be ready to prove it, against thee and all the rest of you, that the Devil is
not only the Author of al your religion, the Father of Antichriste, who is
the Pope, and that curssed Antoni. (...).
estate in succession, but also the supporter and maintayner of that kingdom,
by false miracles, strong delusions and woonders, where, Nauclerus.
The Devil the author of the popish religion.
by he would confirm it. What should I speak out of your Legendes,
Festiualles and Stories, of the continual conference, that in a manner all
your Saints have had with the Devil, whom they name almost in every leaf.

I speak nothing of Frauncis, of Dunstone, and Dominick, the wonders Liber
(...).
and life of the one, as in an Alcoran, framed to overthrow al religion, is set
out in that book of Conformities: and the, woonders and miracles John
Capgraue. Lombard. bist.
of the other, set out by John Capgraue, and the last by other Legendes. As for
that thou chargest Luther with pride, for that by a fiction he sets forth
dialogue-wise, in that spiritual conflicte, it makes Luther had no bodily
conference with the Devil, though Dunston had, when he held him by the nose
with his to^ges.
nothing to the purpose: neither does that any whit make for the confirmation
of a sensible conference, that he reports of the death; of Empser and
Oecolampidius, whom, (though in some over great bytternesse) Luther
accountinge them for adversaries, him self having endured so many sharp
assaults, supposed to be overcome by the Devil: yet this makes no more to
prove a bodilye (...), (...)the rest. Finally, that Luther confesses him
self to The godly have many assalts, with that enemy of their salvation.
have (...)a bushel of salt with him, is also from the purpose. For, I am
sure, neither Parsons profession, not his weed, his Medoles, his Agnus Deies,
and such other trumperies can rid him from the like acquaintance with the
Devil. Nay, I say not the like: for he by profession and religion, is the
Deuilles darling by a full resignation The Papists are the deuilles own
darlinges by profession and conversation.
and possession: and therefore eats, drinks, sleeps with him; obeys,
follows and loves him: but those that fear GOD, howsoever Satan lays at
them, rages and stormeth against them, exercising them with many sharp and
fearful conflictes, that he may gain them to damnation, never sheweing him
self more restless and vnpacified with them, then when they most resist him:
yet he never so vanquisheth and overcomes them, that he will be at one, or
have any (...)peace with them.

Concerning Luthers death, which this impure mouth charge to Concerning
Luthers death.
have been a dronken death, and that from a deceitful devil, al which be
lays down by conjecture, is more then villainous, to charge so excellent and
notable a man of GOD with. Therefore, whereas M. Charke deemeth iustlye, that
it is lack of discretion, I pronounce, that it is extreme madness, and more
then impudency in Parsons, and all the pack of Papists, upon the testimony
of such partial witnesses, to John Sleidan, a godly and learned man.
utter any such horrible lies and sclaunders. And as for John (...) credit, he
shall have more credit, being a professor of the Gospel, a man singularly
well learned, and (...)for his gystes, and as appears by the stories he has
written, of greater intelligence, then all the rest of Luthers enemies, that
never could come near him. Against whom, if they would take any exception
because of his religion, they must remember their own rule, that it was in a
matter of fact, whereof all men might be witnesses, wherein, though he would
have deceived them, yet he could not. And howsoever Sir Robert asks the
reason, yet I see not why one John Sleidan a Christian, and an Historiographer,
should not be preferred before all the pack of Papists, being irreligious
Apostates, that have auowed a matter they knew not: who though they lived in
Luthers time, yet lived not with Luther. And though they were Gormaines, yet
could not therefore either know his life or his death. Neither can Fontanus
and Pontanus, though they should have noted some over sightes in Sleidan,
receiving that which they had by intelligence: nor Gasper Genepaeus, who has
dubbed their lies of purpose: nor Bartolomeus Latomus, that dyed as a desperate
These (...)historio graphers partial, because they were deadlye affected
toward the truth.
man, once crack the credit of worthy Sleidan: who, though (as you say) he
have noted so many lies in his history, yet he has not proved any, and if
he had been alive to have answered, he could not have carried it so long in
peace and silence. And as for Gropper, whom in your opinion you term to be
so rare and excellent a man, that commonly called Sleidans book, the book of
lies, his authority ought not much to weigh with us, by your own rule. For,
if John Sleidan were not to be credited (who yet had many writing with him)
because he and Gropper.
they were Protestants, why should we credit you, being all partial Charles
the Emperor.
Papists; And as for Charles the Emperor, who was wont to interrupt the
Reader with saying, there the knave lies, it is but the report of lying
Lindane, and may be as very a lie (for ought we know) as any of the rest. And
as for Guilielmus Mulenaeus, that should refute Sleidans Commentaries: First
we say, that we never yet saw his refutation, so that belyke, though he would
have done it, he could not: or having attempted to do it, durst yet never
publyshe it. Sleidan therefore, though not alone, but having many that did
join with him, though he had been alone, yet being a Christian, a learned
and sincere writer, ought to be credited in this case, and to ouerbeare a
clowd of such false and partial witnesses, as the Papists are, and evermore
have showed them selves to be.

But now forsooth, we shall not want a sound testimony, to strike the matter
dead against Luther, to prove that he died a drunken death, and that is out
of Iustus Jonas being Luthers dear friend and his Cook, and as partial
toward him as Sleidan him self: See here the malice of Satan in this
helhounde Parsons, and such like, from whence he has taken it: For where has
Iustus Jonas, whom he calls else where also Luthers Cook, though he were a
worthy and a notable man, uttered any such word? Indeed he is sometimes
called by a borrowed speech, a third Elias, and that is mentioned in that
story written by those notable learned men, Iustus How Luther was called a
third Elias.
Jonas, Michaell (...), and Johannes Aurifaber. And this was only done in
respect of his great zeal and feruencie of spirit, that he had in defense of
the truth of GOD, and against error: But what Pontacus Burdegalensis, a liing
historiographer.
makes this for the mayntenaunce of that, which he utters, not out of Iustus
Jonas writing: but out of (...)Burdegalensis, with (...)name, that he may
seem for to have some power and authority, he bedaubeth the margent of his
book to dasell the eyes of his reader. You shall not want, says he, a sound
testimony. For I will allege you Iustus Jonas, Luthers dear friend, etc. For
thus Pontacus writes. Martinus Lutherus, quem tertium (...)quidam ausi sunt
vocare: etc. That is, Martin Luther, whom some dare call the third Elias,
going well typpled and (...)to bed, was found dead the next morning, etc.
First we should hear it out of Iustus Jonas; and now there is brought in the
report of Pontacus, the first a learned Iustus Jonas is only named, and then
Pontacus is alleged.
man that has no such words, the other a Popish startvppe, bored through
the ear, whose writings you may judge, not only by this monstrouslye, but
also by many others, received by tradition fom his predecessors, Hosius,
Staphilus, Lyndane, and the rest, as impudente and sclaunderous wretches. And
as true is this report, as the rest, wherewith their predecessors the Scribes
and the Pharisees, have John 7. 8. Mark. 11. Acts. 26.
charged not only Christ and his Apostles, but also these servant of
Christ, that followed him long after. They charged Christ, that he had the
Devil, that he wrought his miracles by Beelzebub, the chief of the Deuilles.
They charged his Apostles with the like, and after them the Christians in the
primative Church with many enormities and detestable factes, whereof yet they
were never guilty, and so yet (...), in A pol. Mertian ex (...). (...)Lacta.
they cease not to spue out their venim, without all color and ground of
truth, against those excellent servants of God, whose shoe (...)they are
not worthy to loose, and al because their crown is reached at, and their
belly is pynched, which yet must down, tugge they never so hard for it. And
hence come all these devises of Satan, being lewd and loud lies, without all
color of probability or conjecture. Hence it is that (...)must needs beethe
son of the devil, that he must dye drunk: that (...), must needs either be
killed by him, or by his own hands: that Peter Martyr must have a familyar:
Martin Bucer must consulte with his Cow and his Calfe: Jewel must The gross
and horrible (...)of the papists devised against Reverend and godly men.
have all his knowledge from his Cat, or from a Wesel, and must dye recanting
his opinions, embracing a popish Cross, with protestation that he sinned
against his own conscience and knowledge, with a thousand such other devises
and fictions. And he that can be the first, to deuisesuch a ground for the^ to
work upon, that they may deface god and his truth; these me^, though they be
the (...)rascals, and landlopers, yt are amongst men: though they be so
branded, yt they deserve no credit amongst honest men, especially amongst godly
me^; yet these they receive and (...)above the skies. And such a one is this
Pontacus, whom he would boarde in steed of Iustus Jonas: Such a one is
Bolsecke, of whom he speaks afterward, Bolseck what he was.
an impure Apostata, and a trouble coast, an envious and malicious wretch, as
afterward shall more plainly be proved. And for the credit of this report
concerning Luthers death. I refer the Reader to that story, written by Iustus
Jonas, and testified by Selius and others, Martyn Luthers death when it was and
where.
that Martyn Luther died in a good age, with great peace and excellent (...)of
great personages, and godly men: who being sick not upon the sudden, but as
he was in his journey toward Islib, at the instant request of the noble
Earls of Mansfielde, departed from Wittenberge the 23. of January, in the
year 1546. The first night going to Bitterfielde, the next day coming to
Haulis about eleven of the clock, he remained there that day, and three days
after in the house of this Iustus Jonas, being a Doctor in Divinity, whom this
sort and the rest, would make to be his cook.

On the twenty eight day after, he departed from Haulis, with his good host
and his three sons (...)him, and (...)over a dangerous flood in a small
(...), by and by afterward he fell so sore ficke, yt every man thought him
in great danger: and thereupon, not only took up the next harborow, but made
such necessary provision as was fit, till he was some what better relieved and
recovered. Afterwhich though he were not fully confirmed, yet he followed yt
matter about which he went: The labors of Luther in his ministry (...)ching,
reading, confuting and confirming were wonderful
he oftentimes preached, and was evermore occupied about the affairs of yt
Church. And for the adua^cement of the kingdom of Christ, his exercises in
study in expou^ding the Scriptures, in writing and in prayer, were wonderful:
All done with wonderful zeal and singular (...). But all this (...), he was
as a crased man, and thereupon was desired by those princes and many others, to
take up his chamber aforehande, that his health might be the better provided
for, but he would not, but thought it a great duty still to be occupied in
things appertaining to his function, (...). in or (...). (...). (...).
And therefore as a prediction of his end, he made a worthy Sermon of death,
and of the joys of the life to come, of the great tentations that every
Christian indureth: and when afterward he waxed sicker and sicker, he was
often found in prayer: he was visited by the Earl Albeis, and received
medicines, such as were appointed for him: being had to his bed, he uttered
these words: The everlasting God be my comfort, for now I go to my bed.
Into thy handas: O Lord I commend my spirit. And whereas this wretch
reports that he should will the^, to pray to God for our Lord and God, and
for his Gospel: it is a foul lie, fit for the mouth of a Papist. For the
story is thus, that when his clothes were done off and he was laid in his
naked bed, he gave each of the^ his hand, and said: Farewell to you all sweet
brethren in the Lord, Luthers prayer.
pray for the congregation, and holy Gospel of God, that they may have
prosperous success, for that wicked council of Trident, and that abominable
Pope, has sought and yet seeks to do them both great harm. What villainy
therefore is this, not only to lie upon a man that is dead, but that the lie
may be credited, to father it upon Iustus Jonas, being reported by Pontacus:
How would this impudent Friar have triumphed against M. Charke, that having
but a little hold in a matter of divorce, for that M. Charke saw not the
latter end of Luthers words, as he did the beginning, and makes yet such
stir about it, if he had had the like advantage, as here he has yielded.
But God and his holy angels, heaven and earth, men and all creatures, must
needs bear witness against such a false witness. If he will say still that
these Reporters are partial: what are his? If these that were present, could
not tell the truth, because they embraced true religion: can Papists tell it
that are absent, embracing superstition? Can this Harlots forehead say, that
any Papist did hear it, howesoeuer they have shamelesly reported it? Or is
there any public seal of the states present, that ever did confirm it? No
no, for the story says, that afterward he fell a sleep, and being awaked,
when (...)was asked how he did, he answered not like a drunken man, but
thus: O my Lord God, how sick am I this hour? Oh M. Ionaes I make no other
account but here in Izlibe where I was both borne and baptized, to lay my
mortal bones. And afterward being desirous to be carried into a stoue,
when they began to comfort him, he still cried out, O Lord into thy hands I
commend my soul, as before, etc: Then going to his bed again, being visited
with Physicians, Noble men and Ladies, and others of all sorts, that did their
best to comfort him with such things as they thought meet, he cried out: O
my Lord God how grievous anguish suffer I now about my heart? I shall now
die: Lord, I thank thee highly: I shall now lay my bones in Izlibe mine own
native City. And when some went about to comfort him again, having now
sweat, etc. Yea (says he) but the sweat it cold, and full of death. I give
over this life, for my pains increase more and more. And further to prove
that he was no drunken man, he made this notable prayer. O my everlasting
father Luthers godly prayer a little before his death.
the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, yea the Lord of all Ghostly
comfort, I render unto thee most high thanks this hour that it has pleased
thine inestimable goodness, to make open unto me a sinner, thy most dearly
beloved son, my Lord Jesus Christ, whom I have now I thank thee, in full
and perfect belief, him have I preached, him have I confessed, him have I
loved and glorified, whom the most wicked Pope, with his cursed cormorants,
do still Ex Melanct. Ex Sleidano and (...)Acts and monuments. fol. 966. 967.
981. 982. etc.
yet darken, disdain, mock, persecute, and blaspheme. I beeseeche thee most
dear Lord Jesus Christ, mercifully to receive my soul. O my heavenly
father, though I now leave this mortal body, and am taken away from this
life, yet do I certainly know, that I shall evermore dwell with thee, and
that none shall Abbas V sperg. Casp. (...).
be able to withholde me from thy gracious hands. Then he rehearsed sundry
comfortable sentences, taken out of the scriptures, to confirm himself in the
hope of that glory. And then receiving the quantity of a sponefull of a
medecin that was ministered unto him, having (...)again repeated those words,
Lord and father into thy hands (...)commend my spirit, etc. He lay still
and quiet, and after a good pause being asked, whether he would persevere in
that doctrine, which he had taught: he answered with Luther con stant in
his doctrine.
great courage and stomach, yea, and so turning upon his right side, after
that spoke not. Thus slept this sweet Luther in the Lord, whom these
monsters did persecute a live, and now like mad dogs do bite upon being dead.

As for that which he adds further, concerning Protestants dissentions, I
have touched it before, and will not enter into it again. It is confessed, Our
differences.
there are some differences amongst us, because we are not all of equal
birth, growth, judgment, and knowledge. But our differences are not in matters
of substance, or such as do break the fou^datio^, upon which Colloquium Mar
purg. in 1529. where Luther and Zwinglius were present, and agreed upon all the
chief points of religion.
if any man stand not, he is not with us but against us. And though Luthers
scholars have grown to greater heat, and less modesty, then was in that
singular instrument of God, yea and to some opinions of more fearful
consequence: yet we hope, if they be Christ's, the Lord shall reueile unto
them also his glorious truth in her excellent perfection and beauty. And as
for Papists dissentions, and contrarieties, they are so many and so weighty,
all besides the foundation, as they may be ashamed, once to object any such
thing against us, but of this enough.

Now concerning the life of that notable and excellent man of God Caluins life.
M. John Calvin, whose laborious and painful works full of sincerity and
wonderful judgment, being so many, and so well written, might The works of
Calvin many, and sincere. Read their Catalogue in the end of his life written
by Beza, set before his Commentaries upon Joshua.
not only seem to have taken up a whole man, but even to have been done by
many men: although I say not only these works, but also his other painful
labors in his ministry, might give a sufficient resemblance to all
posterities, to his friends and veriest enemies, what manner of man he was:
yet not withstanding does this Cerberus, for hatred of the truth, bark also at
the credit of this most reverent and excellent man.

And although (as I have noted before) they that are truly taught of God, are
not wont to measure the truth by men, because the best men have their faults
and imperfections, yea the holiest and best that ever were, that the truth
might stand alone, and not be regarded in respect of men's persons: yet this
doggishe generation whose lives and very virtues not withstanding, are the very
sinckes and infections of the world: that they may deface the Gospel, they
run to men's persons, and like flesh flies they lie still upon their soars.
Wherein yet their stinging and biting, should nothing so much grieve us if they
did not first also wound us themselves, that they might have matter and
corruption to suck upon, though not from us, yet from their own filthe, to fat
themselves withal.

Thus whereas they should be (...)to God for the wonderful graces that he
gives unto his Saints for the edifiyng of his Church, The gifts of God should
be praised in his servants.
they envy them, they bark at the light, because they love darkness more
then light. For if this were not so, what cause have they, thus to rave against
a very Gods man, the most singular and rare instrument, that God has raised up
in our time. Wherein yet their fault were the The nature of the wicked.
less, if they had any color, or probability by any reasonable conjecture,
or warra^ted testimony against him. For of all others, who is this Bolsecke
whom Parsons thus highly commends? Whom as if he had known, he affirms
to have lived with John Calvin both in Bolsecks description set out by
Parsons, to the end his testimony might be (...).
Geneua, Berna, and Lausanna, thirty years agone, whom he dubbeth a Doctor
of Physic, and calls him by a reverent name, as if he were some great
personage, skillful and of experience, such a one, as should have professed
and practiced Physic, even in Caluines time, whose book of Caluines life was
written in the year of our Lord 1577. and dedicated to Monsieur Epynack,
Archbishop forsorth, and Earl To conclude, this is granted, and stands fast
fixed betwixt us: that it is not lawful to make God, a companion of the fault
or blame in men's sins: neither that the name of sin does by any means
agree to him. And yet this lets not, that, that exercifing the power of his
hand, by a certain wonderful and incomprehensible judgment, thorugh Satan
and the reprobate, as it were the organes of his wrath, he should sometimes
instruct the faithful to patience, and sometimes inflicte, such punishments
upon the wicked as they deserve. But this profane (...)cries out, that God is
wrapped in this guiltines, when we make his providence the arbitrer of all
things: To conclude, taking away al dif, ference betwixt the secreete removed
cause, and those near causes, he suffers not those adversities that were
laid upon Job, to be counted the work of GOD, unless he also be made
guilty together with the Devil, and those theeuish Chaldeans and Sabeans:
Wherefore as our brotherly conjunction requires, we beseech you think not
much to maintain and unburden by your subscription the doctrine of Christ,
laden and oppressed with the sacriledges of a vile and naughty man: which
because we hope you will willingly do, and of your own accord, it is in
vain with any careful and diligent praires to entreat you. We again, as
our help shall be needful for you, you shall find us evermore ready to
every brotherly duty. Fare you well dear and reverend brethren. The Lord
govern you by his spirit, and bless al your labors, and maintain and
defend your Church.

At Geneua.

If Parsons will say, that M. Calvin might be partial, yet he cannot take
any just exception against the whole Senate, and against the other Ministers
that wrote, as they were persuaded, and as the truth was, against this
wretched and vile man, who being thus corrupt in the beeginning (when he would
seem, having now cast off his coule, to be in exile for the Gospel, and yet
standing against it) could not give any great hope of embracing it
afterward. He was now fled from his vow, which is the greatest sacrilege
that can be amongst Papists, and therefore deserves no credit among them.
And toward us, you see what credit he deserves. For though he had cast off
his cowle, yet he had not cast off his cowlish superstition. In this matter, he
is, a party, provoked, and provoking others, and therefore his testimony is as
the testimony of a man boared through the ear, neither to be credited of one
or other: who, although he make never so earnest protestation, is no more to
be credited in that, then in the other things, for which you (...)him.

Neither could he write the life of Calvin, without suspicion and reproof
both of Caluines friends, and Caluines enemies. Of his friends, who were the
Churches, from whom he both dissented and was condemned. Of you, from whom he
was now departed, and as you accounted beecame an horrible Apostatate. But
this is your fashion, even as common shifting mates are wont to do, to auowe
that they are set, at so much and so much in the Queens books, that they
may be counted as freeholders, and sufficientsuerties, so do you: you would
never use else to bring in every rife raffe, whom you can get, in any cause to
speak any thing against us, whether it be with you or against you: because
your selves are heretics, you join with all heretics against Christ and his
truth. So as you have borrowed some sclaunders from some such knaves and
(...), as were notorious and troublesome to the whole world, and stincke
almost in the nostrelles of al: such as were Baldwine Blandrat, Heshusius,
Fickler, Frarin, and the like: so when you have no author to follow, rather
then you will lack to charge us, you will devise things that were never said
or done, as this impure Apostate has done, in writing so long after the death
of Calvin, so many horrible and palpable lies of him, that all the world can
witness to be false and shameless. And as that Epistle sent to the Churches
of Heluetia, did witness, what the whole Church thought of him, so there was
another Letter written to the Ministers of Basyll, that gives sufficient
testimony of him: which because also it makes for the more clearing of the
matter, and contains many profitable things against Bolseckes false
doctrine, I will not think it much to (...)it down.

Calvin to the Ministers of Basil: grace be with you, and peace from God our
father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ, most dearly beloved and honorable
(...).

Although concerning the question propounded unto you, you have given a less,
full and clear answer, then peradventure was meet, and in good sooth
otherwise then our hope and desire was: yet notwithstanding we embraced with
thankeful hearts, that same forward and gentle readiness of yours, to have
helped us. And further we (...)nothing to be contained therein but godly and
sound. I would to God such a confession might have been obtained of
Bolsecke, for then we should have had no cause to have troubled you. But that
which we have testified of him, that he is a man of more then a brazen
forehead, this proves it true: for that he falsely lies, to have subscribed
to your judgment. Neither was he ashamed before our Senate to boaste of the
same. But being confounded through a strong confutation, which was at hand,
he was at length quite dumb. Further, whether he hold any thing near your
doctrine, there is no hard judgment. Let not our Letters and testimony be
credited. Our Senate has sent you his aunsweres written out of our public
acts, in which you shall find word for word, that our faith hangs not of
our election: also that election is of faith: also that no man remains in his
blindness, by reason of the corruption of his nature: because all men are
rightly enlightened of God: and that God is reproched: if any man shall say that
God has left some in their blindness, because it seemed good unto him.
Also, that al reasonable creatures are drawn of God, or that any is forsaken of
God from the beginning, but only he, who has wrestled against God
oftentimes. Also, that a fleshie heart is made of a (...)of stone, is nothing
else, but yt a heart, capable of understanding is given unto him. And that this
grace is general, also yt these rather the^ they are predestinate to salvation.
When that place was objected unto him, out Ephe. 1. (...).
of the first Chap. of the Ephe. he answers after his woonted desperate
impude^cie, that there yt apstole entreated not of the common salvation of the
godly: but that Paul with his companions, was to be elected into the office of
the Apostleship. When it was again excepted of us, that the^ the Apostles
only were partakers of the free adoption, were only reconciled to GOD, and
only assured of the forgiveness of their sins, he was so far from
being moved, that with a doggish laughter, he took those lyghteninges unto
him. Confer these frantique dreams with your judgment: and what is more
unlike? Far be it from us, that we should say, that you maintain his
wicked errors: from which, that you are most far, your Epistle plainly
shows. Yea, when that same deceauer attempted to wind you in with him,
having manysested his deceit, we mightilye brydled his leawdenes. Of which
thing we have our Senate a most plentiful witness: And when he was banyshed,
it was publiquelye pronounced out of a solemn writing, that he had obstinately
despised the judgments of the Churches, to which he said, he would have
stood. Let Falesius write, that he is not a man altogether so (...), and in
favor of an unknown knave let him pawn his credit, to be mocked for his
labor. For it will shortly appear, to a greater hurt of the Church then we
would, what an hurtful pestilence he was. For there are many other fit
witnesses, that he nourishes within his breast, many other monstrous errors.
And now when he openly resisted our faith, by a deceitful counterfeiting of
consent, he went about to get letters from you, under color whereof, he
might the eafilier abuse the rude and simple. But you, as it became brethren,
and friendly toward us, differred what to answer, until you were certified
of the whole matter from us: and as was woorthye your wisdom, skilfully and
rightfully you suffered not your selves to be circumuented by the craft of a
perfidious and wicked knave. So that as your moderation deserved not a common
praise: so we hope you shall feel the fruit of it. And for this your
gentleness used toward us, we give you great thanks. Fare you well worthy
men, and brethren beloved of us from our heart. The Lord preserve and bless
you together with your Church. This month of January. 1552.

By these testimonies it appears plainly, what this Bolsecke was, whom
Parsons brings in, as a witness against Calvin, and hears him to speak,
and helps him (...), though his work of Caluines life forsooth, were
translated and miss carried in the carriage: A pitiful loss: which yet that
it may be recovered, Parsons has stuffed this book, with a brief
recapitulation of the most odious matter, for the better discharge of his
credit with M. Charke. But a man may see that Birds of a fether, will
together: and if Parsons had been one, that had set either by credit, or
honesty, he would have been loath, to have bin seen so familiar, and so
conuersaunt with such an honest moome: of whom he has learned such notable
lies. For, admit that he knew Calvin, as many others did: is it like that
fuch a knave, having had intelligence of such horrible faults, as he
aduoucheth to have been in Calvin, that he would not then, when he was
nearest to him, when he was thus provoked, was heard, and might have been
heard in that Ecclesiastical Senate: when for an Heretic and trouble coaste
he was afterward banished out of Geneua, is it like (I say) that he would
have spared then to have uttered it, or if he did for fear, or for other
respects not then utter it, was it notlike, when he came afterward to Berna
where he boasted of favor, or to Lausanna, from whence also he was of Lions,
which in the very forefront of his book, carries so sacred a protestation,
that he neither wrote nor spoke any one thing for anger, envy, evil will,
against the truth and his own conscience. Are not here think you goodly
colors to gain credit, to so wicked and infamous a sclaunder? For the first,
that you may know this cub, as the Lion by the clawe: I will set forth what
this Bolsecke was, that all Christian Readers may in the fear of God judge, of
what credit such a one deserves to be amongst those that fear God, then
afterward I will examine every circumstance of his evidence, and compare
things so together, as I trust, it shall evidently appear to all that will
not wilfully be blinded, that this Bolsecke is not only a notorius roge and a
runnagate, but those men, at whom he barketh, are worthy and excellent men:
reverend for their gifts whilst they were a live, and many being now dead in
the Lord, of a blessed and everlasting memory. First therefore, that you may
see, what hold the Papists take of every riffe raffe that may but begin a
matter for them, and what a shameless witness this is, whom they bring in, as
if he were an honest man, you must first understand, that this Bolsecke was a
friar Carmelite, who suddenly leaped Bolseck a (...)Carmelite.
from the profession of popish divinity, to practice of physic, wherein yet
though he had not had that bringing up, that should have made him fit for so
necessary a science, yet he was bold and impudent, and for the better
compassing of estimation and credit, (which such kind of spirits ever hunt
after) he dispatched himself from Paris out of his cloister to the Church of
Geneua: where, the discipline of Christ being even through some difficulties
by the worthy labors of M. Calvin, recovered, brought in, and fully settled
in these Churches together (...)in vita (...).
with sound doctrine: which then had chased out the darkness of popery from
their public assemblies, (though there were many papists amongst them:)
This Bolsecke was quickly (...)out what he was amongst them. For he
persuaded himself, as if he had been still in a cloister, and therefore knew
not how to bear himself in a reformed Church. And this was the cause that
certain naughty and evil disposed persons, with whom this Bolsecke joined
(having now in the beginning begun to bark against that comfortable doctrine
of Gods everlasting predestination and providence: as though M. Calvin and
others, had made God the author of sin, and culpable of their condemnation)
did so much then trouble that church. This Bolseck therefore having deceived the
Duchess of Ferraria, who in the beginning had conceived some good opinion of him
favoring in some points the Gospel, came to Geneua (...)the year, 1551. where
in deed, though he took upon him to be a Phisitio^ (who^ Parsons this Jesuit
(...)out with all his titles) yet he was never of any (...)amongst those
learned Physicians that were there. On a time, one of the ministers in the
assembly, and as they call it a congregation, propou^ding upon that text of S.
John: He that is of god, hears the words of God, ye therefore hear the^ not,
because you are not of God, etc. did by occasion inuay against free wll, and
that same foresight of works, which the papists much speak of, proving that
same decree of Gods everlasting predestination, to be certain, etc, This
Bolseck being present, and M. Calvin (as he thought (...)) he was so bold and
impudent, that he could not any longer refrain, but burst out openly, to the
disturbance of that congregation, and with many seditious, vile, and
opprobrious words, set himself against yt excellent doctrine: whereupon M.
Calvin being now M. Calvin upon the (...)co^futeth Bolseck out of the scrip
(...), and out of (...). Augustine.
come thither, or ever he had finished: he did so notably confute him, and yt
eue^ upon yt sudden, by many notable arguments and places, especially out of S.
Aug. having not thought of any such matter before, as the calfe had nothing to
reply or say against it: and as yt story says: If ever Call. showed what a
man he was, he did it at that time. There was at that time one of the
Magistrates present, who presently committed him to prison: but the matter being
ha^deled by many disputatio^s, in the Ecclesiastical senate, and yt Senate of
the Heluetia^s having their opinion also asked, concerning yt matter, he was at
length condemned as a mere Pelagia^, and banished out of Ge neua, yt 23. of
Dece^ber 1552. From thence he departed to the territories of the Lords of
Berne, where also he behaved himself in such sort, that he was twice or thrice
banished out of their dominions, as an impure and seditious heretic, till at
the last, seeing some hope of peace in the churches (...)inconstant and a (...).
of France, he labored the^ to enter into the ministry, and at a Synod in
Orlea^s kept there in the year 1562. he acknowledged his fault, and feigned an
earnest and hearty repe^ta^ce, in such sort, yt M. Beza and sundry others
conceived some good hope of him. But because he had been so notoriously infamous,
they would not admit him without some notable satisfaction to the (...)in vita
(...). Call. de (...)Apostata (...).
church, and especially to the church of Geneua, which he had so wickedly and
wretchedly infamed. And although he fained himself ready to perform all this, yet
when he saw, that that which he sought for, could not be obtained, but with
such hard conditions, and that the peace of the Churches in France where he
would have bin employed, fell not out to be such, and so great as he looked for:
this dog returned to his vomit again, and joined with the enemies of the
gospel, his wife in the mean time playing the (...), and prostituting her
self to every (...), and he playing the (...) In the (...)down in
(...)before Joshua. (...) 1574. (...) 80.
knave in sclandering and backbiting the religion of Jesus Christ, and the true
professors of it. This is that goodly witness that Parsons brings forth in a
fox furd gown, like some knight of the post against that bles sed man of
god, of blessed memory, I. Calvin: taking upon him, to broch unto the world,
such shameless sclanders and lies, as this Bolseck has devised and set down:
first, being as you have hard a Friar, then an impure knave, not instructed in
the sound doctrine of salvation: one that was a seditious wretch, and having
carried the shame of so just a reprehensio^ by M. Calvin would not digest it,
but envied and hated to the death that worthy man, (whose shoe latchets he was
not worthy to unloose) al his life after: of whom not only M. Calvin, but also
the churches gave this testimony, and have set it down to remain to al
posterities: that he was a deceiuer, and of The whole Church of Geneua, to them
(...). (...)sters of (...). Fol. (...). 140.
the number of those runnagate Physicians, that had gotten so much impudency,
as they were fit for any mischief. This Bolseck (say they) about an 8. months
since, in a publik asse^bly of our church, went about to over throw the doctrine
of the free and undeserved election of God, which we teach together with you
out of the word of god. But the^ the frowardnes and stubbornnes of the man,
with as much moderation as might be, was assuaged: yet afterward he ceased not
in all places where he came, to make (...)noise, to the end he might shake from
the simple, this chief head of their faith. At length, with open mouth he
vomited forth his poison. For when, after our accustomed manner, one of our
brethren should expound that same place of John, where Christ pronounces,
that they are not of God, which hear not his word, and had said, that as many
as are not regenerated by the spirit of god, resist God stubbornly to the end:
because that gift of obedience, which god vouchsafes his elect, is a peculiar
gift: This knave started up and said, that it was a false and wicked opinion,
spru^g up of late in our time, whereof Laure^ce Valla was the author, to wit,
that the will of god was the cause of all things. And that by this means, the
sins of al me^, and the blame of al evils was laid upon God, and that there was
fained upon him a certain (...), eue^ such as Poets dreamed to be in their God
Jupiter. Afterward he descended to another point, to wit, that me^ do not
obtain salvation, because they are elected, but they are therefore elected,
because they believe: nor yt any man is reprobat by gods decree, but only those
that deprive themselves of that common election. In yt ha^dling of this
question, he inuaied against us with many bitter and shameless slanders. The
governor of the city being there, and hearing the matter, commit. ted him to
prison, especially because he had seditiously exhorted the people, not to
suffer themselves to be deceived. Now the knowledge of the (...)is brought to
the Senate, where he goes on with no less obstinacy and impudency, then he
was wont to maintain it. In the mean season, when he boasted, that he had
many ministers in other churches that were of his side, we desired of the
Senate, that it should not pronounce any thing of the sum of the whole,
before the answer of your Church being obtained, it might know how shamelesly
the knave did abuse the title of your suffrage or consent. He in the beginning
being (...)uercome with shame, would not seem utterly to refuse the judgment
of the Churches: But he cauilled, that you might seem worthily to be
suspected, for the overmuch familiarity you had with our brother Calvin. The
Senate for all this, as we had requested, thought meet that you should be
consulted withal. And this also drew it on, because he had wound in, your
church. For co^demning Zwinglius above all others, he lied, that Bullinger was
of the same opinion with him. Also, he has (...)ly taken occasion of
contention amongst the ministers of the territory of Berne. But our desire is,
that our church may be so purged of this plague, as that being chased from
thence, it hurt not our neighbors. And yet notwithstanding it is our parts,
and very material for the maintenance of publik peace, that the doctrine which
we profess, be approved by your consent: although there be no cause, that we
should entreat your faith with many words. The institution of our brother Calvin
is not unknown un to you, which this fellow especially has taken upon him to
resist. It were not to the purpose to set forth, how reuere^tly and soberly,
he there entreats of the secret judgments of God: because the book is a
sufficient witness in it self. Neither do we teach any thing here, unless it be
drawn from the word of God, and is received also in your church, ever since
the light of the Gospel was received. It is fit enough that we are justified by
faith: but in this appears the immovable mercy of god, when we understand
faith to be the fruit of our free and undeserved adoption, and our adoption to
flow from the everlasting election of god. Now this deceiuer, when he faigneth
election to ha^g of faith, he faineth yt faith it self does no less arise of
yt proper motion of man, the^ of yt heavenly inspiratio^. Again, it is without
all controversy, yt when men perish, it is to be imputed to their own
malice. But in the reprobate, who^ god passes over and forsakes as (...)thie
by his secret counsel, it shows a worthy instruction of humility. Now
this Hierom Bolseck grants nothing to be done (...)of god, unless the
reason of it may be set before his eyes. publicly banished, that he would
not have blabbed it forth? or, if ever he learned it, he must have learned it
then, and there, or else afterward devise it, when he was returned to that
stye of Hogs, where there is store of such filthynesse, to delighte such
beasts withal. Again, why was it so many years, after Caluins death, he
having now slepte in peace, in such honor and fame amongste all the Churches
of GOD? so concealed, that this soul bird was not hatched? Surely the reason
is, because it was devised, that being the further off, and now brought in
cunninglye, to be avenged upon a dead man, it might be currande amongst
Papists, amongst whom nothing is so usual, as lying and sclaundering. As
for Bolsecke his learning, credit, wisdom, and honesty, Parsons in praising
them, shows his partial judgment: one Mule does (...)another in it. For,
for the proof of the first: to wit of learning, there is no other proof,
but this only book of Caluins life, which being a barn of so long a
birth, and a work of so many years, uttered so out of season, it carries
nothing in the forheade, Anthony Cathaline against whom Calvin wrote, being a
companion of his, was such a scholar, that wrote in the end of an Epistle,
Perme (...).
but barbarous ignorance and scurrilitie. And if he be of credit, wisdom,
or honesty, let Parsons also be wise and honest. As for the place of his
living, I suppose, Parsons knows not where Bolsecke lives, whether in heaven
or in hell. I have heard credibly reported, that for the time he lived
((...)now I hear he is dead) he lived like a fugitive, neither in credit
nor estimation, either with Protestant or Papiste: although I cannot think,
but the Papists had cause to make some accounte of him, that having ground
forth such a deal of stuff for them, against Calvin and Beza, and being
then of a Friar become a priest amongst them, (as they say he was) they
should for his good seruicehaue set some greater price upon him, and rewarded
him, either to have made him a Cardinal, or at the least some Jesuit. Thus
much concerning Bolseckes, and his protestation, till we come afterward to
speak of M. Beza.

Where he says, that John Calvin was borne at Noion in (...), Where (...)
was borne.
the year 1509. he says true, because he learned it of them, that set
it down before him, that better knew it, then he could tell them: but in
that he says, that he was in his youth a horrible blasphemer of GOD: we
ask him how he knew it? The place of his birth he knew by information, but
Caluines (...)he could not know: because it was not set down in any
story, nor given him to understand by any sincere information. And although
it had not been much to the purpose, nor ought not to way against the truth,
if (...)youth, ignorance, and blindness he had showed him self such a
one! yet they that knew his parentage, his friends, and the course of his
youth, being not partial, have testified, that he was towardly, his lyberal
bringing up in knowledge, and his (...)borne of good parentage, and well
brought up. Calvin no blasphemer.
profiting in it, that made him a man of so worthy gifts, plainly confirming
it. And if he had been such an execrable blasphemer in his youth, is it
likelye, that he either did, or could so apply his book, as to come to such
perfection even in his youth, at the age of 24. years, and somewhat under, to
have written those notable commentaries upon (...)de Clementia? Again, when
he says, that he became at length a Priest by shifts, and had the cure of
a certain Chapel in Calvin under the age of 24. writes those notable books
of Clemency (...)extaunt
Noton: It is true, that by his fathers procurement, being a man of good
reputation, he had a prebende in the Cathedral Church of Noion, but that he
ever came by it, by any shfting means, it is the sclaunder of an impudent
Friar. And if he had come unto it by any, after that sort, yet this ought not
much to prejudice the truth, which then he neither knew nor professed:
seeing the Popish Church makes no conscience of simony, and shifting means,
to get fat By shopprickes and benefices, the most of their Popes buying and
selling their Popedomes In the papacy nothing but shifting, chopping and
changing, (...)and selling. Read their own stories.
and benefices, as in a common market. But yet, that he was a priest, though
he had a cure, and preached certain Sermons to the people, it is uncertain,
both because his years had not fitted him to that highest place in their
Antichristian kingdom, by their own Canons, who might not be a priest
under the age of xxx: and also because he continued not long in it, his father
changing his mind, in (...)to set him to the study of the Law, and M.
Calvin (...)having received some light of the truth, by means of his (...)
Calvin by all (...).
M. Peter Oliuentanus, that made him to withdraw from that abomination.

As for being taken and convicted in that horrible sin of Sodomie, if there
were any such thing, it was a fruit not of the Gospel, but of Poperye,
amongst whom, holy Matrimony being detested and shunned, as vncleaene and
filthy in their Popish unction, what other fruits No (...).
could it yield, but Sodometrie, Buggerie, Whoredom, and all other kind of
filthiness? but that it was unlikely, that Calvin was ever teynted with any
such crime: First, we must think, that if there had been any such conviction
or condemnation, it would have (...)set down upon record: Besides, who ever
heard, that the Papists retained any such law in France for that sin,
having so many Abbeyes, Nunneries, and religious houses, as they call them, but
most irreligious, where they made no account of that sin, but always
accounted it as a sport: their Popes having dispensed with it, in some
Countries, and some of their Cardinals having written books in the praise of
it. And if he had been condemned to have been burnte alive, why Pope Sixtus,
(...)is alleged before, and sundry (...).
did not this villain, and wretched liar, set down the manner of process,
the form of pardon that was granted, and she we the like practice of any
burnte in the shoulder, for the like offense. The like is to be said of
changing his name, to make him agree with Luther, which impudentlye he
says, the whole City did testify to Bertilier, Secretary of the council
of Geneua, under the hand of a public and sworn Notarie, the same being
extaunt and to be seen, etc. For I ask, what man of credit did ever see
any such testimony? If it were a public instrument, it was not so easily
concealed?

Again, who was this Bertilier? Surely a knave, one of Bolsecks companions,
Bertilier an ungodly man, one of (...)faction.
and of Seruetus faction, that troubled the Church, that having stood
excommunicate of the Church a long time, striued against the discipline of the
Church, to be admitted to the Lords Supper: which Calvin dutifullye
resisting, he hated him for it to the death. Now, if Bertilier, first a
secretary, and afterward a deviser, and underminer of the Church, have
feigned some such thing, what credit can it deserve amongst the godly? M.
Calvin witnesses of him, in an Epistle to M. Bullinger; that being thrust
from the Lords Table, Fol. 127. (...)
for his unbridled lusts, and manifold wickednesses, till he should show
amendment, he despising the judgment of the Church, would needs
notwithstanding be admitted, and when openly through his contumacie, he
would have overthrown the right of the Consistory, he had obtained of the
Senate that which was necessary for me to deny.

Furthermore, because the brazen forhead of the man was known unto me, and the
wicked of purpose had set him against me, that either he might overcome me with
his wayward stubbornness, or stir up a tumulte, I admonished the Senate,
what I would do. But the worser faction prevailed, so that I could not
obtain any equity, etc. Read that whole Epistle, and also another written
to Master Virette, and the Churches where he was, and to the Churches of
Tygurine likewise: whereby it may appear what this Bertilier was, an ungodly
and factious man, that so troubled the Church, as his name is registered to all
posterities: and therefore M. Calvin having had such a do with him, he is
unmeet to be admitted into any court for a witness against him. And shall
we think that Bartilier, having such a notable testimony, to stayne
Caluines youth, lying by him, that in all these stirs, he would not have
brought out it? and that it would not have been more notorious then it was?
But this is the malice of that pestilent generation, when they cannot be
avenged of the truth, then will they devise against the Professors, what
soever the Devil can suggeste unto them. And therefore this being a (...),
laid upon that worthy man, bellowed forth by those Bulls of Basan, what are
they else, but such marks and printes, as Paul did bear in his body for
the Gospel of Christ? M. (...) (...). See it answered in the preface
beSaunders reasons.


For if Calvin a Priest, as Bolsecke says, had now been (...)for
Sodometrie, in detestation of that vice, contrary to the whole practice of the
Romish Church, that like and allow that vice but to well, it being so common
in their own brood? then M. Whitakers had made the comparison unequal: But
if Calvin now, making profession of the Gospel of Christ be sclaundered by
a sort of villains and knaves, not for Sodometrie, but for Christianity,
because GOD vouchsafed in mercy, to draw him out of that sincke of
abominations, and he ran not to the same ryotte with the rest of that
rank and These things areset down in (...)story.
Romish generation, does he not now bear the marks of Christ? for
Christ's sake, and for the Gospel, which is the matter yt they have, do, and
shall persecute, and notthe evil that is in men, nor their sins, wherein all
the world knows they were deeper (...), then that they were able to
beplucked out: I will not speak now of the childre^s heads found in pondes,
(...)of the Popes despensation for Sodometrie, in the hotteste months of the
year, nor of those Sodometries, that were too (...)in other countries, in all
their religious houses: But I will come nearer home into our own country:
where, when it pleased God, in mercy, to visit this Land with his truth, and
to make a way for his Gospel, and those dens were no we to be searched into,
and to be dissolved upon examination and due trial, of each manns
conversation that lived in them, there was no house found, wherein that
abominable (...)was notfound. Amongst the rest, these are set down in a book
that (...) When K. Henry caused the religious houses to be visited anno 1538.
D. Lee. D. (...). D. Bedel. and others being (...) Thomas (...) being the
public notarie.
offered to the king, called the Breuiarie of those that were found in the
Abbeies, Brotherhoods, and Colleges, etc. In the Abbey of Battle of Chichester
diocese, these Sodomiters were found: John Abbot, Richard Salchurst, Thomas
Cutbert, William March, John Hasting, (...)Champion, Clement Westfield, John
Cross, Thomas Cranebrooke, Thomas Basil, John Hamfield, John Hierome, Clement
(...), Richard Touie, and John Augustine. Incontinent Thomas Lyuet, with one
married woman, and another unmarried, Thomas Cranbrooke incontinent with the
same women and many others, etc. In the Cathedral Church of Canturburie,
amongst the Monks of Benedicts: Sodomits, Richard Godmer sham, William
Lichfielde, Christopher James, John Goldmyston, Nicholas Clement, William
Caunston, John Ambrose, Thomas Farleigh, and Thomas Morton, of incontinent,
there were found the foresaid Christopher, with three married women, and
(...)las Clement with one unmarried.

In the Monastarie of Saint Augustine, (not the Doctor, but of him, whom the
papists call the Apostle of England) in the same City of Canturburie, there
were found these incontinent ones: John Abbot, with (...)
one only, John Langdon, with two, Richard Compton with one, William
Rainsfoorth with one, William Godmerston with two, David Frankes with one,
Laurence Goldston with one, William Holling (...)with one, William Milto^ with
one, John Shrousburie with one, and Thomas Baram a Sodomit. In the Abbey of
Bath amongst many other, Richard Lyncombe, was found to keep seven whoores,
four unmarried, and three married, and one William Beushon, besides that he
kept (...)whores, was also found an horrible Sodomite, using diverse kinds of
that All these ditches came srom that (...)of (...), where that sin was not
accounted of.
sin. In Monkenfarleg, of the Diocese of Salisburie, the Prsor of the house
had niene whores, for his own share, and the house many (...)that belonged
unto them. Richard the Prior of Maiden Bradley, had (...)whores, and six
bastardes, William the Abbot of Bristow Abbey, (...)four, three (...)and one
married, Thomas the Abbot of Abingdon, beside his natural sister, by whom he
had two children, he had three other whores, and this was a father and captain
of many Sodomites. I speak not of the Abbey of Reading, of Glasenburie, of
Chertsey, of Bury, Shulbrede, and many others, where such honest women had
their harborowe, and boys were kept for the nonce to serve (...)of this
(...)generation. And as for the Colleges of Priests, they were worse, if
worse might be, altogether given to such shifts, as all (...)knew, that
knew those (...), and the whole world must needs speak of them, and yet
they were more borne with, and had greater favor amongst the wicked, then
they that in the fear of God, use that lawful remedy, that God has
sanctified and appointed: nay they thought it good policy not to stir too
much with their Priests, that kept whores every where, least they should
cause them to run from them to sectaries (as they called them) and so leave
their desolate Churches desolate.

Concerning that he charge him, that after a little wandering in (...),
assisted with some alms of the Duchess of Ferara, that he returned back to
Basil, Strausburge and Lausanna, and began to play the minister and preacher:
And that thence he came to Geneua, and there joined with two seditious
ministers, Farrel and Carold, and began by a thousand devises to work great
tumultes, and innoxations in the City: What other answer should I give to so
impudent an accusation: but to tell this lying Parsons for Bolsecke, who I
hear is now dead, that he lies in his throat, of a reverend and notable
man. For it is plain, that after he withdrewe himself from the popish
service, he did some good time continue his study at the (...)Law at (...).
de (...).
Orleance, where M. Peter (...)Estoille did read, profiting so in it, that he
might have proceeded Doctor in that faculty gratis, without any manner of
those charges, that are wont to be laid upon it. Afterward he went to the
university of Bourges, by reason of that famous Lawyer Andrewe Alciate, and
heard him: practicing in (...)under his first master, when he was president
of the Court of Parliament in Paris, being both of credit and countenance, and
studying therewithal (...)only the tongues, but also (as he could)
Divinity, and after the death of his father, by that occasion returning to
Noyon: he was, whilst he was yet not thoroughly delivered from that
blindness, sent to Paris, to be preferred in the Court upon occasion of a
sedition-and if God had not drawn him to a work, whereunto he was sanctified
from his mothers womb, for the overthrow of the kingdom of Satan, he had not
been of meanest place and condition amongst themselves. But God had showed
mercy upon him, and those great troubles in France increa sing, he chose
rather to be a door keeper, in the house of God, then to dwell in the tents of
princes: and therefore he departed out of France in the year, 1534 and was at
Basil before he went into Italy, for there he caused to be printed his
first instruction, dedicated to Fraunces, the first French king of that name:
In deed afterward he went into Italy, where that worthy Lady the Duchess
of (...) having heard and seen him, was confirmed in the knowledge of the
truth, and loved him (...)well for his singular learning and virtues all his
life long: from whence, having only seen the borders of Italy, and by the
grace of god having not drawn that strong poison of Godlesnes, that men are
wont to bring from thence, that dwell there too long, he returned into France,
and having set his things in order, and being also careful for his brother, he
thought to bring him together with himself either to Argentine, Strausbourge or
to Basil, where he minded to follow his study. But the Lord who has a hand
over all his works, who disposes, howsoever men do purpose, according to his
own good will, the wars growing hot in France, he was constrained to pass
through Geneua: where thinking of no such matter, the gospel having been
there brought in myraculously by the means of M. Farrel of worthy memory,
and M. Uiret, where also this worthy M. (...) was, though blind in body, yet
one to whom God had given the spiritual sight, he was so sore charged to
join with them in that business, that at length he yielded himself, to such
lawful calling, as by Gods word, received in their church (though discipline
were not yet thoroughly (...)) was appointed, And before (...)played not the
Minister, as this sycophant would insiouate, but executed the function of a
Doctor and read (...)amongst them, in the year of our Lord 1536. As for
these notable men, whom in the cankered malice of his heart, he calls
seditious Ministers: it may (...)appear, that they were notable and singular
men. For whosoever shall read M. Caluines Epistles, and M. Beza his (which
howesoeuer these cankred wretches will not allow as sufficient testimony, yet
they shall be of credit with all the godly, though they would burst for
anger) he shall see (I say) first for M. Farrel, that he was a man of a rare
(...), far from any seditious practices, (for these are the practices of
Prelates) and as for ye other, he was a man of such holiness of life that his
death was wonderfully lamented of all the godly. Calvin witnesses that his
death Epist. Farrel. fol. 10.
was so heavy unto him, that he could put no end to his sorrow. If therefore
there were any tumults and stirs in the City, it came from the vnqui (...),
and ha^mering heads of papists, and such corrupt ones, as would not (...)the
Lords yoke. As (...)it falls out, in yt fou^ding of any church where men
loving darkness more then light, strive to maintain it (...) the light, and so
it has fared in other places, as well as in Geneua, that famous, and most
happy City of the world, who^ the Lord has made so glorious a mother, of so
many excellent and beautiful children. When Christ was born, Herod was
troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. When the Devil is to be cast out, he
throws the child into the fire, and his rage is greatest when he is most
disturbed. Whom he possesses he holds (...)peace, but when he has any to
win, or to loose, he bestirreth him like a Devil, and so do all his
devilish instruments. The banishment of Calvin therefore, was not for any
evil, but because the wicked had for a time prevailed, whom God yet
afterward found out in their sins, so that (...)no manlaide hand upon them,
yet they went not down in The vvo^derful judgments of God against such as
resisted the truth.
peace to their grave. For when Calvin was gone, those that were in the
chiefest place of office, being called Syndiques, and had been the cause of M.
Caluins banishment and M. Farrells, the one being guilty of a (...), and
thinking to save himself through a window, when he was sought after, burst
himself all to pieces, another of them having committed a murder, was by order
of justice beheaded, the other twain being convinced of treason and
disloyalty against the state of the town, fled away and were condemned in
their absence,

Concerning that the dog howleth, of his recall again to Geneua, by
practice, and that by the means of some noble both Dutch and French, whom he
had made as he says Caluinists: it is evident, that he came again to the
town, as sore against his own will as could be, having been ouerweeried and
whelmed with the troubles and difficulties that had been there before, which
appears by many of his letters, and specially, by one written to M. Farrel,
wherein he has these words: As often (...). Epist. 24.
(says he) as I remember in what miserable case I was there, I cannot but
abhor from my heart, that there should be any dealing for my calling
again. I let pass that same unquietness wherewith I was continually tossed
up and down, ever since I was (...)a companion with thee in labor: for I
know that wheresoever I shall become, that there are infinite troubles
prepared for me, if I will live to Christ: that this world shall always be a
trouble some world unto me, and that this present life is a continual battle:
but whilst I way with what torments my conscience was continually vexed, with
what cares it was heat, pardon me, if I fear that place, as fatal unto me.
Thou thy self art the best witness together with God, that I was not so long
holden there with any other band, but that I knew that the yoke of my calling
was laid upon me by the Lord which I durst not shake off. As long therefore
as I was bound there, I had rather endure any thing, then once to think of
changing my place, although I had many times such thoughts. But seeing now by
the goodness of God I am delivered, who will not pardon me, If I do not
willingly draw my self again into that gulf, which by experience I have
known to be so dangerous? etc. Read out that whole Epistle, and also diverse
other places, and it shall evidently appear, that M. Calvin came back
again, as one drawn with the strength of a lawful and godly calling,
according to the word of God: That he used no such practices of strengthening
his side, or brought in any stranger, but that such strangers as from other
places were harbored there, had nothing a do in that business. If there were
any great personages, by the goodness of God converted from Popery, that
favored so notable and singular an instrument: and set forward so worthy a
work, as to recall him back whose feet were beautiful unto them, bringing
the gospel of peace, they did but their duty. And the Lord multiply many
such amongst his people, that above all things, they may have care to seek
the means of their salvation.

As for that he alleges, concerning Caluines behauionr against his enemies:
this was not his least praise, that always such were his enemies, as were not
friends to God, impure men teynted with heresies, Caluins behavior against
his enemies.
such as he reckons up here: Castalio, Caroly, Bernardyn Ochine, and Peter
Morell, every one abandoned and banished by the Censure of the Church, not in
respect of any quarrel betwixt him and them, but because they walked not with
an upright foot in the truth of the Gospel, but were found to be obstinate
and runnagate heretics. And as for Perinus, Petrus Wandalus, the Balthasars,
and others that He should have set the letters down.
he speaks of (as has been noted before) God found out these in their
sins, after M. Calvin was banished the town, and their Acts remain in
public record, that they were practisers of treason, and received their just
reward: all or the most of them, notorious and wicked men, favorers and
boulsterers of wickedness and wicked men, such as could not digest the
discipline of Christ, nor endure that sweet yoke. And therefore all that he
adds of forged letters and other inventions, to bring these men in suspicion
of betraying the City, they are forged lies, A likely matter that the Lords of
Berna would
such as whereof he can bring no testimony from that Courcel of Berna, and
though he could, yet were that no acquiting of them, seeing for the time,
they might be abused. And if they had not been abused, (...)with (...),
banished (...)amongst them, of any (...).
why is not the subornation of M. Calvin set down? Why does he not set
down, the denial of his accusation, and prove under the seal of that Court,
this man's (...); and what price was paid in his purse; who was his paymaster,
and into what apparel he was disguised': Where is that public testimony of
the Lords of Berna, (...)their common Notaries hand? And why is it not set
down to clear them (if it can) of that notable crime, which by all
likelyhoode if it could (...)been showed, Caluines faction was not so strong,
he being but one man, and the favorers of the truth but an handefull in
respect of the multitude, they might have been well restored again.

As for those other examples that he brings in, to prove Caluins tyranny
against such as offended him: and namely, against Mountofet a Lutheran, Almer
to the Queen of Navarre, whom ((...)says) he made to flee Geneua for
speaking a word or two against his partial distributyng of the Queens alms,
sent in great quantity to the poor Protestants of that City: and (as he
says) (...)and devoured by Calvin him self: it is oflike credit as all the
rest, for who knows not, that Calvin being subject to the order of the
Church where he lived, could not of himself do any thing against the
determination of the whole Church. And if he would have done it, yet
Montoset, being Almer to the Queen, and therefore having in his own power
the distribution thereof, and also being a Lutheran, and therefore could not
favor Calvin; how could it be that Calvin could be avenged of him, and
drive him out of Geneua for speaking a (...)or-two against his partial
distribution? For either he must be an Almer absolute to dispose of the
queens alms, or else he must be none: but he was one (as this man
affirms) therefore Calvin could have nothing to do to deal in it. Again,
if he parted his right with him, or were only a messenger to bring the
queens (...), and (...)infected and corrupted, would have disposed (...)of it
(...)he ought, yet Calvin did but his duty in (...)it there, where was most
(...).

And as for devouring of it himself, his sober diet, life and death,
(...)known, and his (...)amounting (...)to so small a sum, it must needs
be a shameless sclaunder wherewith he is charged, having no greater ground,
then the impudent asseueration of a shameless Friar.

And concerning Peter Ameau, ( whom he says) he should make to walk
through the City naked in his shirt, with a torche in his hand, and to ask
him openly forgiveness for that he had spoken at a supper in his dishonor,
etc. It is too shameless: for this man was known to be a wicked and evil
man, aduer sarie to Gods (...)truth, against whom if any sentence were
pronounced, it was neither pronounced nor procured by M. Calvin him self, but
by that solemn assembly, which by indgemente both could and did, discern
and discuss of every fault as it deserved. These Curres therefore that barked
so against M. Calvin, for hatred of the truth, were justly musseled by those
to whom God had committed authority, whose duty it was to defend the
innocence of their Pastors and Doctors, against their ravening mouths and
cursed teethe.

As for that same wretch Seruetus, otherwise called Michaell Michael Seruetus
the vilest heretic that ever lived.
vella (...), Doctor of Physic in Uienna of Dolphin, etc. Whom he him
self calls an heretic, and yet for all that, brings him in as a witness
against Calvin, what should a man blotte paper about such a monster, who
was not envious of Caluines glory, but of the glory of him whom Calvin
served: one of the most monstrous and most blasphemous heretics, that ever
saw light in this world, compounded of all the ancient and new (...), and an
execrable blasphemer against the blessed Trinity: and namely, against the
eternity of the son of GOD, which heresies he had now maintained for the
space of above thirty years and more; vomiting them out both by mouth and
writing.

And do you not think now that this is a fit man, to be brought in as
witness by Bolsecke and Parsons, two cowpled companions in the same mischief,
against M. (...) of blessed memory? But so they may have some what and some
body against him, they care not whom they join with them, whether it be the
Devil The malice of papists (...)they care not what witnesses they take, so
they may have some to bring in against us.
himself, or any of the vilest heretics that (...)lived in the world. Is it
therefore like or probable that he should write thirty Epistles directed
Caluins Institutions were like to be well corrected, if (...) might (...)been
put in trust with them.
to Calvin, together with a little book in written hand, in the year of our
Lord 1546. coming all at once as a Captain with his troop upon M. Calvin,
to find so many faults escaped in his Institutions? I suppose a man of a
mean sense may smell this or ever he come at it. For was not he like to be
a good Corrector, and to find fault to the purpose, that was so notable an
heretic? But a man may see, whither envy and rage will carry a man.

But if M. Calvin were grieved as he had good cause, having known him in
those heresies so long, and God casting the heretic into Grief for iniquity
is a good grief.
the Magistrates hands, there, where he had corrupted many, as the sequel
proved: why should any man blame M. Calvin, who like a good Pastor resisted
the Woolfe, and endeavored to draw his sheep out of his mouth? That he
therefore should purpose his death, and that upon a private quarrel for
finding fault with his Institutions: And also should accuse him of heresy,
alluring him to come to Geneua, it is a most horrible and monstrous Sclaunder.
For if M. Calvin had had any such purpose, or had but barely accused him, he
being in truth no heretic, then had master Calvin been disappointed. But
whosoever acccused him, because he was both found an obstinate heretic, and
also was crept thither to trouble the Church, vnallured and unsent for by any,
the Magistrates did their duty to purge their city to the terror of others,
of such a monster.

This was not done by Calvin alone, as the story of his life declares who
used all good means to reclaim him, and as appears by sundry his Epistles,
was a suitor to have had his punshimente mitigated. And therefore it is but a
tale that he tells of any such secret Letter written to Virette, that should
show the purposing of his death, for any such quarrel. And of like truth is
that of Seruets speedy passing through the town, howsoever M. Calvin having
intelligence that he was there, and also having known him long before in
Paris, to be (...)with that heresy, and (...)to hold it and spread it, to
the infection of the world: caused process to be served, and the suite to
be followed against him, till the Magistrates had given him his just reward.
As for that he further (...)M. Calvin, that he should cause him The Papists
cruelty exceeding for one executed and burned alive for heresy indeed, in
many years, they have burned thousands in a few years.
to be burnt alive, and that with a soft fire, for his greater tormente,
making him like his Pope and his adherentes, who yet burnt men quick, not for
heresy indeed, as this man was, but (...)the everlasting truth of God, it is
most false and sclaunderous, seeing nothing was done here but by the
Magistrates, and by the consent of the common Council, who had authority in
such matters. Of like truth also is that, (...)be says, that M. Calvin had
written a book a little before, that heretics should not be put to death,
and that now he showed the contrary by his practice, whereupon also he gives
that marginall note, that Who ever saw that book.
heretics hold not a doctrine longer then it serves their turn: and that
forsooth many Protestauntes hereby were offended, and (as he speaks)
grievously scandalized. If ever Calvin wrote such a book, I am sure some must
have seen it, and yet if he had in his time before God gave him a sincere
knowledge and judgment, delivered out any Such Protestants as him self, belike
he means, some Anabaptists, or such like.
such thing, yet this proves not, but upon better advise and judgment, he
might have the same (...)that all other writers have to retract it. And of this
I amsure, that by the occasion of the death of this monster, both he and M.
Beza set out worthy works of that argument, to prove the truth of that
doctrine to all posterities. And if there The notable works of M. Beza and
Calvin, occasioned by (...).
were any that were offended herewith, they were no true christians, but some
such heretics, as were favorers to that cursed wretch, and to his cause.

Indeed Arrians, Anabaptists, and those heretics of the (...)lie of love,
and such like, can at no hand endure that doctrine, because they would live
as they list, and spread their heresies abroad to the destruction of others.
Furdermore, whereas he accuses M. Calvin for his manners, that he shouldbe
teinted with intolerable ambition and pride, and thereof takes upon him to
set down some examples: as yt to make himself famous, he should devise diverse
letters and other works in praise of himself: and publishe them under the
name of Horrible (...), absurd and false.
Galasius and others, and that he should send them to Viret, who acquainted
with the style, should epsy the devise, he being offended, should be
pacified with an answer, that it was neces sarie for the credit of their
cause, and that he would shortly do as much for Viret. For proof whereof
(he says) (...)these letters were found in the study of Viret, with forty
more, at what time (...)away from Lausanna, and they were showed to the Lords
of Berne, who could never afterward abide Calvin for it, etc. For confutation
of all this, they that knew Calvin in his life time, and (...)great humility.
were thoroughly acquainted with him, did know him to be the most simple and
humble man, considering his great gifts, that lived in the woorlde, who
(...)in all his writings, and in his expositions upon the Scriptures, without
any ostentation, or subtle devises (whereof he could have found out as great
store as others) yet did he refer al to the edifying of the people, and to Gods
only glory: and that he should devise letters and works in his own
(...), and publishe them under the name of another, it is shameless and
villainous, well becoming (...)Bolsecke, an Apostate Friar, to devise it, and
(...) Robert Parsons a shameless Jesuit, to credit and publishe (...).
Galasius has turned some of Caluines treatises written in French, into Latin.


For Galasius, he was a worthy and learned (...)then, and now (as I suppose)
living, and whose name could not be so abused. Indeed Galasius did gather
some of (...)Lectures, as from his mouth: or which being gathered by others,
he might translate into the Latin tongue out of the French, which might; as
was (...), both be reuised, and also published by M. Calvin. But what is this
to prove that it was done in his own praise? Again, what should it have
(...)to have sent them, (if any such thing had been) to Virette alone, when
others also could have judged and discerned of Caluines style, he writing not
(...)and in a corner, but much, and to the whole world. Further, if Viret were
offended, and wrote so to Calvin, and that these Letters with one and forty
more were found (...)Virets study, and that they were showed to the Lords of
Berne, and they could never abide him for it: why is there not so much as one
set down? And why did those Lords of Berne afterward by so many honorable
testimonies and intercourse of messages, testify their love both to M.
Calvin, and also to that state and town? And again, where was the
perfourmance of that promise to Viret and Farrel, concerning the setting forth
of (...) So Claudius Zantes and Baldwine charge Beza.
praise? As for that he adds concerning his breaking down of Images, and
raizing the pictures of Christ and all Saints in Geneua, and causing his own
to be drawn, and set in place, and giving them also to diverse Gentlemen and
Gentlewomen, to hang about their necks, it is as monstrous a lie as any of
the rest. It is true, that when the Gospel was Images ought to (...)down
established there, the Magistrates cast down, being rightly instructed, those
instruments of (...), adored and worshipped in every place, contrary to the
wholesome doctrine of salvation, but that Calvin did it himself, or by any
extraordinary course, or caused his own to be put in place, it is
shameless, and where is the proof? His picture might be drawn, and was, it
cannot be denied, he being an excellent (...), of rare and singular gifts:
but that it was procured to be done by him self, or set up in places of the
City, or in the Church, where the pycture of Christ, (as he calls it)
stood to be adored and worshipped: or that it was given or taken by him or of
others, to be worn (...) Lying the sosidation of the Popes kingdom.
their necks, is most sclaunderous. Indeed the Papists, lying Lindan, a
deadlye enemy, Staphilus, that rayler, and others do charge him with such a
thing. But we may see from whence all these charges spring, even from that same
father of theyrs, that has been a liar from the beeginning: who has no other
posts nor pillars to uphold his kingdom in credit with his lying and
viperous generation. The like is to be thought of that answer, that he should
say, that he that cannot abide it, let him burst for envy.

As for that Legend, that he should be a miracle worker, especialy v. Calvin no
miracle worker, that belongs to Jesuits.
pon one Brul, whom he should raise from death to life, and the servant of a
Citize^ of Geneua, out of whom he should cast the devil, it deserves no (...),
as having been devised by shameless and wicked Friars: whereas there
appears no color of probability of any such thing ever Bristow in (...).
to have been done by M. Calvin. Besides, it is plain and evident, that M.
Caluins doctrine is flat against both the one and the other. For Calvin
teaches according to the scriptures, that we are now not to look for A miracle
wrought upon a whore (...) which Bristow (...)sorth solemnlye in three sundry
books, in his motives, in (...)Epitome thereof, and by it self.
(...), that gift being an extraordinary (...), and only found in the
Prophets, in Christ, and in the Apostles. And as for casting out (...), though
Papists would make both that and the other a special (...) to (...)their
religion, yet they are indeed as far from (...)able to work true miracles,
as we or any other. Neither is it a mark of true relygion, seeing that
Antichrist shall come (...)with a full and powerful spirit of his (...)the devil,
to deceive (if it were possible) even the elect, with lying signs and wonders.
Indeed the like (...)whereof he speaks here, of raising one from death, was
set forth long ago, to (...)been done by a Jesuit, who take upon them
the work Copus in his dialogues.
of such miracles (and as one has reported under the name of Cope, an
Englisheman and yet was not the author, but another ( as has (...)found
since, they cannot only raise the dead to (...), but also they can make holy
water to (...)and rattes, to make barren women (...)with child, and to do
many such feats beesides: but also to conjure out Deuilles, and to chase
them away with the sign of the cross, and we may read in their new legends,
written Ex epist. Indicis.
of their doings in the Indies, and in other such places, where they say they
have converted whole kingdoms and countries, and brought them from Paganism,
to their cursed religion. And indeed these Jesuits that have such exercise in
working miracles: and not only imitate Christ in things that are
supernaturell, but in all things will do as much and more then ever he did,
to whom the Pope, (who can do what he list for that purpose) has
communicated of his power: these are likely to take upon them to work such
miracles, as that story mentioned before, written in the Dutch tongue
testifies they did. For the (...)whereof I refer you to Harrie Steuens
book, written in the French tongue, entitled his Apology upon Herodotus,
where there is testified a number of examples of their vile and wretched
dealinges. I refer the Reader to the 333. 337. 379. and 380. pages of the
same book.

As for casting out deuilles, where with he charge M. Calvin: and Parsons
also upon the credit of Staphilus, in his marginall note most falsely charge
Luther: using such counterfeite words, drawn from (...), as do lively set
out a counterfeit knave; who knows not that the Papists were the greatest
Coniurers in the world? If M. Luther or Calvin through faith, and the earnest
prayers of the Church, have brought relief to any that have been either
possessed or assaulted, they did it not as miracle workers, but through Gods
assistance, without taking upon them any such power. Contrariwise Papists have
had more dealing with the devil then they. Erasmus in his book of Epistles,
The Papists Coniurers, and such as had great familiarity with the Devil.
shows how a night Ghoast was coniured: For there was (says he) a certain
priest, that kept his own neice, who because she was well monied, lapped him
self in a sheet and toward midnight entered her chamber, counterfeiting as if
he had been a spirit: the woman perceauing the mystery, because she would
shift of the purpose of this bug, desired the help of a kinsman of hers, who
lying the next night in her chamber to defend her, in steed of a conturing
book, brought a good cogill, who so bebasted the devil, that if he had not
discovered him self to be a priest, and so a knave, he had utterly spoiled him.

In the year 1569. there was a Gentleman of Auspurgh in Germanye, Apol.
(...)fo. 347
who having certain men, that made no account of that new found 'secte of the
Jesuits; a Jesuit him self, to plant the greater estimation of 'their coat
in their hearts, he disguised himself into the habit of his first founder
the Devil, and after hiding him in a corner of the house, he so feared one of
the maid (...), as she had like presently to have run out of her wits, and
telling this to one of her masters men, he willinge also to make trial of
the matter, found it to be true, and being The (...)killed by a young (...).
assaulted in the horryblest manner that this Jesuitical Devil could devise,
the young man drew out his dagger, and wrought a miracle, for he killed the
Devil. So we read also else where, how familiar always the Devil has
been with these cloister men. Aenaeas (...) that afterward was Pius
secundus, reports, how familiar the Devil (...). (...).
was in a covent of Monks, to whom S. Bennet resorted. So also in the Legend,
which they call golden, but indeed (...)or leaden, in Friar Juniper.
which there are stuffed many such tales of friar Juniper, that made a hoch
poch of all things together, whom Saint Frauncis so highly esteemed Book of
(...).
for a Saint, who also berayed his bed, and has both these pranckes (...)forth
for his singular praise in the book of Conformities of Saint (...), in the 62.
and 63. leaves.

What should I speak of Friar Ruffian, or Friar Rushe, that would Friar (...),
or Friar Rush.
besiege the douill, and threatened to untruss a point into his throat, and
so chased the devil away: Or of Saint Frauncis, who to prove his virginity,
stripped him self stark naked before the bishop of Arsis, and gave him his
breeches for a relic: How he was wont In Confo. 211
to speak to fowls, to sing with nightingales, to salute woolues, and to
carry them with him wheresoever he lysted? Much like as Hildebrand Pope
Hildebra^d carried the devil about with him in the lilcenes of a Sparrow.
the Coniurer, having the devil very familiar with him, (...)him always about
with him in the likeness of a sparrowe.

What should I speak of Saint Micharius, that for killing a flea, did seven
years penance amongst bryates and thorns? What should I speak of Saint
Dominicke, that with a sweet oyntmente (...)prandium.
from under his cope, did heal a Nun that had a grief in her thigh: And as
for raising up men, that were dead to life again, (with which Trim knavery
you charge M. Calvin here) Saint Frauncis and his disciples (above whom I am
sure, the Jesuits will take foul (...), if they be not preferred) O horrible
blasphemy.
they could do it as easilye as drink wine, yea Christ's (...)were nothing in
comparison of Saint Fraunces miracles: (...)Christ was transfigured but once,
Saint Frauncis twenty times: Christ changed water into wine once, and he
thrice: Christ suffered the grief of his wounds but a little while, he
whole two years together.

And as for raising up the dead, of which we have mentioned, casting out
deuilles, making the blind to see, the lame to walk, the dumb to speak, it
was but a play unto him. For thus it is written page (...) (...)estdictus de
(...), in quo Beatus Franciscus fecit illud insigne miraculum, quod (...)medici
filium primogenitum, prius occidit and contritum suscitando restituit. There is
a place called by the name of (...), in which S. Frauncis wrought that same
worthy miracle, that first he killed the eldest Son of a certain Physician,
and by treading upon him, raised him up again.

As for Christ, he did indeed these miracles to a few, but S. Frauncis to
many. For S. Frauncis gave sight to more then a thousand that were blind: he
restored limbs to more then a thousand that were lame as well men as beasts:
and he forced the devil to fly out of more then a thousand men and women.
Well sir Robert, I will spare you for this time, but if thou shall hereafter,
dare once to hiss for the crediting of such monstrous lies devised by the
Devil; I say to thee in the fear of God, if thou shall dare to broach such
absurdities and monstrous fables, of good and holy men, to stayne their faces
with the filth and dyrte of your dunghill: I will, (if God give me life) not
spare to rake your filth together, and to cast it in your faces (as the Prophet
says) and into your teeth, so as you shall never be able, but as men
drowned and choked in your own filth, once to look up again. I will
translate that book of the Conformities of your Frauncis, and gather out of
your other woorshipfull Writers all the (...)I can, to measure that unto you in
truth, which unjustly and falslye you have powered out upon Gods Saints, to
dishonor his holy name withal. And thus much concerning these devised
things, that you lay upon Calvin and Luther. (...)the name of Prophet (...)to
Calvin, and of Elias to Luther, in respect of his (...)zeal.


Now, for that which follows, concerning the lascivious dealing of M.
Calvin, (whom in mockage he calls a Prophet) etc: Saying, that there are
many examples set down of his loose beehauiour gathered by open signs,
importing great suspicion of foul dishonestie, both with man and woman kind,
though he had always a wench of his own. etc. This wretch might have
remembered, first for the name of Prophet given thus in mockage to M. Calvin,
and also for the name of Elias, given by a borrowed speech unto M. Luther, that
they themselves in their filthy books, shame not to prefer S. Frauncis
before Jesus Christ, in most damnable terms, saying that he was not
worthy, (O horrible blasphemy) to pull off his hose, that he did excel all the
Apostles, In lib. Conform. (...). 17. and a little after fol. 49.
the Saints, and all Aungelles, yea that he was a Patriarche, a Prophet, an
Apostle, a Martyr, a Doctor, a Confessor, a Virgin, an Angel, a Saint, most
conformed to Jesus Christ. And therefore, as Christ had twelve Apostles, so
had he. And as Judas Iseariot betrayed Christ, so Johannes de Capella, was
dejected from his Master S. Frauncis, because he disliked his M. profession,
as I suppose all the lesuites do.

Concerning the other point, what villainy is this, upon the report of such
a varlet, as (...) is, dubbed by Parsons to discredit the truth, to bring M.
Calvin, a man spente in study, (whose labors and learned works testified
then, and shall testify to all posterities, how he was occupied, beside his
public ministry, in preaching and reading, his being continuallye occupied
in writing worthy monumentes, and both in the publik and pryuate affairs of
the Church) as a man teynted with foul dishonestie, and to have lead an
incontinent life: Whereas, if he had turned the leaf on the other side to him
self, and such The stories are mentioned in every (...).
like swine, and considered (...)dooinges, I should weary my self, and annoy
the whole world with the filth of their bauderies, and vile abominations. For
who knows not (if he know any thing) that all this cursed generation, even
from the highest Pope, to the lowest hedge Priest, with all their orders,
Cardinals, Abbots, Pryors, Moonkes, Nuns and Friars of all sects that draw
within the ropes of their Vows and cursed Consecrations, they all live as the
Bores of the (...), not only committinge all kind of filthynesse in
fornication and uncleanness, and such kind of wickednesses, but also gyuing
over them selves to such abominations, as a man would blushe once to think,
much less to have them named. Caluins (...).


And whereas he names M. Caluines daintines, both for rare meats, choice of
Wines, and furniture of service, and that when he would Belike Bolseck was both
his Cook, baker, and butler, or else very well acquainted with him.
show so much favor to any manne, as to go forth, and dyne or suppe with
him, always a silver (...)of his own wine, must be carried with him, for his
own mouth, and that he had a Baker that made bread of purpose for him only,
of fine flower, wette in Rose water, and myngled with sugar, (...), and Annis
seed, etc. and that he had a kind of biskat made for him self, etc. (...)the
It is meruell you put not in, that he had some iellies, and iunckets, and
comfects also. What an envious knave is (...)?
Lords of Berne were offended, etc. I answer, that all this is but a
horrible slander like the rest, and showing the malice of this Momus, that
has his finger in every dishe, and enuieth whatsoever M. Calvin does or
enjoys. They that knew him, knew him to be a man of as sober diet, as might
be, whose great studies and labors had brought him now so low, that he
could hardelye feed upon any thing. If therefore he had his own wine with
him, and his own dishe also of some little boiled meat, (as commonly they say
he had) and wheresoever he went, did only feed upon that: If he had (I say) a
diet bread, made for the nonce against his rewme, where with he was sore
cumbred (as all great students commonly are:) why should this be objected
unto him, as used to provoke him to lust and wantonness, from the suspicion
whereof he was always free, had not these deuilishe devises (...)put in
practice against him? Besides, if a man do but consider, the (...)he had with
the continual occasions of expense, how little he died worth, they might
somewhat testify, that he had not the thickest diet in the In the papacy
nothing but (...)cheer, and (...).
world: far unlike to the superfluous excess and cramming, that is in the
Papacy, where in their kingly provisions, their Popes, Cardinals, and
Bishops dwelling in palaces, their Priors, Friars, and Nuns in Abbyes,
more beautiful then Princes houses, endued with all lively hood and rich
possessions, where in sties they swil and devour, the richest and fattest
things of the earth, following in a manner no profitable study for the
edifiyng of the Church of G O D: what can this idleness, this bellye cheer
else breed, but all kind of iniquity, filthiness, and bawderie; The Cardinal
therefore that having roasted to his breakefast Partridges and Woodcockes, and
being served without Oringes cried out, O quanta patimur. What penance do we
endure? And what do we suffer for our mother the holy Church? Belike Apolo.
Sten. fol. 325.
he was served far otherwise then M. Calvin, and yet this he spoke at a
general Council, when he had layne with a whore all night before. What
shall we say also to that Pope, that before he was Pope, in sign of
humility and devotion, had no other cloth to feed upon but a net, In (...).
Tri.
but when he had gotten that he fisht for, he laid a side those clothes, and
fell to the like iolitye that all the rest of the Popes did.

I will not mention Pope Julius Peacocke, which he preferred before the
Apple in Paradise, and his Gammon of (...), which he would have in despyte
of G O D: but I will only mention one Peter Riarus, which was first a Friar
Minor, and afterward made Cardinal by Pope Sixtus the fourth, who did not
only wear cloth of gold himself in his house, but his hangings and couerlets
were likewise of cloth of gold; and making a feast to one Elenor of (...).
Fulgosa, lib. 9. cap. 1.
Arrago^, yt passed by Rome to marry with Hercules de Est duke of Ferrara, the
service of the feast continued seven hours, his servants at every course
changing themselves into new Liueries. If you will needs speak of furniture
of service, and of delicious daintiness, to cause lust, lo here a Prelate of
your own, advanced from a dounghill, that keeps no measure. And if this
were so in a Cardinal, who also kept his harlot openly, named Tiresia, so as
her shoes were covered with pearl and precious stones: what shall we think
of the Pope himself, (...)
neither God nor man, that by that fable of Christ, said, he got so much
riches, if we look upon his sumptuousness, his braueries, and other
royalties, who shall be compared to him? What temporal kings or Lords shall
be offended with him, and think that never any of their old prophets or new,
took such care of their bodies as this new prophet does?

Concerning his examples, of the Gentlewoman of Mongis, that stole (as he
says) from her husband at Lausanna, and coming to Geneua, her husband durst
not follow her: and also a young strange Gentlewoma^, that took a house nigh
Geneua, where (...)was wont to lie when her husband was from home: and the
Lady Iolland of Bredrode, to whom M. (...)should use persuasion of marriage
whilst her husband was alive, and he being sickly, should will her to let
him go. Let all these examples stand or fall, as they shall deserve All
filthy (...).
credit with the Christian Reader, only this I say; Is it or can it be likely
that M. Calvin, who was so sharp a Censurer and an executor of the Lords
discipline for that foul vice in others, that he could have escaped scot free
himself? or if there had been any such notorious signs of suspicion as he
speaks of, and yt with so many of name, and in such a place, where the least
infamy of such a person, so many envying his honor, could not have been kept
close: Shall we think (I say) yt this can carry any probability of truth,
especially such a knave, being both party and witness, and Parsons as good as
himself believing and broching ye same to the world; Again, why should the
credit of a servant (if any such were) or of such a Lady yt should not dare at
Geneua, but afterward when she was departed from the town, which Bolsecke
being so very a knave, should hear from her mouth: weigh against the credit
of so honorable a personage? Again, if she were godly, why should she
conceal so lewd a thing so long, or concealing it, how should she come
acquainted with Bolseck an heretic, unless she favored his heresies also?
Or if it were told so in the hearing of so many, why was it not before uttered
and declared, the truth searched out, and he detected in his life time? But a
man may smell this gear, and easily see whence all this forged stuff
comes. If I should (to requite into his bosom) open the pack of their
knaueries, and of their wicked lives, I might begin a new book, for every
story is full of their villainies. I refer the Reader but to the lives of
their own Popes, as they are set down in their own histories, and in every
book, etc.

Now in that he does leave (as he says) infinite matters of other quality,
as of his singular cosinage, especially toward the Queen of Navarre by
diverse feined and contrary letters, and the like, for which Friar Parsons
refers us to this goodly and worshipful book: I say nothing of them here,
because they may be considered of in another place, when it shall pease God,
that that lying Legend shall be further examined and sifted. In mean time, for
that he says so shamelesly, that M. Calvin died so shameful a death, having
besides those manifold diseases, that M. Beza (...), con cerning M. Call uines
death most shameless and impudent
reckons up in his life, that horrible disease of lice and worms, which did
eat his whole body over: beside an ulcer, which he should have in his
fundament, and in his privy members, and should make him so to stinck, that
none was able to abide him: and also that he should die swearing and cursing,
and naming the devils through desperatio^ of his See M. Beza his answer to
Claud. Xaintes (...)fol. 392.
extreme pains, and that he should bewail that ever he had studied or
written book, I leave also this to the consideration and judgment of the
wise, discreet, and Christian Reader, only this also I would note by way of
examination in trying the just weight of these circumstances, that I might show
what probability of truth there is in this report. First therefore, if M.
Calvin, besides those diseases that he had, (which what they were, is
confessed by M. Beza, and set down to have grown upon him by his great and
excessive study) if (I say) he had had that same foul disease CaIuin visited
by many excellent perso^ages.
upon him, that he should have stunke, that no body could have abidden him:
how could that be true, that is written of him, (which yet was most true) that
he should be visited by so notable and excellent personages. By the four
Syndiques of Geneua.
For he was visited in the time of his sickness, not only by ye 4. Syndiques,
which are 4. chief lords and magistrates of the town, to who^ M. Call. made a
grave and a notable exhortation, that they should continue faithful in By the
ministers.
that place wherein God had set the^: but also by all the Ministers, who
according to the custom of that Church, met at his house, and in token of that
unity and love that was between the^, took their repast together at a
supper, Among who^ M. Calvin was brought forth sitting in his chair, If he had
had such a soul dis ease, is it like so little while before his death that he
would have come forth and sit amongst them
to take of them as it were his last farewell in this life: and notwithstanding
that he were very sick, yet he conceived prayer himself as well as he could,
cheered up his guestes: and before supper was ended, withdrawing himself, he
told them that a wall could not sunder them, but that he would be joined
with them in spirit. After which time going to bed, his sickness grew to be
such, as lying upon his back, he never rose again, till God had put an end to
all his miseries, and received him into that everlasting joy, which he had
from before the foundations of the world prepared for him. Now therefore,
though Calvin had been teinted and touched with as sore plagues and diseases,
as ever was (...)and that in his end the anguishe of his flesh, had made him
to speak as foolishly as ever Job did: if his bones had been putrified and
corrupted, as David confesses his were, and he had had all the diseases in
himself that many holy men have complained to have felt: yet forasmuch as ye
end of a man simply in it self is not enough for a man to be judged by, God
exercising his children as he sees to be best for the^: and seeing ye breasts
and bones of the wicked, are as full of milk and marrow, as the breasts and
bones of the godly; and that neither outward prosperity nor adversity in the
ends, either of the godly or of the wicked, simply in themselves are just
measures to measure ye favor or displeasure of God by; I conclude yt though M.
Calvin had had such a disease: yet he dying in the Lord, and in the
constant profession of his truth, this growing upon him by his great labors
and studies, taken against such helhoundes and enemies as you are, I conclude,
that he dyed a glorious and an honorable death.

And besides the reasons before alleged, that he died not any such horrible
the end of M. Calvin; was in the Lord, proved by many reasons and arguments.
death, with any such coffeehouse and rage against God, hereby it may be
proved, that he was continually occupied in prayer, in writing and ouerseeing
sundry books and writings that he had in hand to finish, that he uttered
many golden and excellent sentences, made such a solemn and a godly will, died
with such peace and quietness, ha uing neither clogged himself with tra^sitori
things, not being in love with the world, so as he yielded most willingly,
neither stirring hand nor foot, as by the testimony of them that were present,
is declared; whereas Bolseck this heretic was both his enemy and also absent,
and therefore unfit to Read M. (...)his desence of Calvin against (...).
(...). fol. 388. 389 390. etc.
give any testimony of him.

But now if a man should turn over the leaf, and look to the life and
death of Papists, which as their doctrine is wicked and idolatious, so their
lives and their deaths, are abominable and hideous, he should enter into
such an argument, as he could not tell where to begin, nor The judgments of
God wonderful and fearful against his enemies.
where to end, so copious and plentiful are examples of the judgments of God
upon them. And what peace and honor can be in the death of them, whose life
and death is without God? Dives in outward show, and to the judgment of the
world, dyed as a man blessed, and Lazarus as a cursed man, upon whose lives
and deaths yet if Bolseck and Parsons might have sat as Judges, Dives should
have been justified, and Lazarus condemned. But those wicked ones, whose
doctrines and lives have been wicked, and whose death therewithal have been
marked with some notable judgment of Gods wrath; these indeed are examples
unto us to make us to fear. So died Steeuen Gardener a wicked and a wretched
man very horribly, with his tongue swollen out of his mouth, with such a
hideous and fearful countenance, with such stincke and despair, as his own
side did loath him for it. So likewise dyed Thomas Arundell, Archbishop of
Canturburie, Cardinal Wolsey, (...) ante (...)de morte Ioh. (...). Ex (...).
Latomus, Francis Spira, and diverse others. Even like as in the old time, God
brought strange judgments upon his enemies, that were (...)and merciless
persecutors, as upon Antiochus, Herod, Julian the Apostata, Valerian, Decius,
Maxentius, and infinite others: So also upon men even in our times whose lives
were wicked, he made their deaths notorious and infamous, by setting upon them
as it were visible signs of his wonderful and unsupportable judgments. I
refer the Reader for brevity sake, unto a special book, written in the
French tongue, wherein there are gathered together, as into one sum, the
wonderful judgments of God that have been executed upon wicked men, declared
both in their life and in their death. To which also may be added a special
treatise, which M. Fox has set down in his book of Acts and (...). 2298.
Monuments, in the second part.

Now concerning the life of M. Beza, and his manners, which Parsons M. Beza.
says this worshipful writer has set down during M. Beza his life, and
dedicated to the honorable Magistrates, Councillors and other (...)of the
City of Geneua, etc. Although I should not (...)much to weary myself, seeing
M. Beza is (thanks be to God) alive and both of sufficient age and ability in
Christ, to answer for himself, and may perhaps have seen the book if it be
delivered there, where it is dedicated: yet because I know yt M. Beza will not
file his hands upon such a shameless wretch; and also because as Parsons
in England, so also another of the same fether in Scotland, have been so eger
to spread these sclaunders, to the discredit of this reverend and honorable
person in Christ: I have thought it my duty to examine his grounds, and to
weigh the circumstances of this, as I have done in (...)life of M. Calvin.
First therefore where he says, that he has done it during his life, that
if it be false he may refute it: this makes no whit to the iustifiyng of his
fact. He that has showed himself such a varlet against the truth, and M.
Calvin for it: is it like, being a bored and branded witness, that he will
deal with any more (...)toward M. Beza? Shall we think that his purpose is
to find out the truth, The purpose of the ad uersarie.
or being confuted for falsehood, that he can make any satisfaction for it? No
no, his purpose is to spue out his poison, that it may have a perfect effect in
the children of darkness, and as much as lies in him, also that he might
steal the hearts of faithful men, not only from the love of their persons,
who are their chief fathers and professors: but also from the truth which
they teach and profess. But thanks be to God, howesoeuer the wicked do
greedily suck in such poison to their own destruction, yet the children of
God have this preservative, that no such poison can hurt them. They honor men
for the truth, but they honor the truth and love it, because it is of God: and
is the healthful means of their salvation: they know that the Devil is a
liar, and so are his instruments, that will do their best to stain the
beauty of Jesus Christ, in his blessed and holy members. But first let us
hear what this fury says concerning Beza? For sooth first that he was borne
at Uezels in France; that his father was the kings Whether M. Beza his father
did curse him, and disinherite him yea or no.
Lieuetenant, and that when he came to die, seeing the most wicked disposition
of his son, he did upon his death bed curse him, disclaim him for his
son, and disinherite him, and that under the hand of a public Notarie, and
in the presence of many witnesses, etc. A heavy case if it were true, that so
good a son should have so evil a father. But shall we believe it, because
bablyng Bolsecke only says it upon his bare word? If there were any such
thing, why is not the public instrumente set down? Or if that could not be
done conveniently, why are not the causes declared, that made his father so
egar against him? O it was his evil disposition: A curse for righteousness is
a blessing.
O I smell a ratte, perhaps you would say his religion. It may be the
(...)according to those times, was led with common error and superstition,
and because his son did not continue in Babylon together with him, that in
steed of blessing him, he would have cursed him: but this curse (if any
such were) was a singular blessing. His father forsook him, but the Lord
took him: and blessed was he, if he were cursed for righteousness sake. As
touching that which he adds, that his father brought him up in the study of
learning, both at Paris and Concerning Beza his father, read his own (...)in
the (...)of his own (...).
Orleans, and procured for him a Priorie, it confirms that which I have said
before, that he was ignorant and superstitious, that I say no worse: and that
it was the Lords singular mercy, to draw him out of that sincke of Popery.

Again, where he says, that of all other wickedness, he abounded in the
excess of carnalitie, not only offending God himself, but also infecting
others, into whose company he came, which he proves by an Epigram, which
he made (as he says but most untruly) in comparison of the two sins of
adultery and sodometrie, between aboye which he should abuse, and a man's
wife, etc. And that this (...)being printed by Robert Stephanus, (...)so
offend the Council of Paris that process was awarded out against him, which
he understanding, not only sold and let out his Pryorie, taking double
money, and so betaking him to his heels, took Candida a Taylours (...),
dwelling in Calenders street with him, and she stealing what she could from
her husband, they both were received at Geneua by (...)and Beza soon after
was placed by him, as chief minister and public Reader of divinity in
Lausanna. Would not a man think that this were the mouth of the Devil, that
could belch and vomit out such wicked lies, and yet this drumbe is played
upon by every Papist, in their railing and lying books, though in truth they
might have been satisfied, and had their mouths stopped long ago concerning
these falsehoods. And though I cannot, in every particular make that answer
that Beza can: yet concerning the general, which is the Epigram, let us hear,
what has been set down, and published in printe a good while since by
himself concerning this matter. And then I doubt not (good Christian Reader)
but if thou shall hear with an indifferent ear, and weigh with an upright
heart, that which he says in his own (...) thou will learn to detest the
malice of such sclandering liars, and also embrace the truth of God, which thou
regardest for it self, and not in respect of men's persons. In that preface
therefore set before his Poemes and Epigrames, with thirty Psalms of David,
reuised and corrected, he preuenteth both that, that has been or hereafter
might be, objected against him, concerning those Epigrams which this monster
makes mention of in this place. First he says, that he (...).
was given to Poetry even from his youth up, which he did (...)very
studiously, partly by a certain instinct of nature, that drew him that way,
and partly his learned and notable master Melior Volmarius, exhorting him both
to those same other studies that became that age, as also to the exercising of
his wit in this kind of style. Whereupon he says, that upon the seventeenth
year of his age, when by his (...)appointment, he was come to Orleans to
study the civil law, and there did find certain learned men now already
confirmed in judgment, and excellent in that kind of learning, and so
reckons up a great sort of their names; he did not only not forsake that
study of Poetry, but rather as it were with a certain emulation sproung up
amongst them, follow it with greater contention, and so profited in it, that
even by the testimony of those same learned men, he attained to an exact
knowledge in it. He witnesses that though he were taken with the love of
these same Poets, with their iestes and pleasant speeches, yet he detested
their filthiness, even in that same brittle and frail time of his youth, when
if ever the exercise of such follies might have corrupted him, and brought him
to a practice of wickedness, it was then. In this study he continued, not as
in the chiefest: for he used it rather as a pastime and recreation from other
that were more weighty: but when he returned from Orleans to Paris again,
among other great learned men of that profession, he was famous. And when he
was called upon by his M. Uolmarius, to publish those Epigrams, he was in the
beginning so far of from having any mind or purpose to publish them, that
they were now all scattered, and in his friends hands, and he was feign as it
were, to beg for them, and yet could never altogether recover them.

Now when it pleased GOD to awaken him, and to kindle in him the love of his
truth, which then in France he could not profess without danger of his life,
he be thought himself to join with Gods people in a sincere and a reformed
Church, and therefore Christ calling him, forsaking all things, that he
might follow him, as oneled by his hand, together with his dear wife, whom
he had married a little before he arrived at Geneua, where he was lovingly
entertained, of that worthy man M. John Calvin, and there abode, till he was
called to Lansanna; an University in the territories of the Lords of Berna,
to profess the Greek tongue: being called therefore such inquiry was made
into his life, as is wont to be, in those Churches where the Gospel is
professed, where also voluntarily, M. Beza makes mention of his Epigrames,
that the Church might not be deceived, and testified unto them, that there
were many things in them, that did utterly dislike him, for which he was
heartily sorry: and further, that he was ready (if it should seem good so
unto them) even publicly to witness, how much that oversight of his youth
did displease and (...)him. This also is witnessed not only by his own
preface, set before the confession of his faith in the first aedition dedicated
to his father, whom Parsons by Bolseckes testimony affirms, should (...),
in (...). (...).
have cursed him, who was in truth somewhat alienated from him by sclaunderous
reports in respect of his profession, whom by this confession he sought to
satisfy: but also by his preface set before that tragedy of Abraham's
sacrifice: where he has these words, I Praefat. in Trage. Abrahami. page
(...)
confess (says he) that even of nature I delighted in Poetry, and I cannot
yet repent me of it: Nevertheless it heartily greeueth me, that the little
grace which God gave me in that behalf, was employed by me in such things,
as the very remembrance of them, yrketh me now at the heart. Hereupon
therefore, that same assembly of brethren, considering that this was done in
the time of his youth, when he was led by ignorance and Popery, (which
commonly is the mother not only of vices, but of all indiscrete and foolish
dealings) they thought it unreasonable, that he who was now translated from
popery to Christ, and (as it were from Paganism to Christian religion:) who
also had lived honestly and blamelesly, whatsocuer he had written, should now
be thrust from a place of such service in the Church of God. They therefore
pardoned his former folly, they embraced him and encouraged him to go
cherefully forward in that place, (...). confess (...).
whereunto he was appointed of God.

And whereas, not only this Bolsecke, but also Parsons (...)charge him, as that
same impure Apostata Baldwin, and Friar (...)Zanctes did before him, that Beza
should make this Epigram, as an assured testimony of dishonest life,
comparing Whoredom and Sodometrie together, and preferring the last before the
other: as also that filth Nicoll Bourne the Scot, or whosoever it were that
wrote it under his name: Let us see with what probability of truth they have
done it.

Beza had been now married (he says) four years before his (...)his
wife (...)chaste (...).
voluntary exile into those parts: his wife an honest and chaste matrone, and
whatsoever he (...)concerning Candida (which was but done by way of fiction,
it is certain that he made those verses before he could understand what that
vice meant, wherewith they charge him. Again, those verses were written a good
while before they were published: And Beza having published them was but xx.
year old or there about: and that he could not mean (by Candida), his wife,
it is plain, because in those feigned verses he commends Candida being with
child, to the Gods, and yet he never had child. And as touching Audibert the
boy, (whom they say) he should abuse, God knows (says he) how unjust and
false it is. Indeed Audibert was a young man then, most dear unto me, now a
man of singnlar learning, and good name, to whom being at Uezel, I wrote
tryflingly certain verses: wherein I did declare my singular desire of seeing
him, and of other my friends: and of my repayring to them again.

Now, that these wretches should say and write, that he committed the
horrible sin of Sodomie, what ground have they, but even their own wicked
and devilish invention? And that he should also run away with an other man's
wife (as Persons says) out of Bolsecke, dwellinge Frarine in (...)railing
(...)translated.
in Calendar street, and Frarine says, dwelling in Harp street, (so well
they agree in their tale) her husband yet living, who could ever imagine it,
but such limbs of Satan? God forbid (says Beza) Lo if there be any mortal
creature, which is able justly to touch Beza, but with the least and lightest
suspicion of adultery, I refuse no seat of judgment. And yet notwithstanding
(says he) if any such thing had been done: by what right I be seech you,
should they reprehende this in me, which where they live, is not only not a
wickedness, but (...)counted worthy of praise. etc. Read that same whole
preface set before his Epigrams, (which for breuities sake I omit) and thou
shall see the wantonness, wickedness, and (...)of that whole popish generation,
who not only carrye in their hands beastly Epigrams, but also expound them,
and set them forth in their schools: amongst whom there is scarce one can be
named, of a number, that is not defiled with all kind of lusts and
filthiness. And I pray you what be their Poets? though many of them be witty,
yet most of them most ungodly and (...), and yet these same good Catholics,
can bellowe and bleate out against Beza, and against Calvin, as intolerable
men, because they profess the Gospel. But they them selves can intertaine
among them selves, and also allow to others, even the very fountains to be
opened of al scurrilitie and iniquity. They can suffer their palpable toys
more then filthy to be in every man's hand, so that they come not near the
Gospel. But they The Poets commonly read, allowed, and com me^ded amongst the
Papists, most filthy and wicked.
cannot endure Beza that in his youth made such Epigrams, first so praised of
them selves, and whilst he was amongst them, well lyked: but now because (by
the grace of God), he has both publikelye and privately by writings, and in
his life time disclaymed and forsaken the^, they take on with him as if they
were mad, for continuing no longer in Amadis Olive. Cassandra siderid. Neae.
etc
their filth, pressing that poem to the uttermost, and making it to sound that
which was never meant: yea, they can make the worst of them, and (...)them to
their filthy meaning, with full and foul mouths of baudry, making them to
speak that, which they never meante, as that impure knave Nicholl Burn a
Scot, in his pretended and feigned disputation has done; whose fleshly and
filthy spirit that you may see, I will set down that Epigrame it self,
and his interpretation thereof, so much, as my modest pen may utter, that all
may see their vile and villainous (...)rite. This is the Poem word for word in
Latin.

A Best Candida, Beza quid moraris?
Audebertus abest, quid hic moraris?
Tenent Parisu tuos amores,
Habent Aurelij tuos lepores,
Et tu Vezeliis manner pergis
Procul Candidula, amoribusque,
Et leporibus, Audebertuloque:
Immo Vezelij procul valete
Et vale pater, and valete fratres,
Namque Vezelijs carere possum
Et carere parente, and his, and illis,
At non Candidula, Audebertuloque.
Sed vtrum rogo preferam duorum?
Vtrum inuisere me decet priorem?
An quenquam tibi Candida anteponam?
An quenquam anteferam tibi Audeberte?
Quid si me in geminas secem ipse parts?
Harum vt altera Candidam reuisat,
Currat alter a versus Audebertum.
At est Candida sic auara, noui,
Vt totum cupiat tenere Bezam,
Sic Beza est cupidus sui Audebertus,
Beza vt gestiat integro potiri:
Amplector quoque sic and hunc and illam,
Vt totus cupiam videre vtrumque,
Integrisque frui integer duobus,
Praeferre attamen alterum necesse est,
O duram nimium necessitatem:
Sed postquam tamen alterum necesse est,
Priores tibi defero Audeberte,
quod si Candida forte conqueratur,
quid tum? Basiolo tacebit imo.
Now though this be somewhat too wanton, to have been uttered by Beza, in
respect of that office he now bears in the Church of God: yet, if you look
upon him, as he was then a young youth, brought up amongst your selves, where
not only such love songs and Epigrams were highly (...), but he also
wonderfullye extolled and praised by you for these: with what equity, in the
profession of the Gospel, should you now so egarly obiecte them against him?
And whether they sound so ill, as they are interpreted, by that baudy wretch, I
leave to the confideration of any indifferent reader, either Protestaunt or
Papist.

The title is: Theodorus Beza de sua in Candidam and Audebertum beneuolentia:
That is, Thodore Beza, concerning his good will toward Candida, and Audebert.
He interprets it thus.

The testimony of Theodore Beze the neu Pseudoprophet and pretendie reformator
of the world concerning his sodomitical Bougorie vith the zoung man Audebertus,
And adultery vith Candida, ane vthir ma^nis vyf, quha is his harlet zit for
the present, co^posit be him self in latin.

BEza quhy bydis thou, quhy dois thou stay?
Sen Candida and Audebert are both auay?
Thy love is in Pareis, in Orleans thy mirth,
zit thou vald vezel keip to thy girth,
Far from Candida lust of thy cor. s
Far from Audebert thy great plea-sors
Fair veil vezel veil mot ze fair,
Fair veil my brethering quha du-ellis (...)
I may spair vezel, my father, and zou,
Bot nather Audebert, nor Candidas mu.
Then quhilk of their prefer sold I
quhilk sold I vissie first or espy?
Candida may onie he deirar, nor thou?
Or Audebert any preferrit to zou?
quhat gif I cut (...)my body in tuay?
And give the ane half to Candida gay?
The other to Audebert: zit Candida nei-die
Vald Beza have hail scho is so gre-die:
And Aude-bert vald Beze have hail.
So covetous is he for to prevail,
Bot I vald so them both embrace
To be al hail with both in a place A (...)filthy knave, there is no such word
in the Epigram.

Her with her -- him with his --,
And I betuix both vith ane stif --:
zit (...)ane sold I prefer indeid
Bot O hou (...)a thing is neid? I blushe to (...)down the words (...).

And sen the ane ma be preferred
My fore quarters salbe con-ferd
To Aude-bert for Bougo-rie
The chiefest of my vo-luptie
But Candida gif scho com plain
I sal her -- kiss laich a gane.
If a man should rake hell for a filth, where might he find a worse, whose
impure heart, in that wherein he had chiefest delight, has made him with a
foul pen to set down to the world, that, which honest hearts would (...)to
think, and a shamefaste face and ear, would blush and burn once to hear:
and yet this he sets down with a foul pen to deliver to the print, that
it may be seen, read, and heard of the whole world: how near to the meaning
of the Epigrame', take it even as il as may be, and at the worst: I appeal to
al, as aforesaid. But (as I have said before) their Popes and Cardinals may
do what they list, but Beza for a youthly Poem, written in their own shame
and ignorance, must be so condemned, as both he and the religion that he
Platina. (...)Meiero.
professes, for his sake must be thrown to hell, and cried out against by
every fill thy rayler, with foul and vglye mouth. I omit those that were Abbas
(...).
heretics, favoring the Arrians, Nestorians, and such like, as was (...)rius
and Anastatius the 2. I omit Boniface the 8. who entered as a fox, reigned like
a Lion, and dyed like a Dog; who was condemned at a Council in France, of
murder, heresy, and symonie, and being dispossessed Les (...)France.
and imprisoned, became mad, and devoured his own flesh, the deuilles
keeping a terrible stir in the prison the same day that he Cronic.
Cronicor. Mare bist. (...).
dyed: I omit that holy man John the 23. that held that men were no better
then beasts, who was condemned in a general Council, and had his picture
burnt, by Nicholas the fifth, and whose opinions were also condemned by Benedict
the 12. I omit Gregory the eleventh, who at his death, confessed what a
cursed life he had lead, in being so couecous, and raking together that which
did him no good. What should I say of John the 24. who picked Alexander the
fifth over the perch, by Coucil. (...). tom. 2.
the help of an Italyan Fig, that he might come to the papal dignity him
self, who was condemned to be an heretic, a wicked knave, an oppressor of
the poor, a persecutor of the good, a stay to the wicked, a barterer and
exchaunger of By shoppricks and benefices, a glass of dishonestie, a vessel
full of vice, a devil incarnate, one that had kept his brothers sister as his
whore, had defiled many Nuns, and young maids, had contemned his own
religion and service, banished fasting and abstinence, had sold holy
relics, and namely S. John's head: for See the Articles to the number ber of 54.
put in against him.
50. thousand duckettes to the Florentines? What shoude I speak of Leo the 7.
who for his gluttony and incontinencie, might bear the bell, that for the
enlarging of the possessions of Peter's chair, dispossessed Duke Vrbyne of his
whole kingdom, bereaved the Duke of Ferara of Mantua and Regium Lepidi,
kindled wars betwixt Charles the 5. and Francis the French king, who
accounted the Gospel of Christ for a fable? What of Clement the 7. who by
coniuring and poisoning attained the keys and seat, paying for it thirty
thousand ducats, and doubting also of the immortality of the soul? To pass
(I say) over al these, and to come nearer our purpose, what need I remember
Pope Joan, begotten with child by a Cardinal, and laying her burden in an open
Procession in the open street, who was the cause, yt that honorable ceremony
of groping, in their porphirie stone should be used, to try whether they were
men, or women; What should I mention John the 11. begotten in adultery, and
(...),
living in it all the days of his life? who by the means of Theodora, that
shameless strumpet, was made first Bishop of Bullen, then of Rauenna, and
lastly Pope, til he was smothered by Marozia, daughter to Theodora, as very a
whore as the mother: who, to further her son John the 12. that was begotten
of her by Sergius the third, had his breath stopped with a coushin, until (...)
again, through a commotion was deposed, and Leo the 6. set in his place: which
Leo within less the^ 7. months was poisoned by the aforesaid Marozia, and
Steven the 6. set in his placebut yet drunk of the same cup. This Marozia had
also a whelp, named Albericus, who having gotten some head and power in Rome,
took an oath of the Citizens, that after Agapitus, they should elect his son
Octauian to be Pope, and this was called Io. 13. This cub grew up in the same
kind: For he lived filthily, and maintained an open stews: and being reproved
of some of his Cardinals for it, he cut off some of their noses, some of their
hands, some of their legs, and some of their privy members. This father of the
Church gave orders in stables, committed whordome with 2. sisters, (...)called
Stephana.
made children Bishops defiled virgins and widows, made his palace a brothel
house, lay with his fathers own Concubine, and with others, committed
robberies, and being at length deposed for his popelik dealings, be ing taken a
bed with another man's wife, he was worthily killed. I have before spoken of
Paul the 2. a Sodomite, whose neck was broken by the (...). (...). Textor,
devil, and of Sixtus the 4. that erected that shameful foundation of
Sodometrie, of both kinds, and dispensed with his kindred for the free use of
it. What should I speak yet more of your shamful dealings? I could set down,
that Inocent the 8, had plied this filthy occupation so fast, that he had 8.
bastard sons, and as many daughters: I could rehearse how Julius (...)de
Monte,
the 3. besides his strumpets, kept a knave for sodometical use, named Inocent,
to whom he gave a Cardinals hatte for his service in recompense. The like I
could say of (...) the 4. who for his beastly behavior that way, had this of
Pasquil set up by him: Impius es tu, pater tuus latro est, Matter (...)meretrix.
Thou art an ungodly wretch, thy father is a thief and a murderer, thy mother
a whore. Persons out of Bolsecke enuieth M. Caluines silver pot of wine, and
his diet bread: but this Pope keeping besides a curtesan another man's wife,
would commonly eat oysters and snailes, and drink Mangeguerra, to provoke
his beastly lust: which yet This was a very strong (...)for the purpose.
when through feeblenes of age, it would not serve his turn, his Curtesane
delighting more in the young Cardinal de Monte, then in him, he caused her to
be thrown into a stinking dungeon, to bring down her courage, til at last
setting her free again, he eat so raueningly, and spente him self so lauishly
upon her and the other, that he died in his bed beastly. They talk of Caluines
death, how he died: but if a man should set down their ends, they are
wonderful. How Stephen and Sergius used Formosus, Cronicon Sigeberti.
(...)Polonus.
how (...) used Christopher, how Benedict the 4. Been. the 5: how Boniface the
7. John the 15: having his eyes put out, and being famished to death. What
should I remember the horrible and fearful end of Bonif. the 8. that dyed
suddenly, and was trailed through the streets like a dog, thrust in with
spears and bodkins? what of Benedict the 8. who was seen after his death,
riding upon a black horse? They reckon up unto us, (as they think great
accusations, against Luther, (...), Beza and other godly men, which yet are but
sclaunders and lies, but these things appear (...). temp.
out of their own stories: that Engenius the 4. was not only accused, but
also convinced to be a blood thirsty and wicked man, and howsoever he
recovered his papacy after wards, by the help of the Dolphin of France, yet he
was deposed. So Julius the 8. like a Ruffy an threw S. Peter's keys Council.
(...).
into Tyber, and being a man given over to dronkennes, and other fleshly
filthynes, and to Sodometrie, abusing two noble Children, that were sent by the
Queen of France to Cardinal Nantes, by the means also of great wars, he
caused, that within less then seven years, there were brought above two
hundred thousand persons to their graves. And as for their beastly Coniurers,
they are sy known, and so many, that it would require a whole volum to set down
but their names and doings. Was not Siluester the 2. a trim fellow, that by the
means of his M. daughter, dwelling in Spain, got such a book, as taught him
great skill: and was ye cause of al his preferment. For it brought him to the
Popedom, and from thence to the devil: the devil going beyond him in a
bargain that he had made with him, to have his soul when he should take him
saying Mass in Jerusalem? Of whom John 19 learned his cunning, though he
enjoyed his popedom not so long time. To these Coniurers may be joined
Benedict Plat. Naucl. Ioh. de (...)Maria^, (...)
the 9. Gregory the 7. that notable firebrand, that threw the sacrament in to
the fire, and committed such notable villainies, forbidding marriage, that the
whole world was festred with his abominations. And even as these Popes, that
were the heads of that Antichristyan seat for the most part, especially since
they took upon them that Antichristian title, degenerating from Christ and
his doctrine, have showed them selves the veriest villains that ever lived, so
their creatures that as swarms have pestred the world, have been the
wickedest wretches yt ever lived, living in adultery, buggerie, incest, and al
kind of filthynesse: their Cardinals, Bishops, Abbots and (...), giving over
them selves to committee wickedness, with greedines. But if any such filthynes
be found in Israel, we neither justify nor allow it. But they will not see
their own sins, which if they would or did acknowledge, it should make the^
to lay their hands on their mouth, and to be ashamed, they would not abide
that in them selves, even from their highest Popes to their lowest Priests,
which they do: to wit, all kind of Sodometrie, filthiness, and iniquity.
They forsooth may not marry, and then good enough, though they play the
whoremongers, maintain as it were a stews, in every place where they come,
giving over them selves to all filthynesse. Their Popes may possess their
own daughters, and Alexander Borg. called Alex. the 6. His daughters name was
(...), who lay with the Pope her Father, and with Valentin (...). her own (...).
they may be likewise abused by their own sons: so as one, and the same may
be his daughter, his whore, and his daughter in law, and all at once, without
any blame: yea their harlottes can make Cardinals, purchase by shopprickes,
and do whatsoever they (...), as partelye I have showed: yea, their Popes can
lay their own sisters to gage, and take away others by poison, for telling any
tales concerning their filthiness: let Paulus Fernesius, Petrus Aloissius,
Julius Tertius, Johannes Acasa, and Canisius, that for names sake was married
after the manner of dogs to (...), mentioned before, bear witness. All
these things therefore objected against Beza, concerning the sellinge and
letting of his priorie, is false and villainous, and so also is that shameless
report, of his running away with an other man's wife, which if they had been
true, all the safe conductes that the king of France could have made him,
could not have saved him from the shame of such outrageous iniquity: or at
least, if any such challendge had bin made, either by the fermers, or by the
Tailer, (...)that Launoy had given the one of them a hundred crowns, to stop
his mouth, could have stopped the blaste of this infamy, especially beeinge
in such a place, where they would have been glad for to have had some
such matter against him, to have defaced him. Where both he and we should
have had it hot in our noses, set out to the vttermoste, and with the
fullest testimonies, whereas now forsooth only Bolsecke an heretic and an
enemy, and (...) a slidebacke, and an Apostata, are brought in, in a dumb show
to witness the matter. But here for the better satisfiyng of the godly: (for
I suppose nothing can satisfy the papists that are (...)sonable men) in regard
of these accusations, I will set down a letter from M. Beza him self,
(...)even very lately to a learned and godly father of this Realm, that had
written unto him a little before concerning these matters, wherein they shall
hear what M. Beza answers, which I have faithfully thus translated.

Master Beza his Letter to the reverend and godly learned man M. Tho. S.
I Rejoice, that it was and is untrue, that lately was showed unto me, to wit,
that you were gone before me unto that same most quiet haue^, to which we have
hitherto striued through so many storms. Blessed be the Lord our God even
for this, and he grant, that you may long live for the benefit of his
Church. If I had known that the matter had been so, you should not have
been so (...)of me,, when eue^ very lately, not passing three days since, ye
messenger of our Senate coming thither, I wrote letters, directed to many,
concerning our affairs: as also unless it were troublesome unto you, I would
have you to learn of M. (...), or of our M. Fountain, or of those (...)Bishops
themselves, and that you would not think it much also, to lend us your
helping hand in that business. But as concerning those infamous libels of
(...), written against Calvin being dead, and me yet a live, and alleged
(...)the (...): besides, that I have long since waxed hard with suffering such
reproaches, yet he has devised nothing of Calvin, or vomited out against me,
unto which I have not answered before: to wit, in Caluins Interim, and in my
other answer to Claudius then a Monk, and now a popish Bishop, which
concludes the second volume of my works. For this same Verlet writes
nothing, which he has not taken from others, especially out of a libell of a
certain couled Franciscan, This was Anthony Cathalyne as I guess.
published at Lions twenty year ago: in which that wicked wretch, being
expulsed from Lausanna, with his harlot, when I was Rector or Governor of the
school there, sparing none of ye ministers or professors of Lausanna, feigned
also that same tale of my wife, whom I should carry from her husband. Unto
which libell Calvin also thought good somewhat to answer, which if you will
look, you shall find amongst his small books published here together in the
year 1576. in the 531. Page I my self do therefore answer nothing, because
when he had spread those sclaunders at Lausanna, the author according to the
mayor his judgment, had asked me forgiuesse for his lying, acknowledged his
fault unto me by writing, under the common seal of the Town. Afterward, I
understood that ye wretch with his harlot, was for other wickednesses cast
into prison at Paris, a little before the beginning of the first civil wars,
and at the length (as I think) ended his life in an halter. But Bolsecke is
also more detestable, enterprising by circumstances of names and times, partly
true and partly false, to put upon these devises some color of truth, to
deceive the ignorant, being infamous by a threefold banishment, and at the
length falling into open defection of Papistrie, has now so durst to lie,
being in the desperate estate of poverty, yt he might win some favor with the
Archbishop of Lions, a man not much more godly then himself: at that time when
as in a (...)Town of the Country of Subaudia, six miles from this City, he
most impudently; and also unskillfully, professed Physic to his small
profit: Afterward his libell also being enlarged by another impure Apostata
Lan zus, whom I hear not to be there unknown unto you, wonderful things
being promised unto him: of which promises, when the miserable fellow saw that
(...)were both frustrate, he went unto his place, and shortly after departed
(...)life. But do you think (my good Sampson) that I ought so to stay at the
barkings of these Curres, that by bestowing labor in confuting these things
again, which have been so often confuted, I might stir up others to
follow, being more impudent, having no conscience in devising any thing? Or
rather to lean upon mine own conscience, and their testimony, who have been
beholders of my life these 34. years, and by a flat and constant despising the
outrageous barkings of these dogs, which at length of their own accord, will
vanishe away, as much as I can approve my faith and integrity to the Church,
and to all good men. They reprehend my Poemes, which fell from (...)when I was
a young man among the Papists, for which very thing I obtained great praise
even with the Italians. The which not withstanding were printed first of all,
by the permission of the Senate of Paris: which Poemes, I my self first
condemned: which yet may seem very chaste in comparison of many of their sort
of writings, and which they themselves do suffer, and would have them
printed again and again: if I (forsooth) had been given to accompany (...),
or to have committed any thing more filthy, would I have be taken my self
into this church, or not rather have abidden still amongst themselves, where
(I may be bold to say) so large a way was opened, and by many means unto great
riches and to no small dignities: neither was I altogether so senseless, but
that I sweat long time, and labored much in ouercomming this ten tation: If I
went out of my Country for debt, how comes it (...)pass, that no man for
these 34 (...), has sued me in this City, where it is known that the law
is executed most severely. If being guilty of that crime, I forsook France:
how is it, that in so long time, there appeared no accuser, especially seeing
I have so many enemies willingly and of their own accord, without any fee,
conspiring against my life? But I know that I need not these excuses,
neither with you (my Sampson) or with any upright Judges. The brethren which
are here, neither they of Paris, where Lanzus the (...)got these thingse to
be printed, do think meet that I should once think of writing any new
answer. And surely I would wish, that I might bestow the rest of the time
that I have to live, in more profitable matter. Notwithstanding I would have
this to be wayed both of you, and the other brethren, whom I know to have a
care of the glory of God, and of my credit and estimation: that what you shall
advise to be requisite for the good of the Church, I may embrace and perform
in deed, to the uttermost of my power: Farewell most worthy man, and my
dearly beloved brother. The Lord Jesus grant that ouercomming all lets and
hindrances, we may manfully and constantly, enjoying his power, run forth
our race even unto the goal. Pray likewise for this City, the Church and
ministry, even as I pray with all my heart, the most good and mighty God,
that he would bless you and your labors. From (...) the 10. of October.
1582.

Yours wholly, Theodore Beza.

I beseech you that you will pardon the bad writing and letters, of a
trembling and shaking hand, hasting by reason of the speedy departure of the
carrier.

The like is to be said concerning the begetting of his servant with child,
and also murdering the same: Peter Viret being a notable man, being (as he
says) of counsel with him, al set abroad forsooth by Bolsecke, and dubbed
upon the report of a barber. O shameless iniquity, at which even the very
heavens do sweat, and were it not that God in his long patience, did suffer
such wretches to try the faith of his children, and also to utter their own
shame, that all creatures might witness against them: the earth would not
bear them, but even cleave, that they might be swallowed up quick to hell,
and so come to a just and full damnation.

Concerning that he adds, that it should proceed from (...), that the
young king of France should have been taken at Amboys, that Lions, Orleans,
Poyters, and other Cities should have been surprised: that he should
contriue the death of the Duke of Guise, and commit the execution thereof to
Poultrot, that he should be the author of those books (which he calls)
seditious, to wit, of the book entitled the Furies of France, another the
truth, another the watch, another the waking Bell, and the last the life of the
Queen mother: they are to be credited as all the rest are. For first whether
we look upon the reporters, or upon the circumstances to prove these
reports, they are both insufficient to prove any such thing against so rare
and notable a man. For if that matter at Amboys had been contrived from
Geneua, the stories being set down, so many and so variable, as well by
Papists, as by those of the reformed religion, either one or the other would
have touched it, they would, have set down the guilties examinations, and
have published the^ to the world, with the All the histories in a manner written
in the French tongue do acquit the Admiral and the Protestants.
most sufficient proofs, to have brought that place into hatred. And if so
many Cities should have been surprised by their devise, the treason would
have been further discovered, their several confessions that were racked,
tortured, and executed, for and about it, should have been published. And
concerning the Duke of Guises death, the noble Admiral that was so cruelly
murdered, being charged with the same fact, should not have been so cleared
by all their histories one and other that have written of it, nor all the rest
of the Protestants, as they were, as appears by sundry the French kings
Edicts and Proclamations, that have acquitted them from it. And touching the
last, concerning those books, how should Bolsecke know that Beza was the
author, was he present with him; Has he yet confirmed it by any sufficient
testimony? Or did he know it by any special revelation? Can no man write
books but Beza? Was Beza there that he could so set down their particular
dealinges? Is it not rather likely that it was some from amongst themselves,
that being converted and escaping those (...), in the detestation of such
proceedinges wrote them, that was of more intelligence, and acquainted beter
with matters of state, then Beza either was or could be? But any man may
feel these lies they be so gross, and shameless.

That which follows deserves no answer, concerning Beza (...). For all men
know that know the state of a reformed Church, that howesoeuer the Pope like
a Tyrant rages and raueth at Rome: yet Beza cannot do so at Geneua, where
albeit great price be set upon Nothing (...)alone in reformed Churches but by
(...).
him, in respect of his rare and notable gifts, whom they honor and love, as
a singular minister of Jesus Christ: yet he does nothing alone, but all is
done by common consent of the Church, and of the states. And therefore if any
such Merline (as you name) were deposed from his ministry, I warrant you, it
was not for his goodness, or for his sincerity. The like is to be thought of
Gaigne. and the Lord of (...), belike it was for some treason or conspiracy,
seeing the punishment was so capital and deadly. And as for such as you name,
to be the furnishers, and furniture of Geneua, which you make an harborow of
male factours, and wicked livers, of banckrupts, and such as run away from
their husbands and from their wives: though a thousand such Varlets as your
self, conspiring it, against it, should swear it: yet they that have dwelt
there and know it, know that it is most unjust and lewd that you report of
it: For no man can dwell and continue there, no not a few days without
examination from whence he came, and whither he would, but they must know of
his life, religion, and honesty. Seruetus may confute this sclaunder, that
being an heretic, could not escape there, how soever he had escaped in
France, and in other Cities; neither can any others, if, they have been any
notorious offenders; they will quickly be found out, they can neither be
there received, nor find any such maintenance. In deed in your Cities and Popes
kingdom, where lust bears the sway, and iniquity has gotten the upper
hand, there unclean birds do nestle themselves, as in an unclean cage:
there wicked men, that run from their wives, and wicked women that leave
their husbands, may have protection and mainteinaunce enough, for they took
their beginning from such good foundations, and so did Rome it self, which
afterward became that same rose colored whore, Rome had his beginning from
such a foundation.
that was the most glorious strumpet in the world, whither for refuge of
(...), have (...)all the sinckes and channels in the world. Geneua yet
(...)granted such dispensations, for diuorses in cases against the word Rome
the mother of carnalitie and carnal (...).
of God, as Rome has done: Geneua never maintained the stews, such witcheries
and sorceries, idolatries and blasphemies, as Rome has done.

And whereas you say that M. Charke, upon occasion given by himself, has
heard somewhat of the first beginners or restorers of our Gospel, etc. We
(...), that M. Charke has given no such occasion, and you have but testified
and set out to the world, the villainous spirit, that dwells in that
cankered heart of yours: for all men of God know, and by the grace of God
wilconfesse, that these men in deed were holy men and Saints of God, and
whatsoever infirmities they had, Men are not the beginners of the gospel.
yet the Lord having appointed them to a singular work, did enrich and
beautify them, with (...)and singular gifts: neither yet do we say that these
men were the first beginners or restorers of our Gospel. For our Gospel was
before all beginnings, delivered and restored to the Church of God in all
ages, (...)in it self, and shining into the hearts of all the faithful from
time to time to their everlasting salvation. In deed some of these men were
rare instruments in the general Eclipse of the world, when Antichriste your
Pope had prevailed, and had now corrupted and confounded the truth and true
religion of God: these were instruments to scatter that doctrine, and to scour
of that filth and rust, that in length and continuance of time, was grown upon
it, bringing forth that word of God that long had lain hidden, and the Lord
gave a singular blessing unto their labors, reclaiming a great part of the
world from your heresies, and being also, godly virtuous men, your supposition
being false, all that you infer upon it, must likewise be false. And as for
your recapitulation, it is proved before upon occasion of that you have
objected, that the vocation, life and doctrine of M. Luther, was from God, and
not from Satan, as you blasphemously speak, from whom can proceed Religion
is not from man, though God give his gifts unto me^.
no good thing; but the religion of Jesus Christ, which (by the (...)of God)
Martyn Luther professed, was (as I have said) the wisdom of God, hidden in a
mystery with God from before all beginninges. Of the publishing whereof,
although it pleased God to make Martin Luther an instument, and others after
him, yet were they not, neither (...)nor beginners.

As for that you (...)in Carolostadius with Occolampadius and (...). Zvvinglius.
(...), the one being in deed an heretic, and the other sound and The
Papists (...)heretics amongst those that are sound professors, to the end to
deface them. (...).
godly learned fathers: It is but your old practice, to the end you might
deface them. For concerning Carolostadius he was a man so corrupt and evil in
religion, as he was instly sequestered from their unity, and in that Sleidan
our own historiographer, does set forth his banishment and miserable end, it
shows how both he and we did like of it. The other two in deed were hardly
thought of by Luther, and there was some difference betwixt them, concerning a
point of the sacrament, but this was not in any such matter of substance, as
could, or did break that same unity that is amongst the children of God. As
for (...), he was a worthy man, and it cannot be showed by any testimony,
that he came to any such death: that was an end, that (...) As was Siluester
the second when he said Mass in a chapel called Jerusalem in Rome, and
Alexander the sixth.
out to some of their Popes, who were carried (as their stories witness) even
as a man may say quick to the Devil. Of like truth is it that out of lying
Lyndan, (who has labored to discredit all religion, and to bring the
scriptures of God into doubt concerning the originalles, both Heberwe and
Greek) that he delivers unto us that he should kill himself with his own
hands: for that is the end of that desperate doctrine of popery, which
teaches satisfaction to the justice of God, by (...). (...)in (...).
their own (...): which when any of them have felt them selves too short of,
they have bin their own hangmen, and come to miserable ends. Mention has been
made before of some, and I refer the reader unto those places that are
quoted. If I would enter into that field, and make comparison between both the
one and the other, every man should see what little cause Parsons has to speak
of the end of any, that prosessed The death of Gods saints precious in his
(...).
the Gospel of Jesus Christ: For a man might reckon up al sorts amongst them,
that have died most wretchedly, in great despair, in (...)of conscience, in
doubtful wavering of their salvation: the most smitten by the hand of God, and
for lack of peace, smiting them selves: whereas the others, died joyfully in
great peace, and assurance of the favor and mercy of God: And so did not
only Oecolampadius, but also Zwinglius, whom impudently also he would make to
have received his doctrine (...)in not forsakinge his flock in the field, did
the duty of a says full Pastor.
of the Sacrament from a spirit, as he had charged Luther before him, whose
end, though it were in the field, he doing the duty of a good Pastor, and
not forsaking his flock, died gloriously: because he dyed in mayntenaunce of
the truth against the enemies of the Gospel.

And as for Calvin, besides that that has been said, the noble (...)of his
woonderful learning, great pains, excellent knowledge, sincere judgment, etc.
shall be enough to stop the mouths of al his enemies, whose doctrine, though
he would sever and set at odds, from that which Zwinglius taught, by the
testimony of two false witnesses like him self, Andreas Sebedeus preacher of
Noion, and Johannes Angelus, pracher of Burtin, both zwinglians, which they did
take upon them to prove against Calvin, before the Magistrates of Berna,
Calvin him self being present, whereupon should proceed a decree from those
Magistrates, in the year 1555. that none of their dominions should go and
communicate with Calvin at Geneua, etc. It is even as true as the rest: for if
there had been such difference in so many Articles, why are not those Articles
set down? Why is not an extract of that edict also set forth, that men might
see the causes of that restraint? But all this is nothing but malice. For shall
we think, that the Lords of Berne, who are joined to the other Churches in the
same profession, and maintain the Gospel, that there should be such
difference betwit The people in well reformed Churches, sorted to their own
parrishes.
them? Indeed in well reformed Churches the people are bound, not to run
where they list, and to communicate where they will, but they are sorted into
flocks, and every flock has their own Pastors, and such an edicte might
pass from the Magistrates: But who is this Pontas, by whose credit this is
delivered unto us? If it be your lying Potacus, which you have mentioned
before, he deserves as little credit in this, as in the other things that he
brought before.

As concerning Beza (who you say) has brought our doctrine to perfection, that
is as you expound, to Puritanisme, in whom (you say) M. Charke may greatly
rejoice, for that he shows him self in his reply a most zealous Puritan: I
answer, that we thank God for those notable helps, which we have received
by the excellent ministry, of that worthy man M. Beza. The truth of God,
though it be so perfect in it self, as no man can bring perfection to it, yet
then it is most clear and glorious, when it is separated, and purified from
the corruption and (...)of Popery: wherein, if M Bexa his pains have been
further employed, then others, why should this be imputed unto him, as worthy
of blame, and as if he were an heretic, he be charged to embrace that which
both he and we do set our selves against, more then ever did the Papists?
unless they call that Puritanisme, when men do study (...)separate them
selves from Popish corruptions, which indeed, because Papists do not, as they
call us in spite, Puritans, we may justly call them filthy Porkelins.

Last of al, concerning that worthy man M. Bucer, whom this wretch (...).
seeking to deface, as he has done all the rest, by the authority of lying
Lindane, he auouching it upon the report of certain Merchants (as he says)
of Colen, and by the report of Pontacus before rehearsed, a popish, and
therefore a lying Historiographer of our time, who forsooth (as some of his
own Disciples should report) should die a Jew, denying Christ to be come: it
is so foul and false a sclaunder, as M. Charke has already proved, and the
story both of his life and death set forth to all the world, does testify,
as I will not any longer stand upon it. As for the inconstancy, altering and
changing that they charge him with, whereby they would gather, yt he so often
altered and changed his faith, that he might die a Jew, (as Parsons says)
welinough: It is a report worthy such reporters. For, for his inconstancy, it
was no other then it bcommeth al Christians, who must, and do, grow from
worsse to better: we begin first with principles, as it were with milk, but
afterward (by the grace of God) we are confirmed, and can receive stronger
meat: Both Phillip Melancthon, and Martin Bucer, were woorthye men, and yet by
the means of Luther, and Zwinglius in that point of the Scrament, they were
diversely distracted, till their judgment was better confirmed. And what
reproach ( Parsons) was this unto the: Must Bucer therefore needs so often alter
and change his faith, as he was found to alter and change his opinion in this
point? Is there no difference, betwixt a man's faith, that is, that which
comprehends the whole doctrine of faith, and a little point, which only
consists in a matter of circumstance; Again, have the Papists always been
one, of one growth, always like themselves; Did not Priest Bristow, dissemble
a great while, come to our Church, communicate with our Sacraments, be
present at our exercises and disputations, long time after her Majesty came to
her Crown? Did not Friar Campion so, living in S. John's College, beating
office in the University, being the Grocers scholar, and proceeding so
far, that he should have preached before them? And good Sir Robert, (if you
be the author of this book) for your self, how lived you in your college,
before you were expelled your house for your prodigality and wickedness; before
you went beyond the Seas; When there was a greater likelicood, that you would
prove some notable royster or (...), whom the gallows would take up by the
way, rather then a Jesuit: who for popish treason (except the Lord turn your
heart) will bring you (I fear) to a just and a deserved end.

As for that which follo weth (having been long in this) seeing it is matter
of doctrine, and contains but such things as has been already objected, and
was long ago answered: wherein also I suppose M. Chark, as God shall give him
strength, leisure and time, either presently, or when the whole shall come out,
will shap some answer: I leave it for my part, estee ming it unworthy any,
beseeching al good readers, even for Christ's sake, and as they tender their
own salvation, to beware of those enemies: who^ we do see to be distressed in
the maintenance of their cause, that they are driven from the matter, to the
manner, from the truth to men's persons, from the word of God, to men's
traditions, seeking nothing but to inueigle us by odious and false accusations.

Now the Lord Jesus open thy heart, give thee wisdom and strength, that thou
may discern truth from error, and light from darkness: and discerning it,
may so fast cleave unto it, as thou may stand against Satan, against hell,
against Antichrist, and against al his Adherentes, to live and die in it.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the three Cranes in the Uintree, by Thomas Dawson, and
Toby Smith.

1583.


