THE REVENGE OF Bussy D'Ambois. A TRAGEDY. As it has been often presented at
the private Playhouse in the White-Fryers. Written By GEORGE CHAPMAN,
Gentleman.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. and are to be sold by JOHN HELM, at his Shop in S.
Dunstones Churchyard, in Fleetstreet. 1613.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS, AND truly Noble Knight, Sr. Thomas Howard. etc.
Sir,
SInce Works of this kind have been lately esteemed worthy the Patronage of
some of our worthiest Nobles, I have made no doubt to prefer this of mine to
your undoubted Virtue, and exceeding true Noblesse: as containing matt^r no
less deserving your reading, and excitation to Heroycall life, then any such
late Dedication. Nor have the greatest Princes of Italy, and other Countries,
conceived it any least diminution to their greatness, to have their Names
winged with these Tragic Plumes, and dispersed by way of Patronage, through
the most Noble Notices of Europe.

Howsoever therefore in the Scaenicall presentation, it might meet with some
maligners, yet considering, even therein, it past with approbation of more
worthy judgments; the Balance of their side (especially being held by your
impartial hand) I hope will to no grain abide the out-weighing. And for the
autenticall truth of either person or action, who (worth the respecting) will
expe^t it in a Poem, whose subject is not truth, but things like truth? Poor
envious souls they are that cavil at truths want in these natural fictions:
material instruction, elegant and sententious excitation to Virtue, and
deflection from her contrary; being the soul, lims, and limits of an
autenticall Tragedy. But whatsoever merit of your full countenance and favor
suffers defect in this, I shall soon supply with some other of more general
account: wherein your right virtuous Name made famous and preserved to
posterity, your future comfort and honor in your present acceptance, and
love of all virtuous and divine expression; may be so much past others of your
Rank encreast, as they are short of your Judicial Ingenuitie, in their due
estimation.

For, howsoever those Ignoble and sowrebrow'd Worldlings are careless of
whatsoever future, or present opinion spreads of them; yet (with the most
divine Philosopher, if Scripture did not confirm it) I make it matter of my
Faith; that we truly retain an intellectual feeling of Good or Bad after
this life; proportionably answerable to the love or neglect we bear here to
all Virtue, and truely-humane Instruction: In whose favor and honor I wish
you most eminent; And rest ever.

Your true Virtues most true obseruer, Geo. Chapman.

The Actors names.
HEnry, the King. Monsieur, his Brother. Guise. D. Renel, a Marquess. Mont
sureau, an Earl. Baligny, Lord Lieutenant. Clermont, D' Ambois. Captains.
Maillard. Challon. Aumal.
Espernone. Soissone. Perricot. The Guard. Soldiers. Servants. The ghost of
Bussy. Monsieur. Guise. Card Guise. Shattilion.

Countess of Cambray. Tamyra, wife to Mont sureau. Charlotte, wife to Baligny.
Rioua, a Servant.
THE REVENGE OF Bussy D'Ambois. A TRAGEDY.
Actus primi
Scaena prima.
Enter Baligny, Renel. Baligny. TO what will this declining Kingdom turn,
Swindging in every license, as in this
Stupide permission of brave D' Ambois Murder?
Murder made parallel with Law? Murder used
To serve the Kingdom, given by suit to men
For their advancement? suffered scarcrow-like
To fright adultery? what will policy
At length bring under his capacity?

Rene. All things: for as when the high births of Kings
Deliverances, and Coronations,
We celebrate with all the Cities Bells
(Iangling together in untuned confusion:)
All ordered Clockes are tied up: so when Glory,
Flattery, and smooth applauses of things ill,
Uphold th'^ordinate swindge of downright power,
Justice, and truth, that tell the bounded use,
Virtuous, and well distinguished forms of Time,
Are gagged and tongue-tide, but we have observed
Rule in more regular motion: things most lawful
Were once most royal, Kings sought common good
Men's manly liberties, though never so mean,
And had their own swindge so* more free, and more,
But when pride entered them, and Rule by power,
All brows that smiled beneath them, frowned; hearts grieved,
By imitation; virtue quite was vanished,
And all men stud^'d self-love, fraud, and vice,
Then no man could be good but he was punished:
Tyrants being still more fearful of the good
Then of the bad; their subjects virtues ever
Managed with curbs, and dangers, and esteemed
As shadows, and detractions to their own.

Bal. Now all is peace, no danger: now what follows?
Idleness rusts us; since no virtuous labor
Ends oug^t rewarded: Ease, Security
Now all the Palm wears, we made war before
So to prevent war, men with giving gifts
More then receiving, made our Country strong;
Our matchless race of Soldiers then would spend
In public wars, not private brawles, their spirits;
In daring Enemies, armed with meanest arms;
Not courting strumpets, and consuming birthrights
In Apishnesse, and envy of attire.
No labor then was harsh, no way so deep,
No rock so steep, but if a Bird could scale it,
Up would our youth fly to. A Foe in arms
Stirred up a much more lust of his encounter,
Then of a Mistress never so be-painted:
Ambition then, was only scaling walls;
And ouer-topping turrets: Fame was wealth;
Best parts, best deeds, were best Nobility;
Honor with worth; and wealth well got or none.
Countries we won with as few men as Countries.
Virtue subdued all.

Ren. Just: and then our Nobles
Loved virtue so, they praised and used it to;
Had rather do, then say; their own deeds hearing
By others glorified, then be so barraine,
That their parts only stood in praising others.

Bal. Who could not do, yet praised, and enui'd not;
Civil behavior flourisht; Bounty flowed,
Avarice to vpland Boores, slaves hang-men banished.

Ren. It Is now quite otherwise; but to note the cause
Of all these foul digressions, and reuolts
From our first natures, this it is in a word:
Since good Arts fail, crafts and deceits are used:
Men ignorant are idle; idle men
Most practice what they most may do with ease,
Fashion, and favor; all their studies aiming
At getting money, which no wise man ever
Fed his desires with.

Bal. Yet now none are wise
That think not heavens true foolish, weighed with that.
Well thou most worthy to be greatest Guise,
Make with thy greatness a new world arise.
Such d^prest Nobles (followers of his)
As you, my self, my Lord will find a time
When to revenge your wrongs.

Ren. I make no doubt:
In mean time, I could wish, the wrong were righted
Of your slain Brother in law, brave Bussy D' Ambois.

Bal. That one accident was made my charge.
My Brother Bussy's Sister (now my wife)
By no suite would consent to satisfy
My love of her, with marriage, till I ^ow'd,
To use my utmost to revenge my Brother:
But Clermont D' Ambois (Bussy's second Brother)
Had (since) his apparition, and excitement,
To suffer none but his hand in his wreake,
Which he has vowed, and so will needs acquit
Me of my vow, made to my wife, his Sister,
And undertake himself Bussy's revenge;
Yet loathing any way to give it act,
But in the noblest and most manly course.
(If The Earl dares take it) he resolves to send
A Challenge to him, and my self must bear i^,
To which delivery I can use no means;
He is so barricado'd in his house,
And armed with guard still.

Ren. That means lay on me,
Which I can strangely make. My last lands sale,
By his great suite, stands now on price with him,
And he (as you know) passing covetous,
(With that blind greediness that follows gain)
Will cast no danger, where her sweet feet tread.
Besides, you know, his Lady by his suite,
(Wooing as freshly, as when first love shot
His faultlesse arrows from her rosy eyes)
Now lives with him again, and she, I know,
Will join with all helps, in her friends revenge.

Bal. No doubt (my Lord) and therefore let me pray you
To use all speed; for so on needels points
My wifes heart stands with haste of the revenge:
Being (as you know) full of her brothers fire,
That she imagines I neglect my vow;
Keeps off her kind embraces, and still asks;
When, when, will this revenge come? when performed
Will this dull vow be? And I vow to Heaven
So sternely, and so past her sex she vrges
My vows performance; that I almost fear
To see her, when I have a while been absent,
Not showing her before I speak, the blood
S^e so much thirsts for, freckling hands and face,

Ren. Get you the Challenge writ, and look from me,
To hear your passage cleared no long time after.
Exit Ren.
Bal. All restitution to your worthiest Lordship,
Whose errand I must carry to the King,
As having sworn my service in the search
Of all such Malcontents, and their designs,
By seeming one affected with their faction,
And discontented humors against the state:
Nor does my brother Clermont escape my counsel
Given to the King, about his Guisean greatness,
Which (as I spice it) has possessed the King
(Knowing his daring spirit) of much danger:
Charged in it to his person: though my conscience
Dare swear him clear of any power to be
Infected with the least dishonestie:
Yet that sincerity, we Politicians
Must say, grows out of envy, since it cannot
Aspire to policies greatness: and the more
We work on all respects of kind, and virtue,
The more our service to the King seems great,
In sparing no good that seems bad to him:
And the more bad, we make the most of good,
The more our policy searches; and our service
Is wondered at for wisdom and sincerenesse.
It Is easy to make good suspected still,
Where good, and God, are made but cloakes for ill.
Enter Henry, Mon^sieur, Guise, Clerm Espernone, Foisson, Monsieur taking leave
of the King. See Monsieur taking now his leave for Brabant,
The Guise, and his dear Minion, Clermont D'Ambois,
Whispering together, not of state affairs
I durst lay wagers, (though the Guise be now
In chief heat of his faction) but of some thing,
Sauouring of that which all men else despise,
How to be truly noble, truly wise.

Mors. See how he hangs upon the ear of Guise,
Like to his Jewel.

Esper. He Is now whispering in
Some doctrine of stabilitie, and freedom,
Contempt of outward greatness, and the guises
That vulgar great ones make their pride and zeal,
Being only servile trains, and sumptuous houses,
High places, offices.

Mons. Contempt of these
Does he read to the Guise? It Is passing needful,
And he, I think, makes show t'affect his doctrine.

Esp. Commends, admires it.

Mons. And pursues another,
It Is fine hypocrisy, and cheap, and vulgar,
Known for a covert practice, yet believed
(By those abused souls, that they teach and govern)
No more then Wives adulteries, by their Husbands,
They bearing it with so unmoved aspects,
Hot coming from it; as twere not all,
Or made by custom nothing. This same D'Ambois
Has gotten such opinion of his virtues,
(Holding all learning but an Art to live well,)
And showing he has learned it, in his life,
Being thereby strong in his persuading others;
That this ambitious Guise, embracing him,
Is thought t'mbrace his virtues.

Esp. Yet in some
His virtues are held false for the others vices:
For it is more cunning held, and much more common,
To suspect truth then falsehood: and of both,
Truth still fares worse; as hardly being believed,
As it is unusual, and rarely known.

Mons. I Will part engendring virtue. Men affirm
Though this same Clermont has a D'Ambois spirit,
And breathes his brothers valor; yet his temper
Is so much past his, that you cannot move him:
I Will try that temper in him, Come, you two
Devour each other with your virtues zeal,
And leave for other friends, no fragment of ye:
I wonder Guise, you will thus ravish him
Out of my bosom, that first gave the life
His manhood breathes, spirit, and means and luster.
What do men think of me, I pray thee Clermont?
Once give me leave (for trial of that love
That from thy brother Bussy thou inherit'st)
T'vnclaspe thy bosom.

Cler. As how sir?

Mons. Be a true glass to me, in which I may
Behold what thoughts the many headed-beast,
And thou thy self breathes out concerning me,
My ends, and new vpstarted state in Brabant,
For which I now am bound, my higher aims,
Imagined here in France: speak man, and let
Thy words be borne as naked as thy thoughts:
O were brave Bussy living!

Cler. Living my Lord?

Mons. It Is true, thou art his brother, but durst thou
Have brau'd the Guise: mauger his presence, courted
His wedded Lady; emptied even the dregs
Of his worst thoughts of me, even to my tenth;
Discerned not me his rising sovereign
From any common groom: but let me hear
My grossest faults, as grosse-full as they were.
Durst thou do this?

Cler. I cannot tell: A man
Does never know the goodness of his stomach
Till he sees meat before him. Were I dared,
Perhaps as he was, I durst do like him.

Mons. Dare then to pour out here thy freest soul,
Of what I am.

Cler. It Is stale, he told you it.

Mons. He only iested, spoke of spleen and envy;
Thy soul more learned, is more ingenuous,
Searching, judicial; let me then from thee
Hear what I am.

Cler. What but the sole support,
And most expectant hope of all our France,
The toward victor of the whole low Countries?

Mons. Tush, thou will sing Encomions of my praise,
Is this like D'Ambois? I must vex the Guise,
Or never look to hear free truth; tell me,
For Bussy lives not: he durst anger me,
Yet for my love, would not have feared to anger
The King himself. Thou vnderstand'st me, do not?

Cler. I shall my Lord, with study.

Mons. Do understand thy self? I pray thee tell me,
Do never search thy thoughts, what my design
Might be to entertain thee and thy brother?
What turn I meant to serve with you?

Cler. Even what you please to think.

Mons. But what think thou?
Had I no end in it think?

Cler. I think you ha^

Mons. When I took in such two as you two were,
A ragged couple of decaid Commanders,
When a French-crowne would plentifully serve
To buy you both to any thing in the earth.

Cler. So it would you:

Mons. Nay bought you both outright,
You and your Trunkes: I fear me, I offend thee.

Cler. No not a jot.

Mons. The most renowned Soldier
Epaminondas (as good Authors say)
Had no more suites then backs, but you two shared
But one suite twixt you both, when both your studies
Were not what meat to dine with; if your Partridge,
Your S^ipe, your Wood-cocke, Lark, or your red Hering,
But where to beg it, whether at my house,
Or at the Guises (for you know you were
Ambitious beggars,) or at some Cookes-shop,
TO eternize the Cooks trust, and score it up.
Do not offend thee?

Cler. No sir. Pray proceed.

Mons. As for thy Gentry, I dare boldly take
Thy honorable oath: and yet some say
Thou and thy most renowned noble Brother,
Came to the Court first in a Keele of Sea-coale;
Do not offend thee?

Cler. Never doubt it, sir.

Mons. Why do I love thee then? why have I raked thee
Out of the dunghill? cast my cast Wardrobe on thee?
Brought thee to Court to, as I did thy Brother?
Made ye my saucy bon companions?
Taught ye to call our greatest Noble men
By the corruption of their names; Jack, Tom?
Have I blown both for nothing to this bubble?
Though thou art learned; thast no enchanting wit*
Or were thy wit good, am I therefore bound
To keep thee for my Table?

Cler. Well Sir, 'twere
A good Knights place. Many a proud dubbed Gallant
Seeks out a poor Knights living from such Emrods.
Or what use else should I design thee to?
Perhaps you will answer me, to be my Pander.

Cler. Perhaps I shall.

Mons. Or did the s^ie Guise put thee
Into my bosom, t'vndermine my proiects?
I fear thee not; for though I be not sure
I have thy heart, I know thy braine-pan yet
To be as empty a dull piece of wainscot
As ever armed the scalpe of any Courtier;
A fellow only that consists of sinews;
Mere Swisser, apt for any execution.

Cler. But killing of the King.

Mon. Right: now I see
Thou vnderstand'st thy self.

Cler. I* and you better.
You are a Kings son borne.

Mons. Right.

Cler. And a Kings brother.

Mons. True.

Cler. And might not any fool have been so too,
As well as you?

Mons. A pox upon you.

Cler. You did no Princely deeds
Ere you're borne (I take it) to deserve it;
Nor did you any sinc^ that I have heard;
Nor will do ever any, as all think.

Mons. The Devil take him. I Will no more of him.

Guise. Nay: stay my Lord and hear him answer you.

Mons. No more I swear. Farewell.
Ex. Mons.
Guise. No more: Ill f^^tune.
Esper. Soiss. I* would have given a million to have heard
His scoffs retorted: and the insolence
Of his high birth and greatness (which were never
Effects of his deserts, but of his fortune)
Made show to his dull eyes, beneath the worth
That men aspire to by their knowing virtues,
Without which Greatness is a shade, a bubble.

Cler. But what one great man dreams of that, but you?
All take their births and birthrights left to them
(Acquired by others) for their own worths purchase,
When many a fool in both, is great as they:
And who would think they could win with their worths
Wealthy possessions, when won to their hands*
They neither can judge justly of their value,
Nor know their use; and therefore they are puffed
With such proud tumors as this Monsieur is:
Enabled only by the goods they have,
To scorn all goodness: none great, fill their fortunes,
But as those men that make their houses greater,
Their households being less, so Fortune raises
Huge heaps of outside in these mighty men,
And gives them nothing in them.

Guise. True as truth:
And therefore they had rather drown their substance
In superfluities of brickes and stones;
(Like Sysiphus, advancing of them ever,
And ever pulling down) then lay the cost
Of any sluttish corner, on a man,
Built with Gods finger, and enstil'd his Temple.

Bal. It Is nobly said, my Lord.

Guise. I would have these things
Brought upon Stages, to let mighty Misers
See all their grave and serious miseries, played,
As once they were in Athens, and old Rome.

Cler. Nay, we must now have nothing brought on Stages,
But puppetry, and pide ridiculous Antickes:
Men thither come, to laugh, and feed foole-fat,
Check at all goodness there, as ^ing profaned:
When wheresoever goodness comes, she makes
The place still sacred; though with other feet
Never so much it is scandal'd, and polluted.
Let me learn any thing that fits a man,
In any Stables shown, as well as Stages.

Bal. Why? is not all the world esteemed a Stage?

Cler. Yes: and right worthily: and Stages too
Have a respect due to them: if but only,
For what the good Greek Moralists says of them;
Is a man proud of greatness, or of riches?
Give me an expert Actor; I Will show all,
That can within his greatest glory fall.
Is a man fraid with poverty and lowness?
Give me an Actor, I Will show every eye
What he laments so, and so much does fly,
The best and worst of both: if but for this then,
To make the proudest outside that most swells,
With things without him, and above his worth,
See how small cause he has to be so blown up;
And the most poor man, to be grieved with poorness,
Both being so easily borne by expert Actors.
The Stage and Actors are not so contemptfull,
As every innouating Puritan,
And ignorant sweater out of zealous envy,
Would have the world imagine. And besides,
That all things have been likened to the mirth,
Used upon Stages, and for Stages fitted.
The splenatiue Philosopher that ever
Laughed at them all, were worthy the enstaging:
All objects, were they never so full of tears,
He so conceited, that he could distill thence
Matter that still fed his ridiculous humor.
Heard he a Lawyer, never so vehement pleading,
He stood and laughed. Heard he a Tradesman swearing
Never so thriftily (selling of his wares;)
He stood and laughed. Heard he an holy brother,
For hollow o^tentation at his prayers
Never so impetuously; he stood and laughed.
Saw he a great man never so insulting,
Severely inflicting, gravely giving laws,
Not for their good, but his; he stood and laughed.
Saw he a youthful widow
Never so weeping, wringing of her hands,
For her lost Lord, still the Philosopher laughed:
Now whether he supposed all these presentiments,
Were only maskeries, and wore false faces:
Or else were simply vain, I take no care,
But still he laughed, how grave soere they were.

Guise. And might right well (my Clermont) and for this
Virtuous digression, we will thank the scoffs
Of vicious Monsieur. But now for the maine point
Of your late resolution for revenge
Of your slain friend.

Cler. I have here my Challenge,
Which I will pray my Brother Baligny
To bear the murtherous Earl.

Bal. I have prepared
Means for access to him, through all his Guard.

Guise. About it then, my worthy Baligny,
And bring us the success.

Bal. I will my Lord.

Exeunt. Tamyra sola. Tamy. Revenge, that ever red ^itt'st in the eyes
Of injured Ladies, till we crown thy brows
With bloody Laurel; and receive from thee
Justice for all our humors injury,
Whose wings none fly, that Wrath or Tyranny
Have ruthlesse made, and bloody. Enter here,
Enter, O enter: and, though length of time
Never lets any escape thy constant justice,
Yet now prevent that length. Fly, fly, and here
Fix thy steel footsteps: Here, O here, where still
Earth (moved with pity) yielded and embraced
My Loves fair figure, drawn in his dear blood,
And marked the place, to show thee where was done
The cruell'st murder that ere fled the Sun.
O Earth! why keep'st thou not as well his spirit,
To give his form life? No, that was not earthly:
That (rarefying the thin and yielding air)
Flew sparkling up into the Sphaere of fire,
Whence endless flames it sheds in my desire:
Here be my daily pallet, here all nights
That can be wrested from thy riuals arms;
(O my dear Bussy) I will lie, and kiss
Spirit into thy blood, or breathe out mine
In sighs, and kisses, and sad tunes to thine.

She sings. Enter Mont sur. Mont. Still on this hant? Still shall adulterous
blood
Affect thy spirits? Think, for shame, but this,
This blood that Cockatrice-like thus thou brood'st
To dry is to breed any quench to thine.
And therefore now (if only for thy lust
A little covered with a veil of shame)
Look out for fresh life, rather then witch-like,
Learn to kiss horror, and with death engender.
Strange cross in nature, purest virgin shame
Lies in the blood, as lust lies; and together
Many times mix too: and in none more shameful
Then in the shamefac't. Who can then distinguish
Twixt their affections; or tell when he meets
With one not common? Yet, as worthiest Poets
Shun common and plebeian forms of speech,
Every illiberall and affected phrase
To clothe their matter: and together tie
Matter and form, with Art and decency.
So worthiest women should shun vulgar guises,
And though they cannot but fly out for change,
Yet modesty, the matter of their lives,
Be it adulterate, should be painted true
With modest out-parts; what they should do still
Graced with good show, though deeds be never so ill.

Tamy. That is so far from all ye seek of us,
That (though your selves be common as the air)
We must not take the air, we must not fit
Our actions to our own affectons:
But as Geometricians (you still say)
Teach that no lines, nor superficies,
Do move themselves, but still accompany
The motions of their bodies; so poor wives
Must not pursue, nor have their own affections,
But to their husbands earnests, and their jests,
To their austerities of looks, and laughters,
(Though never so foolish and injurious)
Like Parasites and slaves, fit their disposures.

Mont. I used thee as my soul, to move and rule me.

Tamy. So said you, when you wooed. So Soldiers tortured
Withtedious sieges of some wel-wall'd Town,
Propound conditions of most large contents,
Freedom of Laws, all former government;
But having once set foot within the Walls,
And got the reins of power into their hands,
Then do they tyrannize at their own rude swindges,
Seize all their goods, their liberties, and lives,
And make advantage, and their lusts, their laws.

Mons. But love me, and perform a Wifes part yet,
(With all my love before) I swear forgiveness.

Tamy. Forgiveness! that grace you should seek of me:
These tortured fingers, and these stab'd-through arms
Keep that law in their vvounds yet, vnobseru'd,
And ever shall.

Mons. Remember their deserts.

Tam. Those with fair warnings might have been reformed,
Not these unmanly rages. You have heard
The fiction of the North wind and the Sun,
Both vvorking on a Traveler, and contending
Which had most power to take his cloak from him:
Which when the Wind attempted, he roared out
Outrageous blasts at him to force it off,
That vvrapt it closer on. When the calm Sun
(The Wind once leaving) charged him with still beams,
Quiet, and fervent, and therein was constant,
Which made him cast off both his cloak and coat:
Like whom should men do. If ye vvish your Wives
Should leave disliked things, seek it not with rage;
For that enrages: what ye give, ye have:
But use calm warnings, and kind manly means,
And that in Wives most prostitute will win
Not only sure amends; but make us Wives
Better then those that never led faulty lives.

Enter a Soldier. Sold. My Lord.

Mons. How now; would any speak with me?

Soul. I, Sir.

Mons. Perverse, and traitorous miscreant:
Where are your other fellows of my Guard?
Have I not told you, I will speak with none,
But Lord Renel?

Sold. And it is he that stays you.

Mons. O, is it he? It Is well: attend him in.
I must be vigilant: the Furies haunt me.
Do you hear dame?

Enter Renel, with the Soldier. Ren. Be true now, for your Ladies injured sake,
Whose bounty you have so much cause to honor:
For her respect is chief in this design,
And therefore serve it, call out of the way
All your confederate fellows of his Guard,
Till Monsieur Baligny be entered here.

Sold. Upon your honor, my Lord shall be free
From any hurt you say.

Ren. Free as my self. Watch then, and clear his entry.

Sold. I will not fail, my Lord.
Exit Soldier.
Ren. God save your Lordship.

Mons. My noblest Lord Renel! past all men welcome.
Wife, vvelcome his Lordship.

Osculatur. Ren. I much joy in your return here.

Tamy. You do more then I.

Mons. She Is passionate still, to think we ever parted,
By my too stern injurious Jealousy.

Ren. It Is well your Lordship will confess your error
In so good time yet.

Enter Baligny with a Challenge. Mons. Death! Who have we here?
Ho! Guard! Villains!

Bal. Why exclaim you so.

Mons. Negligent Trayters! Murder, murder, murder.

Bal. Ye'are mad. Had mine intent been so, like yours,
It had been done ere this.

Ren. Sir, your intent,
And action too* was rude to enter thus.

Bal. You Are a decaid Lord to tell me of rudeness,
As much decaid in manners as in means.

Ren. You talk of manners, that thus rudely thrust
Upon a man that is busy with his Wife.

Bal. And kept your Lordship then the door.

Ren. The door?

Mont. Sweet Lord forbear. Show, show your purpose sir.
To move such bold feet into others roofes.

Bal. This is my purpose sir, from Clermont D'Ambois
I bring this Challenge.

Mon. Challenge! I Will touch none.

Bal I Will leave it here then.

Ren. Thou shall leave thy life first.

Mont. Murder, murder!

Ren. Retire my Lord; get off.
Hold, or thy death shall hold thee. Hence my Lord.

Bal. There lie the Challenge.

They all fight and Bal* drives in M^nt. Ren. Was not this well handled?

Exit Mont. Bal. Nobly my Lord. All thanks.
Exit Bal.
T^my. I Will make him read it.
Exi^ Tamy.
Ren. This was a slight well^maskt.
O what is man,
Unless he be a Politician!
Exit.
Finis Actus primi.
Actus secundi
Scaena prima.
Henry, Baligny. Hen. COme Baligny, we now are private: Say,
What service bring'st thou? make it short; the Guise
(Whose friend thou seem) is now in Court, and near,
And may observe us.

Bal. This sir, then in short.
The faction of the Guise (with which my policy,
For service to your Highness seems to ^oyne)
Grows ripe, and must be gathered into hold;
Of which my Brother Clermont being a part
Exceeding capital, deserves to have
A capital eye on him. And (as you may
With best advantage, and your speediest charge,)
Command his apprehension: which (because
The Court, you know, is strong in his defense)
We must ask Country swindge and open fields.
And therefore I have wrought him to go down
To Cambray with me (of which Government
Your Highness bounty made me your Lieutenant)
Where when I have him, I will leave my house,
And feign some service out about the confines,
When in the mean time, if you please to give
Command to my Lieutenant, by your Letters,
To train him to some muster, where he may
(Much to his honor) see for him, your forces
Put into Battle; when he comes, he may
With some close stratageme be apprehended:
For otherwise your whole powers there will fail
To work his apprehension: and with that
My hand needs never be discerned therein.

Hen. Thanks honest Baligny.

Bal. Your Highness knows
I will be honest; and betray for you
Brother and Father: for, I know (my Lord)
Treachery for Kings is truest Loyalty;
Nor is to bear the name of Treachery,
But grave, deep Policy. All acts that seem
Ill in particular respects, are good
As they respect your universal Rule.
As in the maine sway of the universe
The supreme Rectors general decrees,
To guard the mighty Globes of Earth and Heaven,
Since they make good that guard to preservation
Of both those in their order and first end,
No man's particular (as he thinks) wrong
Must hold him wronged: no, not though all men's reasons,
All Law, all conscience, concludes it wrong.
Nor is comparison a flatterer
To liken you here to the King of kings;
Nor any man's particular offense
Against the worlds sway; to offense at yours
In any subject; who as little may
Grudge at their particular wrong; if so it seem
For th'vniuersall right of your estate.
As (being a Subject of the Worlds whole sway
As well as yours; and being a righteous man
To whom Heaven promises defense, and blessing,
Brought to decay, disgrace, and quite defencelesse)
He may complain of Heaven for wrong to him.

Hen. It Is true: the Simile at all parts holds,
As all good Subjects hold, that love our favor.

Bal. Which is our Heaven here; and a misery
Incomparable, and most truly Hellish
To live deprived of our Kings grace and countenance,
Without which best conditions are most cursed:
Life of that nature, howsoever short,
Is a most lingering, and tedious life;
Or rather no life, but a languishing,
And an abuse of life.

Hen. It Is well conceited.

Bal. I thought it not amiss to yield your Highness
A reason of my speeches; lest perhaps
You might conceive I flattered: which (I know)
Of all ils under heaven you most abhor.

Hen. Still thou art right, my virtuous Baligny,
For which I thank and love thee. Thy advise
I Will not forget: Haste to thy Government,
And carry D'Ambois with thee. So farewell.
Exit.
Bal. Your Majesty fare ever like it self.

Enter Guise. Guise. My sure Friend Baligny!

Bal. Noblest of Princes!

Guise. How stands the State of Cambray?

Bal. Strong, my Lord,
And fit for service: for whose readiness
Your creature Clermont D'Ambois, and my self
Ride shortly down.

Guise. That Clermont is my love;
France never bred a nobler Gentleman
For all parts: he exceedes his Brother Bussy.

Bal. I, my Lord?

Guise. Far: because (besides his valor)
He has the crown of man, and all his parts,
Which Learning is; and that so true and virtuous,
That it gives power to do, as well as say
What ever fits a most accomplished man;
Which Bussy, for his valors season, lackt;
And so was rapt with outrage oftentimes
Beyond Decorum; where this absolute Clermont,
Though (only for his natural zeal to right)
He will be fiery, when he sees it crossed;
And in defense of it; yet when he lists
He can contain that fire, as hid in Embers.

Bal. No question, he is a true, learned, Gentleman.

Guise. He is as true as Tides, or any Star
Is in his motion: And for his rare learning,
He is not (as all else are that seek knowledge)
Of taste so much deprau'd, that they had rather
Delight, and satisfy themselves to drink
Of the stream troubled, wandering never so far
From the clear fount, then of the fount it self.
In all; Romes Brutus is revived in him,
Whom he of industry does imitate.
Or rather, as great Troys Euphorbus was
After Pithagoras; so is Brutus, Clermont.
And (were not Brutus a Conspirator)

Bal. Conspirator, my Lord? Does that empaire him?
Caesar began to tyrannize; and when virtue,
Nor the religion of the Gods could serve
To curb the insolence of his proud Laws,
Brutus would be the Gods just instrument.
What said the Princess (sweet Antigone)
In the grave Greek Tragedian, when the question
Twixt her and Creon is, for laws of Kings?
Which when he vrges, she replies on him;
Though his Laws were a Kings, they were not Gods;
Nor would she value Creons written Laws
With Gods vnwrit Edicts: since they last not
This day and the next, but every day and ever;
Where Kings Laws alter every day and hour,
And in that change imply a bounded power.

Guise. Well, let us leave these vain disputings what
Is to be done, and fall to doing something.
When are you for your Government in Cambray?

Bal. When you command, my Lord.

Guise. Nay, that is not fit.
Continue your designements with the King,
With all your service; only if I send
Respect me as your friend, and love my Clermont.

Bal. Your Highness knows my vows.

Guise. I, it is enough.
Exit Guise.
Manet Bal. Bal. Thus must we play on both sides, and thus harten
In any ill those men whose good we hate.
Kings may do what they list: and for Kings, Subjects,
Either exempt from censure or exception:
For, (...), ^c.
as no man's worth can be justly judged
But when he shines in some authority; ^^possibile est ^^n cognoscere ^^entem
ac vo^^nt atem, pri^^quam in Ma^^stratibus appa^^t ^^pho Antig.

So no authority should suffer censure
But by a man of more authority.
Great vessels into less are emptied never,
There Is a redoundance past their continent ever.
These virtuosi are the poorest creatures;
For look how Spinners weaue out of themselves
Webs, whose strange matter none before can see;
So these, out of an unseen good in virtue,
Make arguments of right, and comfort, in her,
That clothe them like the poor web of a Spinner.

Enter Clermont. Cler. Now, to my Challenge. What Is the place, the weapon?

Bal. Soft sir: let first your Challenge be received.
He would not touch, nor see it.

Cler. Possible!
How did you then?

Bal. Left it, in his despite.
But when he saw me enter so expectlesse,
To hear his base exclaimes of murder, murder,
Made me think Noblesse lost, in him quick buried.

Cler. They are the breathing Sepulchers of Noblesse:
No trulier noble men, then Lions pictures
Hung up for signs, are Lions. Quo molii^^ gunt (...) E^i^t.
Who knows not,
That Lions the more soft kept, are more servile?
And look how Lions close kept, fed by hand,
Lose quite th'innatiue fire of spirit and greatness
That Lions free breathe, forraging for prey;
And grow so gross, that mastifes, curs, and mungrils
Have spirit to cow them: So our soft French Nobles
Chained up in ease and numbd security,
Their spirits shrunk up like their covetous fists,
And never opened but Domitian-like,
And all his base obsequious minions
When they were catching, though it were but flies.
Besotted with their pezzants love of gain,
Rusting at home, and on each other preying,
Are for their greatness but the greater slaves,
And none is noble but who scrapes and saues.

Bal. It Is base, it is base; and yet they think them high.

Cler. So Children mounted on their hobbyhorse,
Think they are riding, when with wanton toil
They bear what should bear them. A man may well
Compare them to those foolish great-spleen'd Cammels,
That to their high heads, begged of Jove horns higher;
Whose most uncomely, and ridiculous pride
When he had satisfied, they could not use,
But where they went upright before, they stoopt, Simi^.

And bore their heads much lower for their horns.
As these high men do* low in all true grace,
Their height being privilege to all things base.
And as the foolish Poet that still writ
All his most selfe-lou'd verse in paper royal,
Or Partchment ruled with Lead, smoothed with the Pum^ce;
Bound richly up, and strung with Crimson strings;
Never so blessed as when he writ and read
The Ape-lou'd issue of his brain; and never
But ioying in himself; admiring ever:
Yet in his works behold him, and he showed
Like to a ditcher. So these painted men,
All set on outside, look upon within,
And not a pezzants entrails you shall find
More foul and mezel'd, nor more steru'd of mind.

Bal. That makes their bodies fat. I feign would know
How many millions of our other Nobles
Would make one Guise. There is a true tenth Worthy*
Who (did not one act only blemish him.)

Cler. One act? what one?

Bal. One, that (though years past done)
Sticks by him still, and will distaine him ever.

Cler. Good Heaven! wherein? what one act can you name
Supposed his stain, that I Will not prove his luster?

Bal. To satisfy you, it was the Massacre.

Cler. The Massacre? I thought it was some such blemish.

Bal. O it was heinous.

Cler. To a brutish sense,
But not a manly reason. We so tender
The vile part in us, that the part divine
We see in hell, and shrink not. Who was first
Head of that Massacre?

Bal. The Guise.

Cler. It Is nothing so.
Who was in fault for all the slaughters made
In Ilion, and about it? Were the Greeks?
Was it not Paris rauishing the Queen
Of Lacaedemon? Breach of shame and faith?
And all the laws of Hospitality?
This is the Beastly slaughter made of men,
When Truth is ouer-throwne, his Laws corrupted;
When souls are smothered in the flattered flesh,
Slain bodies are no more then Oxen slain.

Bal. Differ not men from Oxen?

Cler. Who says so?
But see wherein; In the understanding rules
Of their opinions, lives, and actions;
In their communities of faith and reason.
Was not the Wolf that nourisht Romulus
More humane then the men that did expose him?

Bal. That makes against you.

Cler. Not sir, if you note
That by that deed, the actions difference make
Twixt men and beasts, and not their names nor forms.
Had faith, nor shame, all hospitable rights
Be^ne broke by Troy, Greece had not made that slaughter.
Had that been saved (says a Philosopher)
The Iliads and Odysses had been lost,
Had Faith and true Religion been preferred,
Religious Guise had never massacerd,

Bal. Well sir, I cannot when I meet with you
But thus digress a little, for my learning,
From any other business I entend.
But now the voyage, we resolved for Cambray,
I told the Guise begins; and we must haste.
And till the Lord Renel has found some mean
(Conspiring with the Countess) to make sure
Your sworn wreake on her Husband (though this failed)
In my so brave Command, we will spend the time,
Sometimes in training out in Skirmishes,
And Battles, all our Troops and Companies;
And sometimes breathe your brave Scotch running horse,
That great Guise gave you, that all th'horse in France
Far ouer-runnes at every race and hunting
Both of the Hare and Dear. You shall be honored
Like the great Guise himself, above the King.
And (can you but appease your great-spleen'd Sister,
For our delaid wreake of your Brothers slaughter)
At all parts you will be welcomed to your wonder.

Cler. I Will see my Lord the Guise again before
We take our journey.

Bal. O sir, by all means,
You cannot be too careful of his love,
That ever takes occasion to be raising
Your virtues, past the reaches of this age,
And ranks you with the best of the ancient Romans.

Cler. That praise at no part moves me, but the worth
Of all he can give others spher'd in him.

B^l. He yet is thought to entertain strange aims.

Cl^r. He may be well; yet not as you think strange,
His strange Aims are to cross the common Custom
Of Servile Nobles; in which he is so ravished,
That quite the Earth he leaves, and up he leapes,
On Atlas shoulders, and from thence looks down,
Viewing how far off other high ones creep:
Rich, poor of reason, wander; All pale looking,
And trembling but to think of their sure deaths,
Their lives so base are, and so rank their breaths.
Which I teach Guise to heighten, and make sweet
With life's dear odors, a good mind and name;
For which, he only loves me, and deserves
My love and life, which through all deaths I vow:
Resolving this, (what ever change can be)
Thou have created, thou have ruinde me.
Exit.
Finis Actus secundi.
Actus tertij
Scaena prima.
A march of Captains over the Stage. Maillard, Chalon, Aumall following with
Soldiers. Mail. THese Troops and companies come in with wings:
So many men, so armed, so gallant Horse,
I think no other Government in France
So soon could bring together. With such men
Me thinks a man might pass the insulting Pillars
Of Bacchus and Alcides.

Chal. I much wonder
Our Lord Lieutenant brought his brother down
To feast and honor him, and yet now leaves him
At such an instance.

Mail. It Was the Kings Command:
For whom he must leave Brother, Wife, friend, all things.

Aum. The confines of his Government, whose view
Is the pretext of his Command, has need
Of no such sudden expedition.

Mail. We must not argue that. The Kings Command
Is need and right enough: and that he serves,
(As all true Subjects should) without disputing.

Chal. But knows not he of your Command to take
His Brother Clermont?

Mail. No: the Kings will is
Expressly to conceal his apprehension
From my Lord Governor. Observed ye not?
Again peruse the Letters. Both you are
Made my assistants, and have right and trust
In all the weighty secrets like my self.

Aum. It Is strange a man that had, through his life past,
So sure a foot in virtue and true knowledge,
As Clermont D'Ambois, should be now found tripping,
And taken up thus, so to make his fall
More steep and headlong.

Mail. It is Virtues fortune,
To keep her low, and in her proper place.
Height has no room for her: But as a man
That has a fruitful wife, and every year
A child by her, has every year a month,
To breathe himself: where he that gets no child
Has not a nights rest (if he will do well.)
So, let one marry this same barraine Virtue,
She never lets him rest: where fruitful vice
Spares her rich drudge, gives him in labor breath;
Feeds him with bane, and makes him fat with death,

Chal. I see that good lives never can secure
Men from bad livers. Worst men will have best
As ill as they, or heaven to hell they will wrest.

Aum. There was a merit for this, in the fault
That Bussy made, for which he (doing penance)
Proves that these foul adulterous guilts will run
Through the whole blood, which not the clear can shun.

Mail. I Will therefore take heed of the bastarding
Whole innocent races; it is a fearful thing.
And as I am true Batcheler, I swear,
To touch no woman (to the coupling ends)
Unless it be mine own wife or my friends.
I may make bold with him.

Aum. It Is safe and common.
The more your friend dares trust, the more deceive him.
And as through dewie vapors the Suns form
Makes the gay Rainebow, girdle to a storm,
So in hearts hollow, Friendship (even the Sun
To all good growing in society)
Makes his so glorious and divine name hold
Colors for all the ill that can be told.

Mail. Hark, our last Troops are come.

Trumpets within. Chal. Hark, our last foot.

Drums beat. Mail. Come, let us put all quickly into battle,
And send for Clermont, in whose honor, all
This mart^all preparation we pretend.

Chal. We must bethink us ere we apprehend him,
(Besides our maine strength) of some stratageme
To make good our severe Command on him;
As well to save blood, as to make him sure:
For if he come on his Scotch horse, all France
Put at the heels of him, will fail to take him.

M^il. What think you if we should disguise a brace
Of our best Soldiers in fair Lackies coats,
And send them for him, running by his side,
Till they have brought him in some ambuscado
We close may lodge for him; and suddenly
Lay sure hand on him, plucking him from horse.

A^m. It must be sure and strong hand: for if once
H^e feels the touch of such a stratageme,
It Is not the choicest brace of all our Bands
Can ma^acle, or quench his ^ery hands.

M^^l. When they have seaz'd him, the ambush shall make in.

Aum. Do as you please; his blameless spirit deserves
(I dare engage my life) of all this, nothing.

Chal. Why should all this stir be then?

Aum. Who knows not
The bumbast polity thrusts into his Giant,
To make his wisdom seem of size as huge,
And all for slight encounter of a shade,
So he be touched, he would have heinous made?

Mail. It may be once so; but so ever, never;
Ambition is abroad, on foot, on horse;
Faction chokes every corner, street, the Court,
Whose faction it is you know: and who is held
The fautors right hand: how high his aims reach,
Naught but a Crown can measure. This must fall
Past shadows waights; and is most capital.

Chal. No question; for since he is come to Cambray
The malecontent, decaid Marquess Renel,
Is come, and new arrived; and made partaker
Of all the entertaining Shows and Feasts
That welcomed Clermont to the brave Virago
His manly Sister. Such we are esteemed
As are our conforts. Marquess malecontent
Comes where he knows his vain has safest vent.

Mail. Let him come at his will, and go as free,
Let us ply Clermont, our whole charge is he.
Exit.
Enter a Gentleman Usher before Clermont: Renel, Charlotte, with two women
attendants, with others: Sh^wes having past within. Char. This for your
Lordships welcome into Cambray.

Ren. Noblest of Ladies, it is beyond all power
(Were my estate at first full) in my means
To quit or merit.

Cler. You come something latter
From Court my Lord then I: And since news there
Is every day increasing with the affairs,
Must I not ask now, what the news is there?
Where the Court lies? what stir? change? what auise
From England, Italy.

Ren. You must do so*
If you will be called a Gentleman well quallified,
And wear your time and wits in those discourses.

Cler. The Locrian Princes therefore were brave Rubers;
For whosoever there came new from Country,
And in the City asked, what news? was punished:
Since commonly such brains are most delighted
With innouations, Gossips tales, and mischiefs:
But as of Lions it is said and Eagles,
That when they go, they draw their seeres and tallons
Close up, to shun rebating of their sharpness:
So our wits sharpness, which we should employ
In noblest knowledge, we should never waste
In vile and vulgar admirations.

Ren. It Is right: but who, save only you, performs it,
And your great brother? Madame, where is he?

Char. Gone a day since, into the Countries confines,
To see their strength, and readiness for service.

Ren. It Is well: his favor with the King has made him
Most worthily great, and live right royally.

Cler. I: Would he would not do so. Honor never
Should be esteemed with wise men, as the price
And value of their virtuous Services,
But as their sign or Badge: for that bewrayes
More glory in the outward grace of goodness,
Then in the good it self; and then it is said:
Who more joy takes, that men his good advance,
Then in the good it self, does it by chance.

Char. My brother speaks all principle; what man
Is moved with your soul? or has such a thought
In any rate of goodness?

Cher. It Is their fault.
We have examples of it, clear and many.
Dem^trius Phalerius, an Orator,
And (which not o^t meet) a Philosopher,
So great in Athens grew, that he er^cted
Three hundred Statues of him; of all which,
No rust* nor length of time corrupted one;
But in his life time, all were overthrown.
And Demades (that past Demosthenes
For all extemporall Orations)
Erected many Statues, which (he living)
Were broke, and melted into Chamber-pots.
Many such ends have fallen on such proud honors,
No more because the men on whom they fell
Grew insolent, and left their virtues state;
Then for their hugeness, that procured their hate:
And therefore little pomp in men most great,
Makes mightily and strongly to the guard
Of what they win by chance, or just reward.
Great and immodest braueries again,
Like Statues, much too high made for their bases,
Are ouerturn'd as soon, as given their places.

Enter a Messenger with a Letter. Messen. Here is a Letter sir delivered me,
Now at the fore-gate by a Gentleman.

Cler. What Gentleman?

Mess. He would not tell his name;
He said, he had not time enough to tell it,
And say the little rest he had to say.

Cler. That was a merry saying; he took measure
Of his dear time like a most thri^tie husband.

Char. What news?

Cler. Strange ones, and fit for a Nouation;
Weighty, unheard of, mischievous enough.

Ren. Heaven shield: what are they?

Cler. Read them, good my Lord.

Ren. You are betrayed into this Country. Monstrous!

Char. How Is that?

Cler. Read on.

Ren. Maillard* you brothers Leiutenant, that yesterday inu^ted you to see his
Musters; has Letters and strickt Charge from the King to appr^hend you.


Char. To apprehend him?

Ren. Your Brother absents himself of purpose.

Cler. That Is a sound one.

Char. That Is a lie.

Ren. Get on your Scotch horse, and retire to your strength; you know where it
is, and there it expects you: Believe this as your best friend had sworn it.
Farewell if you will. Anonymos. What Is that?


Cl^r. Without a name.

Charl. And all his notice too, without all truth.

Cler. So I conceive it Sister: i will not wrong
My well known Brother for Anonymos,

Charl. Some fool has put this trick on you, yet more
T'vncouer your defect of spirit and valor.
First shown in lingering my dear Brothers wreake.
See what it is to give the envious World
Advantage to diminish eminent virtue.
Send him a Challenge? Take a noble course
To wreake a murder, done so like a villain?

Cler. Shall we revenge a villainy with villainy?

Char. Is it not equal?

Cler. Shall we equal be
With villains?
Is that your reason?

Char. Cowardice evermore
Flies to the shield of Reason.

Cler. Naught that is
Approved by Reason, can be Cowardice.

Charl. Dispute when you should fight. Wrong wreaklesse
Makes men dye honorlesse: One borne, another (sleeping,
Leapes on our shoulders.

Cler. We must wreake our wrongs
So, as we take not more.

Char. One wreakt in time
Preuents all other. Then shines virtue most
When time is found for facts; and found, not lost.

Cler. No time occurres to Kings, much less to Virtue;
Not can we call it Virtue that proceeds
From vicious Fury. I repent that ever
(By any instigation in th'appearance
My Brothers spirit made, as I imagined)
That ever I yielded to revenge his murder.
All worthy men should ever bring their blood
To bear all ill, not to be wreakt with good:
Do ill for no ill: Never private cause
Should take on it the part of public Laws.

Char. A D'Ambois bear in wrong so tame a spirit!

Ren. Madame, besure there will be time enough
For all the vengeance your great spirit can wish.
The course yet taken is allowed by all,
Which being noble, and refused by The Earl,
Now makes him worthy of your worst advantage:
And I have cast a project with the Countess
To watch a time when all his wariest Guards
Shall not exempt him. Therefore give him breath;
Sure Death delaid is a redoubled Death.

Cler. Good Sister trouble not your self with this:
Take other Ladies care; practice your face.
There Is the chaste Matron, Madame Perigot,
Dwells not far hence, I Will ride and send her to you,
She did live by retailing mayden^heads
In her minority: but now she deals
In wholesale altogether for the Court.
I tell you, she is the only fashion-monger,
For your complexion, poudring of your hair,
Shadows, Rebatoes, Wires, Tyres, and such tricks,
That Cambray, or I think, the Court affords:
She shall attend you Sister, and with these
Womanly practices emply your spirit;
This other suites you not, nor fits the fashion.
Though she be dear, lay't on, spare for no cost,
Ladies in these have all their bounties lost.

Ren. Madame, you see, his spirit will not check
At any single danger; when it stands
Thus merrily firm against an host of men,
Threate^'d to be arms for his surprise.

Char. That Is a mere Bugge-beare, an impossible mock,
If he, and him I bound by nuptial faith
Had not been dull and drossie in performing
Wreake of the dear blood of my matchless Brother,
What Prince? what King? which of the desperat'st Ruffings,
Outlawes in Acden, durst have tempted thus
One of our blood and name, be it true or false.

Cler. This is not caused by that: ^twill be as sure
As yet it is not, though this should be true.

Char. True? it is past thought false.

Cler. I suppose the worst,
Which far I am from thinking; and despise
The Army now in battle that should act it.

Cler. I would not let my blood up to that thought,
But it should cost the dearest blood in France.

Cler. Sweet Sister, [osculatur] fa^re be both off as the fact
Of my feigned apprehension.

Char. I would once
Strip off my shame with my attire, and try
If a poor woman, votist of revenge
Would not perform it, with a president
To all you bungling foggy-spirited men;
But for our birthrights honor, do not mention
One syllable of any word may go
To the begetting of an act so tender,
And full of sulphur as this Letters truth:
It comprehends so black a circumstance
Not to be named; that but to form one thought,
It is, or can be so; would make me mad:
Come my Lord, you and I will fight this dream
Out at the Chesse.

Ren. Most gladly, worthiest Lady.

Exit Char* and Ren. Enter a Messenger. Mess. Sir, my Lord Governors
Lieutenant prays
Access to you.

Cler. Himself alone?

Mess. Alone, sir.

Cler. Attend him in. [Exit Mess.] Now comes this plot to trial,
I shall descerne (if it be true as rare)
Some sparks will fly from his dissembling eyes.
I Will sound his depth.

Enter Maillard with the Messenger. Maill. Honor, and all things noble.

Cler. As much to you good Captain. What Is th'affaire.

Mail. Sir, the poor honor we can add to all
Your studied welcome to this martial place,
In presentation of what strength consists
My Lord your Brothers Government is ready.
I have made all his Troops and Companies
Advance, and put themselves randg'd in Battailia,
That you may see, both how well armed they are;
How strong is every Troop and Company;
How ready, and how well prepared for service,

Cler. And must they take me?

Mail. Take you, sir? O Heaven!

M^ss. Believe it sir, his countenance changed in turning.

Mail. What do you mean sir?

Cler. If you have charged them,
You being charged your self, to apprehend me,
Turn not your face: throw not your looks about so.

Mail. Pardon me sir. You amaze me to conceive
From whence our wills to honor you, should turn
To such dishonor of my Lord your Brother.
Dare I, without him, vendertake your taking?

Cler. Why not? by your direct charge from the King?

Mail. By my charge from the King? would he so much
Disgrace my Lord, his own Lieutenant here,
To give me his Command without his forfaite?

Cler. Acts that are done by Kings, are not asked why.
I Will not dispute the case, but I will search you.

Mail. Search me? for what?

Cler. For Letters.

Mail. I beseech you,
Do not admit one thought of such a sham^
To a Commander.

Cler. Go to: I must do it.
Stand and be searched; you know me.

Mail. You forget
What it is to be a Captain, and your self.

Cl^r. Stand, or I vow to heaven, I Will make you lie
Never to rise more.

Mail. If a man be mad
Reason must bear him.

Cler. So coy to be searched?

Mail. Sdeath sir, use a Captain like a Carrier.

Cler. Come, be not furious; when I have done
You shall make such a Carrier of me
If It be your pleasure: you're my friend I know,
And so am bold with you.

Mail. You Will nothing find
Where nothing is.

Cler. Swear you have nothing.

Mail. Nothing you seek, I swear, I beseech you,
Know I desired this out of great affection,
To the end my Lord may know out of your witness,
His Forces are not in so bad estate
As he esteemed them lately in your hearing:
For which he would not trust me with the Confines;
But went himself to witness their estate.

Cler. I heard him make that reason, and am sorry
I had no thought of it before I made
Thus bold with you; since it is such Ruberb to you.
I Will therefore search no more. If you are charged
(By Letters from the King, or otherwise)
To apprehend me; never spice it more
With forced terms of your love, but say: I yield;
Hold; take my sword; here; I forgive thee freely;
Take; do thine office.

Mail. Sfoote, you make m'a hangman:
By all my faith to you, there is no such thing.

Cler. Your faith to me?

Mail. My faith to God: All Is one,
Who has no faith to men, to God has none.

Cler. In that sense I accept your oath, and thank you.
I gave my word to go, and I will go.
Exit Cler.
Mail. I Will watch you whither.
Exit Mail.
Mess. If he goes, he proves
How vain are men's fore knowledges of things,
When heaven strikes blind their powers of note and use;
And makes their way to ruin seem more right,
Then that which safety opens to their sight.
Cassandra's prophecy had no more profit
With Troyes blind Citizens, when she fore-tolde
Troyes ruin: which succeeding, made her use
This sacred Inclamation; God (said she)
Would have me utter things vncredited:
For which now they approve what I presaged;
They count me wise, that said before I raged.

Enter Challon with two Soldiers. Chal. Come Soldiers: you are downe-wards
fit for lackies;
Give me your Pieces, and take you these Coats,
To make you complete footmen: in whose forms
You must be complete Soldiers: you two only
Stand for our Army.

1 That were much.

Chal. It Is true,
You two must do, or enter, what our Army
Is now in field for.

2 I see then our guerdon
Must be the deed it self, twill be such honor:

Chal. What fight Soldiers most for?

1 Honor only.

Chal. Yet here are crowns beside.

Ambo. We thank you Captain.

2 Now sir, how show we?

Chal. As you should at all parts.
Go now to Clermont D'Ambois, and inform him,
Two Battles are set ready in his honor,
And stay his presence only for their signal,
When they shall join: and that to attend him hither,
Like one we so much honor, we have sent him

1 Us two in person.

Chal. Well sir, say it so.
And having brought him to the field, when I
Fall in with him, saluting, get you both
Of one side of his horse, and pluck him down,
And I with ^h'ambush laid, will second you.

1 Nay, we shall lay on hands of too much strength
To need your secondings.

2 I hope, we shall.
Two are enough ^o encounter Hercules.

Chal. It Is well said worthy Soldiers: have, and have him.

Enter Clermont, Maillard close following him. Cler. My Scotch horse to their
Army.

Ma^l. Please you sir?

Cl^r. Sd^ath you're passing diligent.

M^il. Of my soul
It Is only in my love to honor you
With what would grace the King: but since I see
You still sustain a jealous eye on me,
I Will go before.

Cler. It Is well; I Will come; my hand.

M^il. Your hand sir? Come, your word, your choice be used.
Exit.
Clermont solus. Cler. I had an auersation to this voyage,
When first my Brother moved it; and have found
That native power in me was never vain;
Yet now neglected it. I wonder much
At my inconstancy in these decrees,
I eu^ry hour set down to guide my life.
When Homer made Achilles passionate,
Wra^h^ull, reuengefull* and insatiate
In his affections; what man will deny,
He did compose it all of industry,
To let men see* that men of most renown,
Strong'st, noblest, fairest, if they set not down
Decrees within them, for disposing these,
Of judgment, Resolution, Uprightness,
And certain knowledge, of their use and ends
Mishap and misery no less extends
To their destruction; with all that they pris'd,
Then to the poorest, and the most despised.

Enter Renel. Ren. Why* how now friend? retired? take heed you prove not
Dismayed with this strange fortune: all observe you.
Your gouernment's as much marked as the Kings.
What said a friend to Pompey?

Cler. What?

Ren. The people
Will never know, unless in death thou try,
That thou know how to bear adversity.

Cler. I shall approve how vile I value fear
Of death at all times: but to be too rash,
Without both will and care to shun the worst,
(It being in power to do, well and with cheer)
Is stupid negligence, and worse then fear.

Ren. Suppose this true now.

Cler. No, I cannot do it.
My sister truly said; there hung a tail
Of circumstance so black on that supposure,
That to sustain it thus, abhorred our metal.
And I can shun it too, in spite of all:
Not going to field: and there to, being so mounted
As I will, since I go.

Ren. You will then go?

Cler. I am engaged both in my word, and hand;
But this is it, that makes me thus retired,
To call my self t'account, how this affair
Is to be managed if the worst should chance:
With which I note, how dangerous it is,
For any man to prease beyond the place,
To which his birth, or means, or knowledge ties him;
For my part, though of noble birth my birthright
Had little left it, and I know it is better
To live with little; and to keep within
A man's own strength still, and in man's true end,
Then run a mixed course. Good and bad hold never
Any thing common: you can never find
Things outward care, but you neglect your mind.
God has the whole world perfect made and free;
His parts to the use of the all; men then that are
Parts of that all, must as the general sway
Of that imports, willingly obey
In every thing without their power to change.
He that vnpleas'd* to hold his place, will range,
Can in no other be contained that is fit,
And so re^isting The All, is crushed with it.
But he that knowing how divine a Frame
The whole world is: and of it all, can name
(Without selfe-flatterie) no part so divine,
As he himself; and therefore will confine
Freely, his whole powers, in his proper part,
Goes on most God-like. He that strives t'inuert
The Universals course with his poor way,
Not only dust-like shiuers with the sway,
But crossing God in his great work; all earth
Bears not so cursed, and so damned a birth.

Ren. Go, on; I Will take no care what comes of you;
Heaven will not see it ill, how ere it show:
But the pretext to see these Battles ranged
Is much your honor.

Cler. As the world esteems it.
But to decide that; you make me remember
An accident of high and noble note,
And fits the subject of my late discourse,
Of holding on our free and proper way.
I ouer-tooke, coming from Italy,
In Germany, a great and famous Earl
Of England; the most goodly fashioned man
I ever ^aw: from head to foot in form
Rare, and most absolute; he had a face
Like one of the most ancient honored Romans,
From whence his noblest Family was derived;
He was beside of spirit passing great,
Valiant, and learned, and liberal as the Sun,
Spoke and writ sweetly, or of learned subjects,
Or of the discipline of public weals;
And it was the Earl of Oxford: and being offered
At that time, by Duke Cassimere, the view
Of his right royal Army then in field;
Refused it, and no foot was moved, to stir
Out of his own free fore-determin'd course:
I wondering at it, asked for it his reason,
It being an offer so much for his honor.
He, all acknowledging, said, it was not fit
To take those honors that one cannot quit.

Ren. It Was answered like the man you have described.

Cler. And yet he cast it only in the way,
To stay and serve the world. Nor did it fit
His own true estimate how much it waigh'd,
For he despised it; and esteemed it freer
To keep his own way straight, and swore that he
Had rather make away his whole estate
In things that crossed the vulgar, then he would
Be frozen up, stiff, like a sir John Smith
(His Countryman) in common Nobles fashions;
Affecting, as the end of Noblesse were
Those servile observations*

Ren. It was strange.

Cler. O it is a vexing sight to see a man
Out of his way, stalk, proud as he were in;
Out of his way to be officious,
Obseruant, wary, serious, and grave,
Fearful, and passionate, insulting, raging,
Labor with iron Flailes, to thresh down feathers
Flitting in air.

Ren. What one considers this,
Of all that are thus out? or once endeavors,
Erring to enter, on man's Right Hand path?

Cler. These are too grave for brave wits: give them toys,
Labor bestowed on these is harsh and thriftlesse.
If you would Consul be (says one) of Rome,
You must be watching, starting out of sleeps;
Every way whisking; gloryfying Plebeians,
K^ssing Patricians hands, Rot at their doors;
Speak and do basely; eu^^y day bestow
Gifts and observance upon one or other:
And what is th'^uent of all? Twelve Rods before thee,
Three or f^ure times sit for the whole Tribunal.
Exhibit Circean Games; make public feasts,
And f^r these idle outward things (says he)
Would thou lay on such cost, toil, spend thy spirits.
And to be void of perturbation
For constancy: sleep when thou would have sleep,
Wake when thou would wake, fear naught, vex for naught,
No pains will thou bestow? no cost? no thought?

Ren. What should I say? as good consort with you,
As with an Angel: I could hear you ever.

Cl^r. W^ll; in, my Lord, and spend time with my Sister;
And keep her from the Field with all endeavor;
The Soldiers love her so; and she so madly
Would take my apprehension, if it chance,
That blood would flow in rivers.

Ren. Heaven forbid;
And all with honor your arrival speed.
Exit.
Enter M^ssenger with two Soldiers like Lackies. M^ss. Here are two Lackies
sir, have message to you.

Cl^r. What is your message? and from whom, my friends?

1 From the Lieutenant Colonel, and the Captains,
Who sent us to inform you, that the Battles
Stand ready ranged, expecting but your presence,
To be their honored signal when to join,
And we are charged to run by, and attend you.

Cler. I come. I pray you see my running horse
Brought to the backe-gate to me.

Mess. Instantly.
Exit Mess.
Cler. Chance what can chance me; well or ill is equal
In my acceptance, since I joy in neither;
B^t go with sway of all the world together.
In all successes, Fortune and the day
To me alike are; I am fixed, be she
Never so fickle; and will there repose,
Far past the reach of any Dye she throws.

Ex. cum Pedis^. Finis Actus tertij.
Actus quarti
Scaena prima.
Alarm within: Excursions over thee Stage. The Lackies running, Maillard
following them. Mail. Villains, not hold him when ye had him down.

1 Who can hold lightning? Sdeath a man as well
Might catch a Canon Bullet in his mouth,
And spit it in your hands, as take and hold him.

Mail. Pursue; enclose him; stand, or fall on him,
And ye may take him. Sdeath, they make him guards.
Exit.
Alarm still, and enter Chalon. Chal. Stand Cowards, stand, strike, send your
bullets at him*

1 We came to entertain him sir, for honor.

2 Did ye not say so?

Chal. Slaves, he is a traitor;
Command the horse troops to overrun the traitor.
Exit.
Showts within. Alarm still* and Chambers shot off. Then enter Aumall. Aum.
What spirit breathes thus, in this more then man,
Turns flesh to air possessed, and in a storm,
Tears men about the field like Autumn leaves?
He turned wild lightning in the Lackies hands,
Who, though their sudden violent twitch unhorsed him,
Yet when he bore himself, their saucie fingers
Flew as too hot off, as he had been fire.
The ambush then made in, through all whose force,
He drove as if a fierce and fire^ given Canon
Had spit his iron vomit out amongst them.
The Battles then, in two halfe-moones enclosed him,
In which he showed, as if he were the light,
And they but earth, who wondering what he was;
Shruncke their steel horns, and gave him glorious pass,
And as a great shot from a town besieged,
At foes before it, flies forth black and roaring,
But they too far, and that with weight oppressed,
(As if disdaining earth) does only grass,
Strike earth, and up again into the air;
Again sinkes to it, and again does rise,
And keeps such strength that when it softliest moves,
It piece-meale shiuers any let it proves:
So flew brave Clermont forth, till breath forsook him,
Then fell to earth, and yet (sweet man) even then
His spirits conuulsions made him bound again,
Past all their reaches; till all motion spent,
His fixed eyes cast a blaze of such disdain,
All stood and star'd, and untouched let him lie,
As something sacred fallen out of the sky.
A cry within. O now some rude hand has laid hold on him!
Enter Maillard, Chalon leading Clermont, Captains and Soldiers following.
See, prisoner led, with his bands honored more,
Then all the freedom he enjoyed before.

Mail. At length we have you sir.

Cler. You have much joy too,
I made you sport yet, but I pray you tell me,
Are not you perjured?

Mail. No: I swore for the King.

Cler. Yet perjury I hope is perjury.

Mail. But thus forswearing is not perjury;
You are no Politician: not a fault,
How foul soever, done for private ends,
Is fault in us sworn to the public good:
We never can be of the damned crew,
We may impolitique our selves (as it were)
Into the Kingdoms body politic,
Whereof indeed we'are members: you miss term*

Cler. The things are yet the same.

Mail. It Is nothing so: the property is altered:
You Are no Lawyer. Or say that oath and oath
Are still the same in number, yet their species
Differ extremely, as for flat example,
When politic widows try men for their turn,
Before they wed them, they are harlots then,
But when they wed them, they are honest women*
So, private men, when they forswear, betray,
Are perjured treachers, but being public once,
That is, sworne-married to the public good.

Cler. Are married women public?

Mail. Public good,
For marriage makes them, being the public good,
And could not be without them. So I say
Men public, that is, being sworne-married
To the good public, being one body made
With the Realms body politic, are no more
Private, nor can be perjured, though forsworn,
More then a widow married, for the act
Of generation is for that an harlot,
Because for that she was so, being unmarried:
An argument a paribus.

Chal. It Is a shrowed one.

Cler. Who has no faith to men, to God has none:
Retain you that Sir? who said so?

Mail. It Was I.

Cler. Thy own tongue damn thy infidelity.
But Captains all you know me nobly borne,
Use ye t'assault such men as I with Lackyes.

Chal. They are no Lackyes sir, but Soldiers,
Disguised in Lackyes coats.

1 Sir, we have seen the enemy.

Cler. Auant ye Rascols, hence.

Mail. Now leave your coats.

Cler. Let me not see them more.

Aum. I grieve that virtue lives so vndistinguisht
From vice in any ill, and though the crown
Of Sovereign Law; she should be yet her footstool,
Subject to censure, all the shame and pain
Of all her rigor.

Cler. Yet false policy
Would cover all, being like offenders hid,
That (after notice taken where they hide)
The more they crouch and stir, the more are spide.

Aum. I vvonder how this chanced you.

Cler. Some informer,
Blood hound to mischief, usher to the Hangman,
Thi^stie of honor for some huge state act*
Perceiving me great with the worthy Guise:
And he (I know not why) held dangerous,
Made me the desperate organe of his danger,
Only with that poor color: it is the common
And more then vvhore-like trick of treachery,
And vermin bred to rapine, and to ruin:
For which this* fault is still to be accused,
Since good acts fail, crafts and deceits are used.
If it be other never pity me.

Aum. Sir, we are glad, believe it, and have hope
The King will so conceit it.

Cler. At his pleasure.
In mean time, what is your will Lord Lieutenant?

M^il. To leave your own horse, and to mount the trumpets.

Cler. It shall be done: this heavily preuents
My purposed recreation in these parts;
Which now I think on: let me beg you sir,
To lend me some one Captain of your Troops,
To bear the message of my hapless service,
And mis^rie, to my most noble mistress,
Countess of Cambray: to whose house this night
I promised my repair, and know most truly,
With all the ceremonies of her favor,
She sure expects me.

Mail. Think you now on that?

Cler. On that, sir? I, and that so worthily,
That if the King* in spite of your great service,
Would send me instant promise of enlargement,
Condition I would set this message by,
I would not take it, but had rather die.

Aum. Your message shall be done sir: I my self
Will be for you a messenger of ill.

Cler. I thank you sir, and doubt not yet to live
To quite your kindness.

Aum. Mean space use your spirit
And knowledge for the cheerful patience
Of this so strange and sudden consequence.

Cler. Good sir, believe that no particular torture
Can force me from my glad obedience
To any thing the high and general cause,
To match with his whole Fabric, has ordainde,
And know ye all (though far from all your aims,
Yet worth them all, and all men's endless studies)
That in this one thing, all the discipline
Of manners, and of manhood is contained;
A man to join himself with th'Vniuerse,
In his maine sway, and make (in all things fit)
One with that all, and go on, round as it;
Not plucking from the whole his wretched part,
And into strai^es, or into naught reuert,
Wishing the complete Universe might be
Subject to such a ragge of it as he:
But to consider great necessity
All things as well refract, as voluntary
Reduces to the prime celestial cause,
Which he that yields to with a man's applause,
And cheek, by cheek, goes; crossing it, no breath,
But like Gods Image, follows to the death,
That man is truly wise, and every thing,
(Each cause, and every part distinguishing)
In Nature, with enough Art understands,
And that full glory merits at all hands,
That does the whole world at all parts adorn,
And appe^taines to one celestial borne.

Exeunt omnes, Enter Baligny, Renel. Bal. So foul a scandal never man
sustained,
Which caused by the King, is rude and tyrannous:
Giu^ me a place, and my Lieutenant make
The filler of it.

Ren. I should never look
For better of him; never trust a man,
For any Justice, that is rapt with pleasure:
To order arms well, that makes smockes his ensigns,
And his whole Governments sails: you heard of late,
He had the four and twenty ways of Venerie
Done all before him.

Bal. It Was abhorred and beastly.

Ren. It Is more then natures mighty hand can do^
To make one humane and a Letcher too.
Look how a Wolf does like a Dog appear,
So, like a friend is an Adulterer,
Voluptuaries, and these belly-gods;
No more true men are, then so many Toads.
A good man happy, is a common good;
Vile men advanced live of the common blood.

Bal. Give and then take like children.

Ren. Bounties are
As soon repented as they happen rare.

Bal. What should Kings do, and men of eminent places;
But as they gather, sow gifts to the graces,
And where they have given, rather give again,
(Being given for virtue) then like Babes and fools,
Take and repent Gifts; why are wealth and power?

Ren. Power and wealth move to tyranny, not bounty;
The Merchant for his wealth is swollen in mind,
When yet the chief Lord of it is the Wind.

Bal. That may so chance to our State-Merchants too:
Something performed, that has not far to go.

Ren. That Is the maine point, my Lord; insist on that.

Bal. But does this fire rage further? has it taken
The tender tynder of my wifes sere blood?
Is she so passionate?

Ren. So wild, so mad,
She cannot live, and this vnwreakt sustain.
The woes are bloody that in women reign.
The Sicile gulf keeps fear in less degree;
There is no Tiger, not more tame then she.

Bal. There is no looking home then?

Ren. Home? Medea
With all her herbs, charms, thunders, lightning,
Made not her presence, and black hants more dreadful.

Bal. Come, to the King* if he reform not all,
Mark the event, none stand where that must fall.

Exeunt. Enter Countess, Rioua, and an Usher. Vsh. Madame, a Captain come
from Clermont D'Ambois
Desires access to you.

Count. And not himself?

Vsh. No, Madame.

Coun. That Is not well. Attend him in.
Exit Vsh. The last hour of his promise now run out
And he break, some brack in the frame of nature
That forces his breach.

Enter Usher and Aumal. Aum. Save your Ladyship.

Coun. All welcome. Come you from my worthy servant?

Aum. I, Madame, and confer such news from him.

Coun. Such news? what news?

Aum. News that I wish some other had had the charge of.

Coun. O what charge? what news?

Aum. Your Ladyship must use some patience
Or else I cannot do him that desire,
He urged with such affection to your Graces.

Coun. Do it; for heavens love do it, if you serve
His kind desires, I will have patience.
Is he in health?

Aum. He is.

Count. Why, that is the ground
Of all the good estate we hold in earth;
All our ill built upon that, is no more
Then we may bear, and should express it all.

Aum. Madame, it is only this; his liberty.

Coun. His libertie^ Without that health is nothing.
Why live I, but to ask in doubt of that,
Is that bere^t him?

Aum. You Will again prevent me.

C^un. No more, I swear, I must hear, and together
Come all my misery. I Will hold though I burst.

Aum. Then madame, thus it fares; he was enuited
By way of honor to him, to take view
Of all the Powers his brother Baligny
Has in his gou^rnment; which ranged in battles,
Mail^ard, Lieutenant to the Governor,
Having re^^iu'd strickt Letters from the King,
To tr^ine him to the musters, and betray him,
To their supprise, which, with Chalon in chief,
And other Captains (all the field put hard
By his incredible valor for his s^^pe)
They haplesly and guiltlesly performed,
And to Bastile he is now led prisoner.

Coun. What change is here? how are my hopes prevented?
O my most faithful servant; thou betrayed?
Will Kings make treason lawful? Is Society
(To keep which only Kings were first ordained)
Less broke in breaking faith twixt friend and friend,
Then twixt the King and Subject? let them fear,
Kings Presidents in license lack no danger.
Kings are compared to Gods, and should be like them,
F^ll in all right, in naught superfluous;
Nor nothing straining past right, for their right:
Reign justly, and reign safely. Policy
Is but a Guard corrupted, and a way
Venter'd in Deserts, without guide or path.
Kings punish Subjects errors with their own.
Kings are like Archers, and their Subjects, shafts:
For as when Archers let their arrows fly,
They call to them, and bid them fly or fall,
As if twere in the free power of the shaft
To fly or fall, when only it is the strength,
Straight shooting, compass given it by the Archer,
That makes it hit or miss; and doing either,
Hee^s to be praised or blamed, and not the shaft:
So Kings to Subjects crying, do, do not this;
Must to them by their own examples strength,
The straightness of their acts, and equal compass,
Give Subjects power to obey them in the like;
Not shoot them forth with faulty aim and strength,
And lay the fault in them for flying amiss,

Aum. But for your servant, I dare swear him guiltless.

Count. He would not for his Kingdom traitor be;
His Laws are not so true to him, as he.
O knew I how to free him, by way forced
Through all their army, I would fly, and do it:
And had I, of my courage and resolve,
But ten such more, they should not all retain him;
But I will never die, before I give
Maillard an hundred slashes with a sword,
Chalon an hundred breaches with a Pistol.
They could not all have taken Clermont D'Ambois,
Without their treachery; he had bought his bands out
With their slave bloods: but he was credulous;
He would believe, since he would be believed;
Your noblest natures are most credulous.
Who gives no trust, all trust is apt to break;
Hate like hell mouth, who think not what they speak.

Aum. Well, Madame, I must tender my attendance
On him again. Will It please you to return
No service to him by me?

Count. Fetch me straight
My little Cabinet. [Exit Ancil.] It Is little tell him,
And much too little for his matchless love:
But as in him the worths of many men
Are close contracted; [Intr. Ancil.] so in this are Jewels
Worth many Cabinets. Here, with this (good sir)
Commend my kindest service to my servant,
Thank him, with all my comforts; and, in them
With all my life for them: all sent from him
^n his remembrance of me, and true love:
And look you tell him, tell him how I lie
She kneeles down at his feet. Prostrate at feet of his accursed misfortune,
Pouring my tears out, which shall ever fall,
Till I have poured for him out eyes and all.

Aum. O Madame, this will kill him: comfort you
With full assurance of his quick acquitall;
Be not so passionate: rise* cease your tears.

Coun. Then must my life cease. Tears are all the vent
My life has to escape death: Tears please me better,
Then all life's comforts, being the natural seed
Of hearty sorrow. As a tree fruit bears,
He raises her, and leads her out. Exe. So does an undissembled sorrow,
tears.

Vsh. This might have been before, and saved much charge.
Exit.
Enter Henry, Guise, Baligny, Esp. Soisson. Pericot with pen, inck^, and paper.
Guise. Now sir, I hope you're much abused Eyes see
In my word for my Clermont, what a villain
He was that whispered in your jealous ear
His own black treason in suggesting Clermonts:
Colored with nothing but being great with me,
Sign then this writ for his delivery,
Your hand was never urged with worthier boldness:
Come, pray sir, sign it: why should Kings be praid
To acts of Justice? it is a reverence
Makes them despised, and shows they stick and tire
In what their free powers should be hot as fire.

Hen. Well, take your will sir, I Will have mine ere long.
But wherein is this Clermont such a rare one?

Guis^. In his most gentle, and unwearied mind,
Rightly to virtue framed; in very nature;
In his most firm inexorable spirit,
To be removed from any thing he chooses
For worthiness; or bear the lest persuasion
To what is base, or fitteth not his object;
In his contempt of riches and of greatness;
In ^stimation of th'Idolatrous vulgar;
His scorn of all things servile and ignoble,
Though they could gain him never such advancement;
His liberal kind of speaking what is truth,
In spite of temporising; the great rising,
and learning of his soul, so much the more
Against ill fortune, as she set her self
Sharp against him, or would present most hard,
To shun the malice of her deadliest charge;
His detestation of his special friends,
When he perceived their tyrannous will to do,
Or their abiection basely to sustain
Any injustice that they could revenge;
The flexibilitie of his most anger,
Even in the maine careere and fury of it,
When any object of desertfull pity
Offers it self to him; his sweet disposure
As much abhorring to behold, as do
Any unnatural and bloody action;
His just ^ontempt of ^esters, Parasites,
Servile obseruers, and polluted tongues:
In sho^^, this Senecall man is found in him,
He may with heavens immortal powers compare,
(...) the day and fortune equal are,
Come fair or foul, what ever chance can fall,
Fix^ (...) himself, he still is one to all.

Hen. Shows he to others thus?

Om^es. To all that know him.

Hen. And apprehend I this man for a traitor?

Guise. These are your Macheuilian Villains,
Your bastard Teucers, that their mischiefs done,
Run to your shield for shelter: Caucusses,
That cut their too large murtherous theueries,
To their dens length still: woe be to that state
Where treachery guards, and ruin makes men great.

Hen. Go, take my Letters for him, and release him.

Om. Thanks to your Highness, ever live your Highness.

Exeuent. Bal. Better a man were buried quick, then live
A property for state, and spoil, to thrive.
Exit.
Enter Clermont, Mail. Chal. with Soldiers. Mail. We joy you take a chance so
ill, so well.

Cler. Who ever saw me differ in acceptance
Of either fortune?

Chal. What, love bad, like good?
How should one learn that?

Cler. To love nothing outward,
Or not within our own powers to command;
And so being sure of every thing we love,
Who cares to lose the rest: if any man
Would neither live nor dye in his free choice,
But as he sees necessity will have it,
(Which if he would resist, he strives in vain)
What can come near him, that he does not well,
And if in worst events, his will be done;
How can the best be better? all is one.

Mail. Me thinks it is pretty.

Cler. Put no difference
If you have this, or not this; but as children
Playing at co^tes, ever regard their game,
And care not for their coites; so let a man
The things themselves that touch him not esteem,
But his free power in well disposing them.

Chal. Pretty from toys.

Cler. Me thinks this double disticke
Seems prettily too, to stay superfluous longings:
Not to have want, what riches does exceed?
Not to be subject, what superior thing?
He that to naught aspires, does nothing need;
Who breaks no Law is subject to no King.

Mail. This goes to mine ear well I promise you.

Chal. O, but it is passing hard to stay one thus.

Cler. It Is so; rank custom raps men so beyond it,
And as it is hard, so well men's doors to bar
To keep the cat out, and th'adulterer;
So it is as hard to curb affections so,
We let in naught to make them ouer-flow.
And as of Homers verses, many Critickes
On those stand, of which times old moth has eaten,
The first or last feet, and the perfect parts,
of his unmatched Poem sink beneath,
With upright gasping, and sloth dull as death:
So the unprofitable things of life,
And those we cannot compass, we affect;
All that does profit, and we have, neglect,
Like covetous, and basely getting men,
That gathering much, use never what they keep;
But for the least they loose, extremely weep,

Mail. This pretty talking and our horses walking
Down this steep hill, spends time with equal profit.

Cler. It Is well bestowed on ye, meat and men sick
Agree like this, and you; and yet even this
Is the end of all skill, power, wealth, all that is.

Chal. I long to hear sir, how your Mistress takes this.

Enter Aumal with a Cabinet. Mail. We soon shall know it: see Aumall returned.

Aum. Ease to your bands sir.

Cler. Welcome worthy friend.

Chal. How took his noblest Mistress your sad message?

Aum. As great rich men take sudden poverty,
I never witnessed a more noble love,
Nor a more ruthful sorrow: I well wished
Some other had been master of my message.

Mail. You Are happy sir, in all things, but this one,
Of your unhappy apprehension.

Cler. This is to me, compared with her much moan,
As one tear is to her whole passion.

Aum. Sir, she commends her kindest service to you,
And this rich Cabinet.

Chal. O happy man.
This may enough hold to redeem your bands.

Cler. These clouds I doubt not, will be soon blown over.

Enter Baligny with his discharge: Renel, and others. Aum. Your hope is just
and happy, see sir both
In both the looks of these.

Bal. Here Is a discharge
For this your prisoner, my good Lord Lieutenant.

Mail Alas, sir, I usurp that style enforced,
And hope you know it was not my aspiring.

Bal. Well sir, my wrong aspired past all men's hopes.

Ma^l. I sorrow for it sir.

Ren. You see sir there
Your prisoners discharge autenticall.

Mail. It is sir, and I yield it him with gladness.

Bal. Brother, I brought you down to much good purpose.

Cler. Repeat not that sir: the amends makes all:

Ren. I joy in it, my best and worthiest friend,
O y'haue a princely fautor of the Guise.

Bal. I think I did my part to.

Ren. Well, sir; all
Is in the issue well: and (worthiest Friend)
Here Is from your friend the Guise; here from the Countess,
Your Brothers Mistress, the contents whereof
I know, and must prepare you now to please
Th'vnrested spirit of your slaughtered brother,
If it be true, as you imagined once,
His apparition showed it* the complot
Is now laid sure betwixt us; therefore haste
Both to your great friend (who has some use weight
For your repair to him) and to the Countess,
Whose satisfaction is no less important.

Cler. I see all, and will haste as it imports.
And good friend, since I must delay a little
My wished attendance on my noblest Mistress,
Excuse me to her, with return of this,
And endless protestation of my service;
And now become as glad a messenger,
As you were late a woeful.

A^m. Happy change,
I ^uer will salute thee with my service
Exit.
Bal. Yet more news Brother; the late jesting Monsieur
Makes now your Brothers dying prophecy equal
At all parts, being dead as he presaged.

Ren. Heaven shield the Guise from seconding that truth,
With what he likewise prophesied on him.

Cler. It has enough, it was graced with truth in one,
To The other falsehood and confusion.
Lead to the Court sir.

Bal. You I Will lead no more,
It was to ominous and foul before.

Exeunt. Finis Actus quarti.
Actus quinti
Scaena prima.
Ascendit Vmbra Bussi. Vmb. UP from the Chaos of eternal night,
(To which the whole digestion of the world
Is now returning) once more I ascend,
And bide the cold dampe of this piercing air.
To urge the justice, whose almighty word
Measures the bloody acts of impious men,
With equal penance, who in the act it self
Includes th'infliction, which like chained shot
Batter together still; though (as the thunder
Seems, by men's duller hearing then their sight,
To break a great time after lightning forth,
Yet both at one time tear the laboring cloud,)
So men think penance of their ils is slow,
Though the will and penance still together go.
Reform ye ignorant men, your manlesse lives
Whose laws ye think are nothing but your lusts*
When leaving but for supposition sake,
The body of felicity (Religion)
Set in the midst of Christendom, and her head
Cleft to her bosom; one half one way swaying
Another the other: all the Christian world
And all her laws, whose observation,
Stands upon faith, above the power of reason:
Leaving (I say) all these, this might suffice,
To fray ye from your vicious swindge in ill,
And set you more on fire to do more good:
That since the world (as which of you denies)
Stands by proportion, all may thence conclude,
That all the joints and nerves sustaining nature,
As well may break, and yet the world abide,
As any one good unrewarded die,
Or any one ill escape his penalty.

The Ghost stands close. Enter Guise, Clermont. G^i. Thus (friend) thou see
how all good men would thrive,
Did not the good thou prompt'st me with prevent,
The jealous ill pursuing them in others.
But now thy dangers are dispatc^t, note mine:
Have thou not heard of that admired voice,
That at the Barricadoes spoke to me,
(No person seen) Let Us lead (my Lord) to Reimes?

Cler. Nor could you learn the person?

Guise. By no means.

Cler. It Was but your fancy then a waking dream:
For as in sleep, which binds both the outward senses,
And the sense common to; th'imagining power
(Stird up by forms hid in the memories store,
Or by the vapors of o'er-flowing humors
In bodies full and foul; and mixed with spirits,)
Faines many strange, miraculous images,
In which act, it so painfully applies
It self to those forms, that the common sense
It actuates with his motion; and thereby
Those fictions true seem, and have real act:
So, in the strength of our conceits, awake,
The cause alike, does of like fictions make.

Guise. Be what it will, it was a presage of something
Weighty and secret, which th'aduertisements
I have received from all parts, both without,
And in this Kingdom, as from Rome and Spain
Soccaine and Sauoye, gives me cause to think,
All vvriting that our plots Catastrophe,
For propagation of the Catholic cause,
Will bloody prove, dissoluing all our counsels*

Cler. Retire then from them all.

Guise. I must not do so.
The Archbishop of Lions tells me plain
I shall be said then to abandon France
In so important an occasion:
And that mine enemies (their profit making
Of my faint absence) soon would let that fall,
That all my pains did to this height exhale.

Cler. Let all fall that would rise unlawfully:
Make not your forward spirit in virtues right,
A property for vice, by thrusting on
Further then all your powers can fetch you off.
It is enough, your will is infinite
To all things virtuous and religious,
Which within limits kept, may without danger,
Let virtue some good from your Graces gather,
Avarice of all is ever nothings father.

Vmb. Danger (the spur of all great minds) is ever
The curb to your tame spirits; you respect not
(With all your holiness of life and learning)
More then the present, like illiterate vulgars,
Your mind (you say) kept in your fleshes bounds,
Shows that man's will must ruled be by his power:
When (by true doctrine) you are taught to live
Rather without the body, then within;
And rather to your God still then your self:
To live to him, is to do all things fitting
His Image, in which, like himself we live;
To be his Image, is to do those things,
That make us deathlesse, which by death is only;
Doing those deeds that fit eternity,
And those deeds are the perfecting that Justice,
That makes the world last, which proportion is
Of punishment and wreake for every wrong,
As well as for right a reward as strong:
Away then, use the means thou have to right
The wrong I suffered. What corrupted Law
Leaves vnperform'd in Kings, do thou supply,
And be above them all in dignity.
Exit.
Guise. Why stand'st thou still thus, and applyest thine ears,
And eyes to nothing?

Cler. Saw you nothing here?

Guise. Thou dream'st, awake now; what was here to see?

Cler. My Brothers spirit, urging his revenge.

Guise. Thy Brothers spirit! pray thee mock me not.

Cler. No, by my love and service.

Guise. Would he rise,
And not be thundering threats against the Guise?

Cl^r. You make amends for enmity to him,
With ten parts more love, and desert of me;
And as you make your hate to him, no let
Of any love to me; no more bears he
(Since you to me supply it) hate to you,
Which reason and which Justice is performed
In Spirits ten parts more then fleshy men.
To whose fore-sights our acts and thoughts lie open:
And therefore since he saw the treachery
Late practiced by my brother Baligny,
He would not honor his hand with the justice
(As he esteems it) of his bloods revenge,
To which my Sister needs would have him sworn,
Before she would consent to marry him.

Guise. O Baligny, who would believe there were
A man, that (only since his looks are raised
Upwards, and have but sacred heaven in sight)
Could bear a mind so more then devilish?
As for the painted glory of the countenance,
Flitting in Kings, does good for naught esteem,
And the more ill he does, the better seem.

Cler. We easily may believe it, since we see
In this worlds practice few men better be.
Justice to live does naught but Justice need,
But Policy must still on mischief feed.
Untruth for all his ends, truths name does sue in;
None safely live, but those that study ruin.
A good man happy, is a common good;
Ill men advanced live of the common blood.

Guise. But this thy brothers spirit startles me,
These spirits seld or never hanting men,
But some mishap ensues.

Cler. Ensue what can:
Tyrants may kill, but never hurt a man;
All to his good makes, spite of death and hell.

Enter Aumall. Aum. All the desert of good, renown your Highness.

Guise. Welcome Aumall.

Cler. My good friend, friendly welcome.
How took my noblest mistress the changed news?

Aum. It came too late sir, for those loueliest eyes
(Through which a soul looked so divinely loving,
Tears nothing uttering her distress enough)
She wept quite out, and like two falling Stars
Their dearest sights quite vanished with her tears.

Cler. All good forbid it.

Guise. What events are these?

Cler. All must be borne my Lord: and yet this chance
Would willingly enforce a man to cast off
All power to bear with comfort, since he sees
In this, our comforts made our miseries.

Guise. How strangely thou art loved of both the sexes;
Yet thou love neither, but the good of both.

Cler. In love of women, my affection first
Takes fire out of the frail parts of my blood;
Which till I have enjoyed, is passionate,
Like other lovers: but fruition past*
I then love out of judgment; the desert
Of her I love, still sticking in my heart,
Though the desire, and the delight be gone,
Which must chance still, since the comparison
Made upon trial twixt what reason loves,
And what affection, makes in me the best
Ever preferred; what most love, valuing lest.

Guise. Thy love being judgment then, and of the mind,
Marry thy worthiest mistress now being blind.

Cler. If there were love in marriage so I would;
But I deny that any man does love,
Affecting vviues, maids, widows, any women:
For neither Fly^s love milk, although they drown
In greedy search thereof; nor does the Be
Love honey, though the labor of her life
Is spent in gathering it; nor those that fat
Or beasts* or fowls, do any thing therein
For any love: for as when only nature
Moves men to meat, as far as her power rules,
She does it with a temperate appetite,
The too much men devour, abhorring nature;
And in our most health, is our most disease:
So, when humanity rules men and women.
It Is for society confinde in reason.
But what excites the beds desire in blood,
By no means justly can be construed love;
For when love kindles any knowing spirit,
It ends in virtue and effects divine;
And is in friendship chaste, and masculine.

Guise. Thou shall my Mistress be; me thinks my blood
Is taken up to all love with thy virtues.
And howsoever other men despise
These Paradoxes strange, and too precise,
Since they hold on the right way of our reason,
I could attend them ever. Come, away;
Perform thy brothers thus importuned wreake;
And I will see what great affairs the King
Has to employ my counsel, which he seems
Much to desire, and more and more esteems.
Exit.
Enter Henry, Baligny, with six of the guard. Hen. Saw you his saucy forcing
of my hand
To D'Ambois freedom?

Bal. Saw, and through mine eyes
Le^ ^ire into my heart, that burned to bear
An insolence so Giantly austere.

Hen. The more Kings bear at Subjects hands, the more
Their lingering Justice gathers; that resembles
The weighty, and the goodly-bodied Eagle,
Who (being on earth) before her shady wings
Can raise her into air, a mighty way
Close by the ground she runs; but being aloft,
All she commands, she flies at; and the more
Death in her Seres bears, the more time she stays
Her thundry stoop from that on which she preyes.

Bal. You must be then more secret in the weight
Of these your shadie counsels, who will else
Bear (where such sparks fly as the Guise and D'Ambois)
Powder about them. Counsels (as your en^^ailes)
Should be vnpierst and sound kept; for not those,
Whom you discover, you neglect; but open
A ruinous passage to your own best hope.

Hen. We have Spies set on us, as we on others;
And therefore they that serve us must excuse us,
If what we most hold in our hearts, take wind,
Deceit has eyes that see into the mind.
But this plot shall be quicker then their twinkling,
On whose lids Fate, with her dead weight shall lie,
And Confidence that lightens ere she die.
Friends of my Guard, as ye gave oath to be
True to your Sovereign, keep it manfully:
Your eyes have witnest often The Ambition
That never made access to me in Guise
But Treason ever sparkled in his eyes:
Which if you free us of, our safety shall
You not our Subjects, but our Patrons call.

Omnes. Our duties bind us, he is now but dead.

Hen. We trust in it, and thank ye. Baligny,
Go lodge their ambush, and thou God that art
Fautor of Princes* thunder from the skies,
Beneath his hill of pride this Giant Guise.

Exeunt. Enter Tamyra with a Letter, Charlotte in man's attire. Tam. I see you are
Servant, sir, to my dear sister,
The Lady of her loved Baligny.

Char. Madame I am bound to her virtuous bounties,
For that li^e which I offer in her virtuous service,
To the revenge of her renowned brother.

Tam. She writes to me as much, and much desires,
That you may be the man, whose spirit she knows
Will cut short off these long and dull delays,
Hitherto to bribing the eternal Justice:
Which I believe, since her unmatched spirit
Can judge of spirits, that have her sulphur in them;
But I must tell you, that I make no doubt,
Her living brother will revenge her dead,
On whom the dead imposed the task* and he,
I know, will come to effect it instantly.

Char. They are but words in him; believe them not.

Tam. See; this is the vault, where he must enter:
Where now I think he is.

Enter Renel at the vault, with the Countess being blind. Ren. God save you
Lady.
What Gentleman is this, with whom you trust
The deadly weighty secret of this hour?

Tam. One that your self will say, I well may trust.

R^n. Then come up Madame.
He helps the Countess up. See here honored Lady,
A Countess that in loves mishap does equal
At all parts* your wronged self; and is the mistress
Of your slain servants brother; in whose love
For his late treachrous apprehension,
She wept her fair eyes from her luory brows,
And would have wept her soul out, had not I
Promised to bring her to this mortal quarrie,
That by her lost eyes for her servants love,
She might conjure him from this stern attempt,
In which, (by a most ominous dream she had)
She knows his death fixed, and that never more
Out of this place the Sun shall see him live.

Char. I am provided then to take his place,
And undertaking on me.

Ren. You sir, why?

Char. Since I am charged so by my mistress,
His mournful sister.

Tam. See her Letter sir.
He reads. Good Madame, I rue your fate, more then mine,
And know not how to order these affairs,
They stand on such occurrents.

Ren. This indeed,
I know to be your Lady mistress hand,
And know besides, his brother will, and must
Endure no hand in this revenge but his.

Enter Vmbr. Bussy. Vmb. Away, dispute no more; get up, and see,
Clermont must auchthor this just Tragedy.

Coun. Who Is that?

Ren. The spirit of Bussy.

Tam. O my servant! let us embrace.

Vmb. Forbear. The air, in which
My figures liknesse is impressed, will blast,
Let my revenge for all loves satisfy,
In which (dame) fear not, Clermont shall not dye:
No word dispute more, up, and see the event.
Exeunt Lady^s. Make the Guard sure Renel; and then the doors
Command to make fast, when the Earl is in.
Exit Ren. The black soft-footed hour is now on wing,
Which for my just wreake, Ghosts shall celebrate,
With dances dire, and of infernal state.
Exit.
Enter Guise. Guise. Who says that death is natural, when nature
Is with the only thought of it, dismayed?
I have had Lotteries set up for my death,
And I have drawn beneath my trencher one,
Knit in my hand-kerchiefe another lot,
The word being; You Are a dead man if you enter,
And these words, this imperfect blood and flesh,
Shrincke at in spite of me; their solidst part
Melting like snow within me, with cold fire:
I hate my self, that seeking to rule Kings,
I cannot curb my slave. Would any spirit
F^ee, manly, Princely, wish to live to be
Commanded by this mass of slavery,
Since Reason, Judgment, Resolution,
And scorn of what we fear, will yield to fear?
While this same sincke of sensuality swells,
Who would live sinking in it? and not spring
Up to the Stars, and leave this carrion here,
For Wolfes, and Vultures, and for Dogs to tear?
O Clermont D'Ambois, were thou here to chide
This softness from my flesh, far as my reason,
Far as my resolution, not to stir
One foot out of the way, for death and hell.
Let my ^alse man by falsehood perish here,
There Is no way else to set my true man clear.

Enter Messenger. Mess. The King desires your Grace to come to Council.

Guise. I come. It cannot be: he will not dare
To touch me with a treachery so profane.
Would Clermont now were here, to try how he
Would lay about him, if this plot should be:
Here would be tossing souls into the sky.
Who ever knew blood saved by treachery?
Well, I must on, and will; what should I fear?
Not against two, Alcides? against two
And Hercules to friend, the Guise will go.

He takes up the Arras, and the Guard enters upon him: he draws. Guise. Hold
murderers.
They strike him down. So then, this is confidence
In greatness, not in goodness: where is the king?
The king comes in sight with Es. Sois. and others. Let him appear to justify
his deed.
In spite of my betrayed wounds; ere my soul
Take her flight through them, and my tongue has strength
To urge his tyranny.

Hen. See sir* I am come
To justify it before men, and God,
Who knows with what wounds in my heart for woe
Of your so wounded faith, I made these wounds,
Forced to it by an insolence of force
To stir a stone, nor is a rock opposed
To all the billows of the churlish sea,
More beat, and eaten with them, then was I
With your ambitious mad Idolatry;
And this blood I shed, is to save the blood
Of many thousands.

Guise. That Is your white pretext,
But you will find one drop of blood shed lawless,
Will be the fountain to a purple sea:
The present lust, and shift made for Kings lives
Against the pure form, and just power of Law,
Will thrive like shifters purchases; there hangs
A black Star in the skies, to which the Sun
Gives yet no light, will rain a poisoned shower
Into your entrails, that will make you feel
How little safety lies in treacherous steel.

Hen. Well sir, I Will bear it; y'haue a Brother to,
Bursts with like threats, the skarlet Cardinal:
Seek, and lay hands on him; and take this hence,
Their bloods, for all you, on my conscience.
Exit.
Guise. So sir, your full swindge take; mine, death has curbed.
Clermont, farewell: O did thou see but this:
But it is better, see by this the Ice
Broke to thine own blood, which thou will despise,
When thou hear'st mine shed. Is there no friend here
Will bear my love to him?

Aum. I will, my Lord.

Guise. Thanks with my last breath: recommend ^e then
To the most worthy of the race of men.

Dies. E^eunt. Enter Monts. and Tamyra. Mont. Who have you let into my house?

Tam. I, none.

Mont. It Is false, I savor the rank blood of foes
In every corner.

Tam. That you may do well,
It is the blood you lately shed, you smell.

Mont. Sdeath the vault opes.

The gulf opens. Tam. What vault? hold your sword.

Clermont ascends. Cler. No, let him use it.

Mont. Treason, murder, murder.

Cler. Exclaim not; it is in vain, and base in you,
Being one, to only one.

Mont. O bloody strumpet!

Cler. With what blood charge you her? it may be mine
As well as yours; there shall not any else
Enter or touch you: I confer no guards,
Nor imitate the murtherous course you took;
But single here, will have my former challenge,
Now answered single, not a minute more
My brothers blood shall stay for his revenge,
If I can act it; if not, mine shall add
A double conquest to you, that alone
Put it to fortune now, and use no ods.
Storm not, nor beat your self thus against the doors,
Like to a savage vermin in a trap:
All doors are sure made, and you cannot escape,
But by your valor,

Mont. No, no, come and kill me^.

Cler. If you will die so like a beast, you shall,
But when the spirit of a man may save you,
Do not so shame man, and a Noble man.

Mont. I do not show this baseness, that I fear thee,
But to prevent and shame thy victory,
Which of one base is base, and so I Will die.

Cler. Here then.

Mon. Stay, hold, one thought has hardened me,
He starts up. And since I must afford thee victory,
It shall be great and brave, if one request
Thou will admit me.

Cler. What Is that?

Mont. Give me leave
To fetch and use the sword thy Brother gave me
When he was bravely giving up his life.

Cler. No, I Will not fight against my brothers sword,
Not that I fear it, but since it is a trick,
For you to show your back.

Mont. By all truth, no:
Take but my honorable oath, I will not.

Cler. Your honorable oath, plain truth no place ha^
Where oaths are honorable.

Tam. Trust not his oath.
He will lie like a Lapwing, when she flies
Far from her sought nest, still here it is she cries.

Mont. Out on thee damme of Devils, I will quite
Disgrace thy braues conquest, die, not fight.

Lies down. Tam. Out on my fortune to wed such an abject.
Now is the peoples voice, the voice of God;
He that to wound a woman vants so much,
(As he did me) a man dares never touch.

Cler. Revenge your wounds now madame, I resign him
Up to your full will, since he will not fight.
First you shall torture him (as he did you,
And Justice wills) and then pay I my vow.
Here, take this Poniard.

Mont. Sink Earth, open Heaven,
And let fall vengeance.

Tam. Come sir, good sir hold him.

Mont. O shame of women, whither art thou fled!

Cler. Why (good my Lord) is it a greater shame
For her then you? come, I will be the bands
You used to her, profaning her fair hands.

Mont. No sir, I Will fight now, and the terror be
Of all you Champions to such as she.
I did but thus far dally: now observe,
O all you aching foreheads that have robbed,
Your hands of weapons, and your hearts of valor,
Join in me all your rages, and rebutters,
And into dust ram this same race of Furies,
In this one relicke of the Ambois gall,
In his one purple soul shed, drown it all.

Fight. Mont. Now give me breath a while.

Cler. Receive it freely.

Mont. What think y'a this now?

Cler. It is very noble.
Had it be^ne free (at least) and of your self,
And thus we see (where valor most does vant)
What it is to make a coward valiant.

Mont. Now I shall grace your conquest.

Cler. That you shall.

Mont. If you obtain it.

Cler. True sir, it is in fortune.

Mont. If you were not a D'Ambois, I would scarce
Change lives with you, I feel so great a change
In my tall spirits breathed, I think, with the breath
A D'Ambois breathes here, and necessity
(With whose point now pricked on, and so, whose help
My hands may challege, that does all men conquer,
If she except not you, of all men only)
May change the case here.

Cler. True as you are changed,
Her power in me urged, makes y'another man,
Then yet you ever were.

Mont. Well, I must on.

Cler. Your Lordship must by all means.

Mont. Then at all.

Fights, and D'Ambois hurts him. Charlotte above. Char. Death of my father:
what a shame is this,
Stick in his hands thus?

Ren. Gentle sir forbear.

Coun. Is he not slain yet?

She gets down. Ren. No Madame, but hurt in diverse parts of him.

Mont. Y'haue given it me,
And yet I feel life for another vennie,

Enter Charlotte. Cler. What would you sir?

Char. I would perform this Combat.

Cler. Against which of us?

Char. I care not much if twere
Against thy self: thy sister would have shamed,
To have thy Brothers wreake with any man
(In single combat) stick so in her fingers.

Cler. My Sister? know you her?

Tam. I sir, she sent him,
With this kind Letter, to perform the vvreake
Of my dear Servant.

Cler. Now alas good sir,
Think you you could do more?

Char. Alas? I do,
And were not, I, fresh, sound, should charge a man
Weary, and vvounded, I would long ere this,
Have proved what I presume on.

Cler. Y'haue a mind
Like to my Sister, but have patience now,
If next charge speed not, I Will resign to you.

Mont. Pray thee let him decide it.

Cler. No, my Lord,
I am the man in fate, and since so bravely
Your Lordship stands me, escape but one more charge,
And on my life, I Will set your life at large.

Mont. Said like a D'Ambois, and if now I die,
Sit joy and all good on thy victory.

Fights, and falls down. Mon. Farewell, I heartily forgive thee. Wife,
And thee, let penitence spend thy rest of life.

He gives his hand to Cler. and his Wife. Cler. Noble and Christian.

Tam. O it breaks my heart.

Cler. And should, for all faults found in him before,
These words, this end, makes full amends and more.
Rest worthy soul, and with it the dear spirit
Of my loved Brother, rest in endless peace:
Soft lie thy bones Heaven be your souls abode,
And to your ashes be the earth no lode.

Music, and the Ghost of Bussy enters, leading the Ghost of the Guise;
Monsieur, Cardinal Guise, and Sha^tilion, they dance about the dead body, and
Exeunt. Cler. How strange is this? the Guise amongst these spirits,
And his great Brother Cardinal, both yet living,
And that the rest with them, with joy thus celebrate
This our revenge? This certainly presages
Some instant death both to the Guise and Cardinal.
That the Shattilians Ghost to should thus join
In celebration of this just revenge,
With Guise, that bore a chief stroke in his death,
It seems that now he does approve the act,
And these true shadows of the Guise and Cardinal,
Fore-running thus their bodies, may approve
That all things to be done, as here we live,
Are done before all times in the other life.
That Spirits should rise in these times yet are fables;
Though learned men hold that our sensiue spirits
A little time abide about the graves
Of their deceased bodies; and can take
In cold condenc't air, the same forms they had,
When they were shut up in this bodies shade.

Enter Aumall. A^m. O Sir, the Guise is slain.

Cler. Auert it Heaven.

Aum. Sent for to Council, by the King, an ambush
(Lodged for the purpose) rusht^on him, and took
His Princely life; who sent (in dying then)
His love to you, as to the best of men.

Cler. The worst, and most accursed of things creeping
On earths sad bosom. Let me pray ye all
A little to forbear, and let me use
Freely mine own mind in lamenting him.
I Will call ye straight again.

Aum. We will forbear, and leave you free sir.

Exeunt. Cler. Shall I live, and he
Dead, that alone gave means of life to me?
There Is no disputing with the acts of Kings,
Revenge is impious on their sacred persons:
And could I play the worldling (no man loving
Longer then gain is reapt, or grace from him)
I should survive, and shall be wondered at,
(Though in mine own hands being) I end with him:
But Friendship is the Sement of two minds,
As of one man the soul and body is,
Of which one cannot sever, but the other
Suffers a needful separation.

Descend Ren. and Coun. Ren. I fear your servant, Madame: let us descend.

Cler. Since I could skill of man, I never lived
To please men worldly, and shall I in death,
Respect their pleasures, making such a jar
^etwixt my death and life, when death should make
The consort sweetest; the end being proof and crown
To all the skill and worth we truly own?
Guise, O my Lord, how shall I cast from me
The bands and couerts hindering me from thee?
The garment or the cover of the mind,
The humane soul is; of the soul, the spirit
The proper robe is; of the spirit, the blood;
And of the blood, the body is the shroud.
With that must I begin then to unclothe,
And come at the other. Now then as a ship,
Touching at strange, and far removed shores;
Her men a shore go, for their several ends,
Fresh water, victuals, precious stones, and pearl,
All yet intentive when (the master calls,
The Ship to put off ready) to leave all
Their greediest labors, lest they there be left,
To the^ues, or beasts* or be the Countries slaves:
So, now my master calls, my ship, my venture
All in one bottom put, all quite put off,
Gone under sail, and I left negligent,
To all the horrors of the vicious time,
The far removed shores to all virtuous aims;
None favoring goodness; none but he respecting
Piety or manhood. Shall I here survive,
Not cast me after him into the sea,
Rather then here live, ready every hour
To feed thieves, beasts, and be the slave of power?
I come my Lord, Clermont thy creature comes.

He Kills himself. Enter Aumal, Tamyra, Charlotte. Aum. What? lie and
languish, Clermont? Cursed man
To leave him here thus: he has slain himself.

Tam. Misery on misery! O me wretched Dame
Of all that breath, all heaven turn all his eyes,
In hearty envy, thus on one poor dame.

Char. Well done my Brother: I did love thee ever,
But now adore thee: loss of such a friend
None should survive, of such a Brother;
With my false husband live, and both these slain:
Ere I return to him, I Will turn to earth.

Enter Renel leading the Countess. Ren. Horror of humane ey^s, O Clermont
D'Ambois!
Madame, we staid too long, your seruant's slain.

Coun. It must be so, he lived but in the Guise,
As I in him. O follow life mine eyes.

Tam. Hide, hide thy snakie head, to Cloisters fly,
In penance pine, too easy it is to die.

Cler. It is. In Cloisters then let us all survive.
Madame, since wrath nor grief can help these fortunes,
Let us forsake the world, in which they reign,
And for their wished amends to God complain.

Count. It Is fit and only needful: lead me on,
In heavens course comfort seek, in earth is none.

Exeunt. Enter Henry, Espernone, Soissone, and others. Hen. We came indeed
too late, which much I ^ue,
And would have kept this Clermont as my crown.
Take in the dead, and make this fatal room
(The house shut up) the famous D'Ambois Tomb.

Exeunt. FINIS.

