A SECOND SERmon upon the ix. Chapter of the holy Gospel of Jesus Christ
according to Saint John.

Preached at S. Mary's in Oxford, the 11. of December. 1586. By John Chardon
Doctor of Divinity.

Seen perused and allowed.

Ecclesiastes. xj.vj. Jn the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not
thine hand rest: for thou know not whether shall prosper, this or that, or
whether both shall be alike good.

Imprinted at London by John Winde^ for Tobie Cook. 1587.

AMPLISSIMO VIRO AC DOMINO SVO CLEMENTISSIMO D. AMBROSIO DVDLAEO COMITI
WARWICENSI, R. M. CONSILIARIO HONORATISSIMO, IOANNES CHARDONVS HANC SVAM
SECVNDAM CONCIONEM IN NONVM CAPVT SACRO-SANCTI EVANGELII IESV CHRISTI SECVNDVM
IOANNEM, OXONIAE HABITAM IN TEMPLO D. MARIAE, DECEMBRIS VNDECIMO ET ANNO
SALVTIS HVMANAE 1586. HONORIS DEBITAE QVE OBSERVANTIAE ERGO DICAT CONSECRAT QVE.

It is written in the ninth Chapter of the Gospel according to S. John, the
4.5.6. and seventh verses.
4 I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day: the night
comes when no man can work.

5 As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world.

6 As Soon as he had thus spoken, he spat on the ground, and made clay of the
spittle, and anointed the eyes of the blind with the clay.

7 And said unto him, go wash in the poole of Siloam (which is by
interpretation, Sent) He went his way therefore, and washed, and came again
seeing.


I have spoken heretofore out of this place (men, fathers and brethren, beloved
in our Lord and Savior) of the Exordium or entrance unto the miracle which
Christ wrought upon the man that was blind from his mothers womb at
Jerusalem, not far from the gates of the Temple, in which I found three
things to be contained: An introduction to a question, the Question of the
Disciples unto Christ, and the answer of Christ unto the same. And now to
proceed.

Our Savior tells his Disciples that he will help this man that was blind
from his birth: which done, he annointeth his eyes with the claye, and bids
him go wash in the poole of Siloam, where he received his sight. For the first,
he testifies that he is provoked thereunto by two special arguments, the one
derived ab officio, from his office and duty, and the other a tempore, from
the time. From his office and duty when he says, me oportet operari, etc. I
must work the works of him that sent me. From the time when he says, Donec
dies est, while it is day: which he expounds by the words that follow
after: the night comes when no man can work, and so forth. In this first
argument (which he deduceth from his office and duty) he yeldeth a reason to
the Disciples why he did so earnestly behold the man that was blind, The first
argument derived from his office.
and seems thus to say: ye marvel not a little wherefore I behold the blind
man, the reason is (says he) because I must work the works of him that sent
me.

Where note you that the word (oportet) is not so to be taken, as though
Christ did these things unwillingly and of compulsion, but rather that in so
saying he shows a singular propensity and readiness of mind to help the
afflicted. And to this end and purpose was he sent of the Father, Luke 4.18.
as him self does testifye in the fourth of Luke, even to preach the Gospel
to the poor, to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the
captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that
are bruised, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. Which embassage
of the Father, our Savior from time to time (as often as occasion was
minystred) did most carefullye seek to fulfill and observe. For speaking of
the earnest zeal which he had toward the business of the Father, he says to
his disciples in the fourth of John, My meat is that I may do the will John
4.34.
of him that sent me, and finish his work. Hereby declaring that there was
nothing that he did hunger for more, or wherein he took greater delight, then
painefullie to labor in the business assigned him of the father.

There was just cause for Christ to speak of the necessity of working the
works of the Father, for it was now the Sabbath day when he made the claie
and opened the eyes of the blind, whereat he knew that the Scribes and Pharisees
would be offended. Therefore to prevent the worst, before such time as he
gives sight to the blind, he says: Me oportet operari, I must work. As who
should say, I know that mine adversaries will be offended herewith,
notwithstanding, I must work the works of him that sent me.

A notable example to learn all men carefully and painefullie to walk in
their vocations and callings. For without exception all estates of men, the
Minister, the Magistrate, and private person are under the bond of this
obligation, and therefore each one must say in his degree, me oportet etc. I
must work the works of him that sent me. Let the Minister then (whom
chiefelie it does concern) feed, 1. Pet. 5.2.
(as much as in him lies) the flock of Christ: let him keep nothing back
that may do good: let him open the whole counsel of God: Act. 20.27.
let him do the work of an Evangelist: let him be instant in season and out
of season: and let the Magistrate be a man of courage, 2. Ti. 4.5. ver. 2.
Exodus 18.21.
fearing God, and dealing truly. For seeing we have diverse gifts, according
to the grace that is given unto us (as Paul bids) let him that has an
office wait on his office: Romans 12.6.
and him that teaches on his teaching: ver. 7.
and him that exhorts on his exhortation. In which words the apostle
declares, how that every man must walk in the roundnesse of conscience in
his vocation and calling. And it is of the merciful providence of God that we
have helpers and governors, 1. Cor. 12.28 Ephesians. 4.11. ver. 12.
pastors and teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the
work of the ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ.
Wherefore since God has so mercifully provided for us in this behalf, without
which there could not but ensue a disordered Chaos and miserable confusion,
let every one walk orderly and painefully in his vocation and calling, that
when we shall be called to the last account, it may be said unto each of us,
Well done good and faithful servant, Math. 25.23
thou have been faithful in little, I will make thee ruler over much: enter into
thy masters joy. But if we shall bury the Lords Talents in the earth, that is,
if we shall not do good with the graces which God has given us, we shall be
thrown as unprofitable servants into utter darkness: ver. 30.
there shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth. As often then as we feel our
selves negligent and slothful in the Lords work, let us call to mind this
argument and reason of Christ to stir us up unto labor, which by nature are
sluggish and slothful unto every good work, unless we purpose to rebel, and
to procure the heavy wrath and indignation of God to be kindled against us.
Ye know that God was very angry with Moses, because he refused to do the
message unto Pharaoh, Exodus 4.14.
which he enjoined him to do. Ion. 1.4.
Into how great perils and dangers Jonah was cast because he would not
promptly follow the Lords calling, who willed him to preach to ye people of
Nineveh, it is better known then I need to declare. And truly, worthily was
the Lord displeased with Moses, and worthily did he punish Jonah, that giving
place to their own reason, would flee from ye vocation whereunto God had called
the^, and in which he would mightily have assisted the^ with the might of his
power. The Prophet, in the first of kings, and thirteenth, 1. King. 13.24.
that did eat bread in the house of another prophet, contrary to the
commandment of the Lord, was slain of a Lion, and his body was cast in the
way. A fearful example, by which we are taught how dangerous a thing it is
for men to behave themselves coldly or deceitfully in that charge whereunto God
has called them. And I would to God al men would learn as by this, so by the
example of Saul to beware, who received a commandment from the Lord by
Samuel to apply the Lords work, to go and smite Amalek, and (without
compassion) to slaye both man 1. Sa. 15.3.
and woman, both infant and suckling, both ox and sheep, both camel and
ass, howbeit he left the Lords work undone, for he spared Agag the King,
and the better sheep, and the Oxen, and the fat beasts, ver. 9.
and the lambs, and all that was good, and he would not destroy them. But for
this his negligence he received a most sorrowful message from the Lord: because
thou have cast away the word of the Lord, ver. 23.
therefore has he cast away thee from being king. True it is, that in every
well ordered common weal, God has authorized rulers to destroy Amalek, and to
deliver the poor, and such as be in need from the hand of the oppressor. Now
if they look not to their charge, but (as Saul did) will suffer Amalek to
live, and not only so, but to grow up in might: doubtless the Lord almighty
and God of Israel shall turn them out of their seats and bring them to
confusion. Nom. 24.20,


But happily some will say, we must do as we may do, and accordingly as time
and occasion will serve. Unto such says the preacher: Eccl. 11.4.
He that observes the wind shall not sow, and he that regards the clouds
shall not reap. For with such the weather is always either too hot or too
cold, or else too wet or too dry. The sense and meaning whereof is this: that
he which fears inconveniences, and sets not forward, when necessity
requires, shall never do his duty. It teaches us then that we must not
stand over long gasing at the season and putting off the time, but must
earnestly and zealously go about the Lords cause, and the Lord shall bless
our labors and give good success unto the same. Otherwise, if we prolong the
time and post it over from day to day, our prolonging and posting over will
purchase the Lords curse. For as Jeremiah tells the Caldeans from the mouth
of God, Iere. 48.10.
Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently. Therefore David
commanding his son Solomon to build the temple of the Lord (which thing he
himself was forbidden to do) exhorts him in this manner, up, and be doing:
1. Chapter 22.16.
as if he should have said go about it quickly, and the Lord will be with
thee. Yea David's zeal was such toward the furtheraunce thereof, that it made
him to spare no expenses, but to bestow his own peculiar treasure, and withal
to provoke others to the forwardnes of the Lords work: for said he, And who
is willing to fill his hand to day unto the Lord? Hereto let us join the
worthy example of Elisha, 1. Chro. 29.5
who returning from his father, and about to depart from the plowmen, took a
couple of Oxen and slew them, and sodde their flesh with the instruments of
the Oxen, 1. King. 19.21.
and gave unto the people. Elisha would not stay till wood was brought, so
great was his desire to follow his vocation. So the Prophet Amos: Am. 3.8.
the Lion (says he) has roared: who will not be afraid? The Lord God has
spoken: who can but prophecy? Wherefore, when Amaziah Priest of Bethel willed
him to get him into the land of Judah, Am. 7.12.
and to eat his bread there, and to prophecy there, and to teach no more in
the land of Israel, contrary to the commandment of king Jeroboam, the prophet
objected his vocation and calling, and told him that he could not but obey God,
ver. 14.
who called him an herdman and a gatherer of wild figs to such an excellent
function, giving him knowledge, and with knowledge constancy to reprove sin
and wickedness in all estates and degrees whatsoever, and to denounce his most
horrible judgments against them, except they did spedily repent and amend.
Jeremiah likewise, because he was in derision daily, and mocked of every one
for doing his office, determined with him self not to make mention of the
Lord, Ier. 20.9.
nor to speak any more in his name: save that his word was in his heart, as a
burning fire shut up in his bones, so that he was weary with forbearing, and
could not stay. This same did the apostles: for when as the rulers, Scribes,
and Elders gave them in charge to preach Christ no more, Act. 4.1^
preferring their authority to the ordinance of God, they answered: whether
it be right in the sight of God, to obey you rather then God, judge ye: For we
can not but speak the things which we have seen and heard. Paul in like manner:
necessity is laid upon me, and woe is unto me, if I preach not the Gospel, 1.
Cor. 9.1^.
Doubtless greatly is the worthiness and authority of the vocation and calling
of God esteemed of those, who know what God is, and weigh well with them selves
what on their parts to him does belong. But on the other side, intolerable is
the slacknes or rather the wilful obstinacy of those, and little do they
esteem of the divine vocation and calling, who halt in the knowledge of the
caller, who has called them to this or that, according to his good will and
pleasure. And it seems unto me that there can no better reason be given of
this devilish and damnable carelessenes which (even at this day) is to be
seen in most ministers of the Church, magistrates of the common wealth,
Parents of children, Masters of families and housholdes, and that too in all
sorts both publicly and privately, then that the greater part think and
believe that they are seated in the rooms they are, not of God, but either of
Fortune, or of their own industry. But let each one in his degree and calling
know and understand this much, that he is called and sent of God, applying
this sentence of Christ every man to himself: I must work the works of him
that sent me, remembering the promise, that he which has been faithful in
little shall be made ruler over much. Math. 25.21
For since there is such a great blessedness promised unto those that shall
dutifully labor in the Lords work, we ought all in our several callinges to
have such regard hereunto, as that nothing whatsoever should provoke us to
shrink from the same.

But the world is at this point now a days, that it is counted a fault and a
matter worthy of reproof, yea and of punishment, to be zealous and fervent in
the Lords cause: especially in beating down sin and reproving iniquity, for
which are used all allurements, occasions and excuses to harden their
conscience in the same. For he that shall deal calmely and temperately, him
they reckon a wise man, fittest to speak in the congregation, and to bear
rule. But if the zeal of Gods house has eaten him up, Psalm. 69.9.
if he touch the quick, if he hunger and thirst the reformation of matters
that are out of course, then by and by he grows out of favor, he is reputed
rash, fonne, foolish, busy, indiscreet, and I wot not what. So it is then,
the more careful we shall be to work the Lords works, the worse we shall
be thought off, and the more enemies we shall have. Howbeit we ought the less
to marvel or to be grieved hereat, because the example is not rare and new,
but common and practiced against the godly long agone. Jeroboam the son of
Nebat bids lay hold on the man of God, 1. King. 13.4.
that cried out against the altar in Bethel. Ahab tells Eliah that he
troubles Israel, and Jeremiah of the false Priests and Prophets is accused of
treason: 2. King. 18.17. Ier. 26.11.
so do the wicked rage against the servants of God, when they declare them
his judgments. Neuerthelatter, the man of God cries out against the altar:
Eliah reprooueth the Prophets of Baal, and Jeremiah (notwithstanding that he
is censured worthy to die) continues his prophesying. And if we look to the
time of the Gospel, Act. 24.5.
Paul is accused of the Jews to be a pestilent fellow, and a moouer of
sedition throughout the world, and a chief maintainer of ye sect of the
Nazarites. The Gentiles also cry out against him in Philippi, that he was a
troubler of their city, Act. 16.20.
and preached ordinances, which were not lawful for them to receive. The like
did the Jews and Gentiles impute to the doctrine of the other Apostles: and
therefore they ceased not to persecute them, as common plagues and enemies of
the common peace and christian religion. The Apostles notwithstanding did not
cease to do their duty, but most constantly preached and professed Christ:
for they knew that it was far better that the whole world should be troubled
and in an uproar, then that the Gospel of the kingdom should not be
preached, or that one soul should be neglected and perish, 1. Pe. 1.19.
so dearelye redeemed with the blood of Christ. They knew too, that their
preachings were not the cause of those offenses and sects, and therefore they
were not discouraged, but cleaving to their vocation went forward daily in the
temple to teach, Act. 5.42.
and from house to house to preach Jesus Christ, knowing that the gospel which
they preached (howsoever it seemed to the Jews and Gentiles foolish and
offensive) was the power of god unto salvation to all that believe. 1. Cor.
1.18.
Romans 1.16.
All which examples are to encourage and to stir us up to painefulnes in our
ministry, and not at all to be moved with the poisoned tongues of the
ungodly, to be negligent in our vocation and calling. For what if at these
days (for working the works of the father) Jeroboam his hand be stretched out
against us? What and if with Eliah we be counted seditious? with Jeremiah
accused of Treason? With the Apostles forbidden to preach? With Paul reported
to be pestilent fellows, raisers of sedition, preachers of unlawful
ordinances, troublers of the city? And to be short, what and if with Christ
himself we be said to have the Devil? Shall we therefore faint and shrink
under the burden? John 8.48.
God forbid. Now that we have put our hands to the ploughe, let us not look
back, for if we do, we make our selves unfit for the kingdom of God. Luke
9.62. Math. 10.37 ver. 39.
He (says Christ) that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of
me. He that will save his life, shall loose it, and he that loses his life
for my sake, shall save it. There is none that shall forsake houses, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands,
for his names sake, but shall receive an hundredth fold more and shall inherit
everlasting life. Math. 19.29 Romans 8.17. Psalm. 126.5.
If we suffer together with him we shall in the world to come be glorified with
him. We yt sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Let Jeroboam then bid, lay hold
on the man of God: let Eliah be counted seditious: let Jeremiah be accused of
treason: let Paul be reported a troubler of the city, and let Christians with
Christ be said to have the devil: Math. 10.24
The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his Lord. Let the
plowers plowe upon our backs, Psalm. 129.4.
and make long furrows: the righteous Lord shall cut the cords of the wicked.
Let the kings of the earth band themselves, and the princes assemble together
against the Lord, Psalm. 2.4. 1. King. 22..24. 2. Chr. 18.24.
and against his anointed: he that dwells in heaven shall laugh: the Lord
shall have them in derision. Let Zidkijah smite Michaiah on the cheek: he
shall see the day when he shall go from chamber to chamber to hide him. To be
short, let wicked me^ (to excuse themselves with shipwreck of conscience) as
Amaziah vs^^ Amos, Am. 7.10.
entitle great and mighty personages into our reprehensio^, as though we had
spoken such and such words which the land can not bear: all these
notwithstanding, let the lords work be applied: let each one look to the
necessity laid upon him, and say like as did our Savior me oportet operari
etc. I must work the works of him that sent me. Which thing for as much as of
our selves we are not able to perform (being a charge so weighty and the
greatest of all) the Lord both by the pastor and people is to be prayed unto,
to strengthen his minister with the spirit of boldness and constancy, that his
forehead may be as the adamant, Ezech. 3.9.
and harder then the flint, that he be not afraid at the looks of men, but may
boldly enter into the house of Israel, and (in the fear of the Lord) declare
unto them the fulness of his will, which I beseech him universally to grant unto
all the professors and preachers of his holy word.

Yet one other thing we have here to note in that Christ says, that he must
work the works of him that sent him, Oportet mo operari eius opera qui misit
me.
that is, such works by which it might appear that he was the son of God,
and sent of God the father into the world, according to that written in the
fifth of John: John. 5.36.
The works which the father has given me to finish, bear witness of me, that
the father sent me. John. 6.38.
And in the chapter following: I came down from heaven, not to do mine own
will, but his will which has sent me. Whereby we are taught, that we must not
work such works as we like best our selves, but such as God in his word has
commanded, that we may be known to be the sons of God. For our works are
naught, and our doings perverse. Our ways are crooked, and our cogitations
evil. Esa. 55.8.
My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, says
the Lord. For as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are his ways higher
then our ways, and his thoughts above our thoughts. And this much of the
first argument or reason of Christ, which he deriueth Ab officio, from his
office and duty.

The second argument of Christ derived from the time.
Now I come to the second, which he deriueth a tempore, from the time:
contained in these words, Donec dies est, while it is day: which argument or
reason of Christ is deduced from the common use and custom of men, who when
they take any task in hand, are wont to apply and follow the same in the
light of the day, least (lingering the time) they be prevented with the
darkness of the night. Now if men are wont to be so careful to finish that
which they take in hand while it is day, which concerns the use of man, how
much more belonged it unto Christ, before his death and passion, to finish the
works of the father? For (says he) The night comes when no man can work.
Venit nox um nemo lotest opeari.
In which words Christ does signify, that he may not omit occasion and
opportunity to work, for that the time would come when he should away. Which
thing too he declares more at large by a Similitude: comparing the time of his
presence to the Day, and the time of his departure to the night. Now the day is
the time to work, and the night is the time to rest. He then that works not
in the day while it is light, shall not work in the night when it is dark.
The like similitude he uses afterward in the leuenth chapter, speaking to the
disciples in this manner. John. 11.6.
If a man walk in the day he stumbleth not, because he sees the light of
this world. But if a man walk in the night he stumbleth, Because there is no
light in him. In both which it is apparent, that he calls the day the time
which in his human nature he ought to spend here upon earth in the business
of the Father: and that he calls the night, the hour of death, from which
once raised, he carried with him his body triumphantly into heaven. But yet
Christ here compares the hour of his death unto the night, not because he
should yield and give place again unto Satan the prince of darkness and God
of this world, Ephesians 6.12. 2. Cor. 4.4.
who^ before he had spoiled and overcome through the force of his death and
passion, but because then (being dissolved from the troubles of this life) he
passed to eternal rest, which now he enjoys with the father till the latter
day: in which he shall come again with majesty and great glory in the clouds,
Math. 24.30
with a shoute, with the voice of the Archangel, 1. These. 4.16
and with the trumpet of God, to judge both the quick and the dead: and at
which time (as S. Paul teaches) al things shall be made subject unto God, 1.
Cor. 15.28
that God may be al in all.

We may not here contentiously reason and dispute, whether Christ also after
his death did not the works of the Father, or whether yet to this day he be
not the light of the world: Quandiu fuero in mundo, Lux sum mundi.
for the Similitudes of Christ are simply and plainly to be conceived, and not
to be wrested hither and thither. Christ's meaning is then, that he must work
the works of the Father while he is in this life: signifying that shortly by
death he should be taken away: who yet to this day shines unto his elect, and
still works in them, by the power, grace and virtue of the holy Ghost, and
will do to the end and consummation of the world, according to that most
comfortable promise of his in the last of Matthew. Math. 28.20


Hereof we may gather this general doctrine: that as Christ had a certain
time appointed him to work the works of the Father, so have we a certain day
and time appointed us to work, which once ended and finished, we can work no
more. Let us work then while it is day, least (if the night come upon us) we
be not able to work. But now: the Day is the present life which God has given
us here upon earth, and in which we may work: but when night, that is to say,
when death comes on, and when the Soul is once loosed from the body, we
shall not be able to work, would we never so feign. So writes Theophilact:
Dies quidem est presens vita, Theophi. in Joan.
eo quod possumus nunc sicut in dic operari. The day is the present life,
because that now we may work as in the day. Nox autem futurum seculum, eo
quod nullus illic poterit operari. But the night (says he) is the world to
come, because that no man can work there. While then we are in this life, let
us not omit the present occasion yt is offered us, to do well. Seek the Lord
(says Esaias) while he may be found, Esa. 55.6.
and call upon him while he is near. Sirach says: sins in this life
committed, in the world to come. Wherefore, as Chrysostom counsels, Omnia
hic dissolve, vt citra molestiam illud videas Tribunal. Set all things here in
order, that without grief thou may behold that Tribunal seat. For if all
things be not well and in good order whylest thou art here, it will be too
late for thee to redress them when thou come there. Hierony. in cap. 6.
epist. ad Gal. 2. Cor. 6.2. Psalm. 65.7.
This is (says Jerome) the last time of sowing. Behold (says the Apostle)
now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. To day (says David) if
ye will hear his voice harden not your hearts. It is a dangerous thing in all
kind of matters to let pass opportunity and convenient time. If the general
omit it, he may leese the victory: If the mariner, he may leese his passage:
If the Marchantman, he may miss his gain. And therefore are we thus often
admonished to take time while time is: to teach us, that if we take it not
when it is offered, when we our selves would, we shall not have it. Christ
himself, as we see here, took his time. I must (says he) work the works
of him that sent me, while it is day. For this we must consider with our
selves from the highest to the lowest: that one is the condition of the present
time, and another of the time to come. We may now do that, which hereafter
we shall never be able to do. Work then while it is day, the night comes
when no man can work, Yet a little while (says Christ) is the light with you:
walk while ye have light, John 12.35.
least the darkness come upon you. And whereas it is uncertain how long we
have here to live (for death tarieth not, and the covenant of the grave is not
showed unto us) we ought the more earnestly to labor while we are here, Eccl.
14.12.
least prevented by death, we be not able to finish the work which is taken in
hand. If the goodman of the house knew at what hour the thief would come,
Luke. 12.3^
he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be dug through. So
likewise, if we knew when Death (the messenger of the Lord) would come,
Colloss. 4.5.
we would redeem the time. We would amend all that is amiss: we would bring
forward that which is behind: we would have our work at an end: we would be
prepared: we would not slumber and sleep out the time with the foolysh
virgins: Math. 25.5.
we would have lights in our hands, and oil in our lamps. But for as much as
it is not for us to know the times, or the seasons, which the Father has put
in his own power (for them has he wholly and soly reserved unto him self) it
stands us all upon to be diligent and careful, Act. 1.7.
to give the household their portion of meat in season: and blessed is that
servant whom his master when he comes, Luke. 12.43
shall find so doing. But if with the ungracious servant we shall say in our
hearts: Our master will defer his coming, and shall begin to smite our
fellow servants, ver. 45.
and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken, without doubt our master will
come in a day when we think not, and in an hour when we are not ware of,
and will cut us off, and give us our portion with the unbelievers. Wherefore
let us work while it is day, lest the night steal upon us, and we covered
with darkness be not able to work.

But out of these words (Donec dies est) While it is day, a farther sense may
be gathered, and that is this. Many think that they may lawfullye give over
and work no longer the works of the father when they be once old and growe^ in
years: and such men say, We have borne the heat of the day long enough: we
have wrought in the vineyarde long enough: we have preached long enough: we
have borne office long enough: It is now high time for us to give over, and
another while to take our ease. Let the younger men (in Gods name) take pains
another while, as we have done, and so forth. But Christ here teaches them
by his own example, that they must work as long as it is day, that they must
continue in well doing to the last gasp, and never give over. For why? It is
nothing to begin well unless we continue to the end. He that endures to
the end, Mat. 10.22.
shall be saved. To him that overcomes, Apoc. 2.7.
shall be given to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the
Paradise of God. Hierony. in 6. cap. Epist. ad Galat. Gal. 6.9.
A lasting reward follows a lasting righteousness. Therefore did S. Paul
exhort the Galathians Not to be weary of well doing, because that in due season
they should reap, if they fainted not. Likewise he charged his Timothy to do
the work of an Evangelist, and to cause his ministry to be thoroughly liked
of. 2. Tim. 4.5.
Whereunto that he might the rather encourage him, He sets down his own
example together with the reward, in these words: I have fought a good fight,
I have finished my course, I have kept the faith. Verse. 7.8.
Henceforth is laid up for me, the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the
righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all
them also that love his appearing. For God is not unrighteous that he should
forget the work, Hebr. 6.10.
and labor of love. We must not then call to mind, how long we have
labored, but must have a watchful eye, and a diligent regard unto the end.
So run (says the Apostle) that ye may obtain. Cor. 9.24.
And again, We desire that every one of you show the same diligence, Heb. 6.11.
to the full assurance of hope unto the end, that ye be not slothful, but
followers of them, which through faith and patience, inherit the promises. And
thus much for the first part.

Now let us take a view of the order and means which Christ our Savior did
use in giving sight to this blind man. The order and means which Christ did
use in giving sight to the blind man.
The Evangelist says: As soon as he had thus spoken (as before declared) he
spat on the ground, and made claye of the spettle, and anointed the eyes of the
blind with the clay, and said unto him, Go wash in the poole of Siloam etc.
Christ could have given sight to this blind man by his only word and secret
power, as he did to Bartimeus the son of Timeus in the 10. of Mark: Mar. 10.52.
but to declare to the disciples and us all the occasion of the blindness of
man and the remedy thereof, he uses these outward and external signs and
ceremonies, by which he provoke not only the mind, but also all the other
senses into the contemplation of his grace and favor, and confirms us wholye
in the truth of his promise. By the Clay then which he made of the spettle, and
duste of the ground, is represented human and worldly wisdom: then which
there can be no greater let unto those that contend and endeavor to follow the
course and pathway that leads to salvation. For as the Spettle does partly
distill from the head, and partly is gathered together in the mouth, by reason
of the humor of the tongue and jaws, and through abundance causes and
procures the lothsomnesse of meat: right so, the wisdom of the flesh
springing up out of the fountain of our own brain, is only busied about
such things as serve to pleasure and volupteousnesse, and being puffed up with
the swelling words of man's pride, que^cheth the desire of heavenly things,
which alone can nourishe and feed the soul of man unto salvation. And as the
Clay stops the eyes, that they cannot execute their office, which is to see
and behold the things which are present and before them: so the wisdom of
the flesh (through the grosnes of opinions) so choketh the sight of the mind,
that we cannot look upon the things which are above in such manner and
measure as we ought to do. They that are after the flesh savor the things of
the flesh: Romans 8.5.
but they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit.

The wisdom of the flesh: namelye, Ver. 7.
whatsoever is most excellent in man, as will, wit, understanding and reason,
for these and such like are meant and understood by the word [Flesh] is
enimitye against God: For it is not subject to the Law of God, neither in deed
can be. S. Paul therefore in the second of the first to the Corinthians, for
examples sake, setting down the manner of his preaching, 1. Cor. 2.4.
says that it was not in the entising speech of man's wisdom, nor yet in the
wisdom of the princes of this world which come to naught, but in plain
evidence of the spirit and of power, even in the wisdom which the holy Ghost
teaches, whose words the natural man (whose knowledge is not cleared by the
spirit of God) perceives not, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. If then we covet to
profit and to go onward in the way to salvation, to behold the will of God,
and the divine mysteries of eternal life revealed in the word, we must labor
to have the claie of carnal wisdom to be purged and washed away from the eyes
of the mind. And thus we are exhorted to do from the mouth of the Apostle in
the first chapter of the former Epistle to Timothy: 1. Tim 1.4.
Where he forbids vain Philosophye which then reigned among the Gentiles,
fables and Genealogies, which are endless, and which breed questions rather
then godly edifiing, which is by faith.

But Christ now, (who is evermore ready to strengthen our imbecillitie and
weakness) does learn us how and by what means this clay of human wisdom
may be washed away: For he sends this blind man to the poole of Siloa^. Go
wash (says he) in the poole of Siloa^. This blind man did not forthwith
receive his sight: but as soon as his eyes were anointed with the clay, he is
commanded to go to the poole of Siloam, and there to wash away the clay with
which his eyes were embrewed: that so the nouelty of the sight, and the delaie
through length of journey, might purchase greater credit and testimony unto the
miracle: for the blind man sat not far off from the Temple, begging by the
way side. And Siloam was a well at the foot of Mount Sion, whose water
received or gathered together not far off from the same, was called Piscina
Siloam, the poole of Siloa^. Hier. in Isa. cap. 8.
Jerome writing upon the eight chapter of the Prophet Esaias says, that Siloam
is a well at the foot of Mount Sion, which at uncertain hours and times does
bubble up through the cones and hollow places of the earth with great noise.
Esa. 8.8.
But Esai (speaking of the waters of Siloah) says that they run softly, and
complains too that they were despised: Not that the waters give life unto any
man, but because they bear the figure of holy scriptures. Which scriptures of
GOD, when without the blustering of worldly eloquence they issue forth calmely
and smoothly from the privy hid caves of godly wisdom, have heavenly force to
remove the blindness of man's mind how long so ever it has continued, and to
open that eye with which God is seen, who^ truly to have seen is true felicity.

But our Euang. S. John sets down the Etymology or true interpretation of
the word Siloam: which is (says he) by interpretation, Sent. Through which
interpretation he gives us to consider of some farther mystery, Theoph in Joan.
and so writes Theophilact. Propterea and Eua^gelista interpretatione^ Siloe
ponit, vt discas quod Siloa figura sit Christi. and therefore the Evangelist
puts down the interpretation of Siloah, yt thou may learn that Siloah is
a figure of Christ: sent of the father to give light to the minds of me^, for
he is the fountain. He is the very true Messiah and savior sent into the
world: he is the continual welspring of al goodness: of whose water he that
drinks shall never be more a thirst. Ioh. 4.14.
He is of the Father made unto us wisdom, 1. Cor. 1.30.
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Coloss. 2.3.
And therefore as many as covet to have their minds illuminated and lightened,
to be purged of the clay and filth of worldly wisdom, and so to see and behold
the wonderful mysteries of their salvation, Let them go to the poole of
Siloam, that is to say unto Christ with a true and steadfast faith, who is the
light of the world, Ioh. 8.^2. Ioh. 1.9.
and lights every one that comes into the same: whose holy spirit, through
the preaching of the word, waters the minds and washes away the clay with
which they are blurred, yt they attain to the sight of celestial things, Ioh.
17.3
to ye knowledge of god and of Christ who^ truly to know is eternal life.

But what did this blind man to who^ Christ said, Go wash in the poole of
Siloam? An example of faith and obedience.
The Euang. says, He went his way therefore and washed. A notable example of
faith and obedience. For although as yet he did not know Christ to be the son
of God, yet he believes that he was sent from God, and thereby perceives that
there was a duty and obedience which belonged unto him. And by so much the more
is his faith and obedience wonderful and excellent, because that many things
might have called him back from this happy course, had he followed the counsel
and persuasion of flesh and blood. For he might have thought this much with
himself: what meant he to anointe mine eyes with clay, through which he yt
sees best of al may be made blind? Or why should I go wash mine eyes in the
poole of Siloa^ an obscure poole, and not hitherto famous for any miracle?
Farther yet: he might have said unto Christ, as Naaman the Syrian, a leaper,
sometime said to the Prophet Elisha. For when Elisha willed Naaman to go wash
him self in Jorden seven times, 2. King. 5.12
he au^swered: Are not Abanah and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better the^ all the waters of Israel? may I not wash me in them, and be cleansed? But all these
conjectures laid aparte, he obeyed the commandment of Christ, he went his way
and washed. The like faith and obedience was in Abraham, whom when God willed
to depart from his country, Genesis 12.1.
and from his kindred, and from his fathers house unto a place which he should
afterward receive for inheritance, Heb. 11.8.
staggered not, but departed even as the Lord had spoken unto him, not
doubting but that he would mercifully guide and protect him in ye way yt he
should go. The like was in Simon and Andrew, who (as soon as they were called)
left their nets: Mat 4.20
And in James and John who without tarying, Ver. 22
forsook the ship and their father, and followed Christ. Though they knew not
whereu^to they were called, nor what should become of the^, nor whether they
should go, nor how they should live: Mar. 1.14.
and though now the example of John Baptist was before their eyes, whereby they
might fear the power and cruelty of the enemy, yet without any manner of
doubting, most willingly they obey the voice of Christ yt said unto the^,
follow me. They might have objected unto Christ their vocation and calling, and
the gain which they got by their painful trade of fishing. At leastwise, they
might have made some delay, as this: suffer us first to go home, and to set our
things in order, and bid farewell unto our friends. Beside this, they might have
thought within themselves: what is the matter that he calls us that are
fisher me^, men of no reputation? why does he not rather call rich men, mighty
men, men of wisdom and renown? Such things they might have thought and
objected too, had they yielded to the suggestion of flesh and blood: but the
spirit of God, which moderateth and rules the hearts of the faithful, so
mightily prevailed, that as soon as they were called, without any co^tradiction
they left their nets, ship and father, and followed Christ. Mat. 9.9.
In like manner Matthew the customer, as soon as he was called of Christ,
arose and followed him. Matthew asked not whether he should go, what he should
do, or how he should live: Matthew (as soon as he was called) rises up from
the midst of his gain, and follows Christ. Matthew, if he had used the advice of a worldly wit, might have thought in this manner. What a foolishness
is it for me to leave ready gain, and to go up and down after this Christ,
who is a poor man and has nothing: whom the foxes of the earth, and the
birds of the heaven excel in happiness: for the one have holes and the other
have nests. Mat. 3.20.
But Matthew thinking no such thing, as soon as he was called arose and followed
Christ. By which examples we are taught to show our selves obedient unto
Christ, who speaks unto us in his most holy and blessed word. To obey is
better then sacrifice, 1. Sa. 15.22.
and to hearken is better then the fat of Rams. Albeit ye means by which God
ministers unto us his help seem never so base, or never so strange to the
wisdom of man, we may not despise nor contemn the same, nor call him who is
omnipotent, Romans 1.2^.
almighty, and blessed for ever into the balance of our own wit and worldly
reason, why he will have this or that to be done this way or that way: but
ought with all celeritie to obey and follow those ways and means which he in
his word prescribes unto us. The commandment of God to the wisdom of man
seems to be folishnes: but then S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 1.25
Stultitia Dei sapientior est qua^ homines, and infirmitas Dei validior est
quam homines: the foolishnes of God is wiser then me^, and the weakness of God
is stronger then men. Man's reason murmureth, co^plaineth, and repineth when it
only considers the signs and outward things without regard to the word of
god which is there contained. Therefore Naaman the Syria^ (when Elisha by a
Messenger willed him to go wash in Jorden 7. times) was wroth, and went his
way in displeasure, rekoning ye advise of ye Prophet vain and ridiculous: for
says he, I thought with my self, he will surely come out, and stand and call on
the name of the Lord his God, and put his hand on the place, and heal the
leprosy. This Prophet prophesied great plenty of vittaile and other things to
Samaria being grievously oppressed with extreme famine: but a Prince in great
favor and authority with the king, mocked at his words: ^. King. 7.2.
that though GOD would make windows in the heaven, and rain down corn from
thence, that which the Prophet had spoken and prophesied could not come to
pass. Such is the manner of those that are wise according to the wisdom of
the flesh: who when they should obey and believe God in his word, reason the
matter with him, as though he knew not what he did. But this our blind man turned
not aside in the heat of displeasure at what time he felt his eyes to be
anointed with the clay, neither did he scoff and ieste at the commandment of
Christ, who willed him to go wash in the poole of Siloa^, but yielded to the
work patiently, and to the commandment readily, though yet the work for the
making of the Clay and manner of anointing, and the commandment to wash in the
poole of Siloa^ seemed ridiculous to the reason of man. His faith did vanquish
and subdue what worldly wit and reason might prompe and dissuade from the
sacred word and will of god. Naaman would not have derided the commandment, nor
the prince the promise of Elisha, had they been endued with his faith and
obedience. The blind man went his way and washed. He did as he was commanded:
he believed, and to belief he joined obedience. And what followed?

The Euang. says, Redijtque videns
And he came again seeing. Neither was the blind man defrauded of his hope,
neither did the commandment of his Christ want his effect. For as soon as he
had washed away the clay from his eyes, his eyes were opened, and he receued
his sight. No sooner had this blind fellow, a notable known fellow for his
begging, and known also to be borne blind, washed (as he was comanded) his
eyes anointed with clay, in a water of no name for any miracle that was ever
done therein before, but he returned home, not without great wonder and
admiration of the neighbors round about, with open eyes and with clear sight.
And so Naaman the leaper, after the heat of his displeasure (through ye
counsel of his servants) went down, 2. King. 5.14
and washed himself 7. times in Jorden, according to the saying of the man of
God: and his flesh came again, like unto the flesh of a little child, and he
was clean. Whereby we are taught this much, that if simply and truly we
believe the word of the lord, and follow that course and way which in his word
he reuealeth unto us, he will grant us the things which he has promised, he
will give us his manifold graces, and the same in a good and large measure
pressed down, shaken together and running over, in his abounda^t mercy will he
pour into our bosoms. The time is past, and therefore I will here make an
end.

GOD for his sons sake Jesus Christ give us all the grace dutifully to
consider of our several vocations and callings, and to work the works of the
Father while it is day, remembering the shortness of the days and times which
we have here to live: and that we may worthily imitate and follow the example
of this blind man in such things as appertain to the rule of faith, to the
increase of obedience and to the maintenance of our own safety: that we
neither affirm nor think that to be vain, unprofitable, or hurtful, which
Christ in his holy word expressly and plainly commands us to do. For they
which obey the voice of Christ, are illuminated with his spirit, they are
guided by his grace, they profit daily more and more, til they grow up into him
which is the head, Christ the head of his Church: Ephesians. 4.15.
who softeneth the hearts of the hardened, vnsealeth the ears of the deaf,
opneth the eyes of the bli^d, norisheth the members, and ioineth the^ together
by ioints to a full proportion, that at length the whole body may rise up unto
perfection to the fullness of immortality, to reign with our Siloa^ Christ
Jesus in eternal glory. Whereunto the Lord our God bring us al to the
everlasting praise of his mercy: to whom with the holy ghost triple in person
and one in substance, be all honor glory and praise, both now and ever. Amen.


