THE ORATION OF THE MOST NOBLE AND REVERENDE FAther in GOD the lord
Cardinals grace of Lorrain, made and pronounced in thassemblie at Poyssi, the
King being present, the sixtene days of Septembre, In the year of our Lord
1561. Translated out of French into English. by T. S.

THis present day being the eight of October. 156^. The king being at Saint
Germyne in Lay did permit and give license to William Morel his printer
dwelling at Paris to printe or cause to be printed the oracion made by the
cardinals grace of Lotharinge: in the assemble at Poissy the 16. day of
September last past, and the same to put abroad and utter, forbidding all
other printers the same to imprinte or cause to be imprinted, or selle without
license or sufferaunce of the said Morel, and his majesty has given me in
commandment hereof to make as much expedicion as I conveniently could.

De Laubespine,

SIRE, we acknowleadge you for our sovereign and natural lord, and confess
our selves to be your most humble and obediente subjects and servants: And
the fidelity which we have sworn, and solemnly promised unto your grace, we
will never gain go it. After our example then, and according to the doctrine
of God, which we announce, all ye that be present, (...)
and all those likewise that be under your majesty's rule and gouernemente in
this moss christen realm, be ye for the love of God subjects to all policy
and human order, whether it be to the king, as to the head and sovereign:
or unto them which under him supply the chief places nerte his person, or
else unto other by him established thorough the provinces, every one according
to his charge, as unto them which be sent by him, to the punyshyng of evil
doers, and to the praise of them that do well. For such is the will of God,
that in doing well you shall stop the mouth to the ignorant and foolyshe:
All this purpose the apostle saint Peter concludes in these four words, 1.
Pet. 1.
Fear God, and honor the King, as though he would say, Honor the king, for
that ye ought to scare God. It is he, Pro. ^.
by whom kings do rule: And they that make laws, ordeyn just things, whereby
princis do command, and the mighty do judge the earth, whereof he that will
seek thoriginall must needs confess, that all power is given of our Lord God,
and the virtue and strength comes from above. (...) Ro^.
It is he (says David) that gives saufetie to kings, and instructs my
hands to fight, and makes my singers to serve in the war. To be short,
fithens that all superior and high power is of God, principally then is the
power of kings ordained by him: where unto if any makes resistance, does
withstand his ordinance, and purchases to himself damnation: Let us be
therefore to your majesty faithful and obediente subjects, not only for not
provoking your anger, but also for conscience sake. Notwithstanding remember
sire, that you are not only a minister of God, and of our Lord Jesus
Christ, The duty of a King toward the church, and of his authoritee there
Esa 49 60
but also of his Chirch, the which you norishe and conserve: you are thereof a
son, and not a lord, a member, and not a head, as by his prophet long time
since, he warned the church which shoulds be assembled of the Gentiles. For
Esaie says, The kings shall be thy nourses, and shall submit them selves to do
thee honor and service. The kings shall be brought unto thee, and shall obey
thee. And the people and realm that shall not serve thee, shall peryshe, and
there shall be made such waste and destruction, that no habitation there shall
be found. Which saying our first and most holy ancient Bishops adventured
to proteste before their myghtiest and most redoubted Emperors, 23 q. 8. cap
conuen^ o^.
and those Emperoures accepted the same in good part. Saint Ambrose speaking
of the Emperor Valentinian the younger, and of Justinian his mother says thus:
What name or title more honorable may an Emperor attribute to him self, then
to be called the Son of the Church, which was spoken without offense, and
the same right thankefully accepted. For the Emperor is within the Church,
and not above. The same Saint Ambrose in a request presented to the same
Emperor refused his judgment in his disputation with Aurentius an Arrian
bishop: Epi 32
Forasmuch (says he) as in causes of Faith and of the Church, Bishops do
judge of the laity, and not the laity in their consistories, and assemblies
do judge of Bishops. And this, says he, none will call in doubt yt will keep ye
well ordered course of ye holy scriptures, or yt will follow the good ancient
customs and observations. Way enge well then these things, what is he, that
in cause of faith will deny, that Bishops have not accustomed to judge of
Christian Emperors, and not the Emperors of Bishops? In this Consistory
JESUS CHRIST has not accustomed to occupye the place of a party, but rather
of a Judge. If ye treat with him I have learned that it ought to be in the
Church, which my forfathers have done. If it be to have conference in
matters of Faith, that conference ought to be made with the priests. What
in g^ments in matters of faith the old christian Emperors observed, and in
what estimation they had their Bishops and priests. Ruf. li. 10 ca. 2.
Tripar. li. 2, ca, ^ Socr. li. 2. ca. 8 Theo. li. 1 cap 11. Sozom. li. 1. c.
17. Nicep. li. 8. ca. 16. ^ Ambrose in the place before: alleged.
The like order was observed under that great Emperor Constantine, who
without any restraynte did permyt to the Ecclesiastical persons free
judgment in matters of faith, and would never judge of private complayntes
made of any Bishops in the council of Nice. It is GOD (says he) that has
constituted you priests, that has given you power to judge of us, and not
power to me to judge of you. He is only your judge, and you ought not to be
judged by men. Which holy opinion Valentinian the elder full well did
follow, saying: It becomes me not to judge among the Bishops, where any
question of the Faith, or of Ecclesiastical order aryseth: He ought not to
judge that doothe diffre in charge, but he which is of like vocation, that is
to say, priests ought to judge of prestes. In the self same time, and to
like effect, Gregorye Nazianzene did preach before the Emperor Valens and
told him. The ordinance of JESUS CHRIST has made you subject unto my power
and to my jurisdiction: You are not he only that rules, for we also rule in a
greatter and more perfect Empire, if we do not submytte the spirit to the
flesh and heavenly things to earthly. But give me leave most noble Emperor
more frankelye to utter my mind. I know that thou art a sheep of my flock,
and in that thou dooest reign and command, thou haste it by the benefyte and
grace of JESUS CHRIST. But whereunto serves this conference of kyngly or
priestlye dignities, namely unto us, which never ne yet our predecessoures
have at any time experimented of our most Christian kings any unseemly
enterprise, and that be and do succeed in the states of them, who never
denied the due obedience to their kings, no not once called the same in
question. The effect of his first proposition.
Let then (Sire) the first discourse of this proposition be to this end
principally that all men may be witness in what reuerente sort we humble
our selves. And how much we would that both we and all they that be under
our charge, should show their faithful obedience. Let it be also a manifest
declaration of the authority that God has left to us in the guidyng of
souls, in the doctrine of our faith, and that under your protection: to the
end that leauyng all other things aparte, I may make you understand my
charge, and by whom I am thereunto authorized.

SIRE, in this company by your commandment assembled we be a great number of
Archbishops, and Bishops, upon whom thimposition of hands have been laid by
their Metropolitanes and other bishops of the same province, and through the
grace of Jesus Christ, the holy ghost has been given, nominated by the kings
your predecessoures, who do succeed in the right of their people, they
referryng themselves to them, and into their hands: themselves being
discharged of all that is necessary to their choice or election: We be
received upon the view and consent of our clergies and of our peoples that be
under us, after our institution made by our holy fathers the Popes, and the
holy see Apostolic, whom we acknowledge for our Superior, and all these
signs and marks be accompanied with one succession from thapostles unto us
very well continued. There be also a good number of priests sent by the
Bishops that be absent, and by the chapters and Clergy, and also Doctors of
Paris (whom I name for honors sake) and of other famous universities, and to
them all I am inferior in understanding, knowledge, and eloquence, and yet
nevertheless by them all ordained to make you understand one thing: The unity
of the prelates and (...)nce
wherein (thanks be unto God) we be all of one heart and one soul, and of one
faith, under one God, and under one head, our savior and redmer Jesus Christ,
under one only Catholic church his spouse: him we serve in spirit, unto him
with one intention, mind, and prayer, we bow the knees of our hearts we
worship and adore him, and by him we ask the graces and gifts of the holy
ghost and have no spotte of Idolatry, howesoeuer some men go about to lay unto
our chargs: Understand therefore Sire, theffect of my message.

It is now eight days passed that by your express ordinance a certain
number of persons were brought into this place, (...) and (...)
who of long time have separated themselves from us to our great sorrow and
grief, making a contrary profession of faith, and would not be obedient to
our orders and observations, and yet in words show themselves as though they
were desirous to learn and to be instructed, reentryng into this their
country, and into the house and company of their fathers, whom when they will
acknowledge for fathers, they shall be received and embraced for children.
Against them we purpose not to obiecte any reproach, but bear with their
infirmity: not reiecte them, but call them again, not separate them, but
unite them, to the end that we may all with one mouth give honor to God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To them therefore in all charity and spirit
of meekness we answer, that we are very glad of their profession made of
tharticles of the Creed, commune to all Christian men, and do desire with all
our hearts, that like as they do agree in words, so also they would agreee
with us in sense and understanding, as it has appeared unto us they have not
done, by their definition of the catholic church calling the same to be the
congregation of the chosen. After that they touched summarily diverse points
clean contrary to that which the Catholic church does teach and believe, and
in so great number, that being well compared unto our profession, whereof not
to speak without law, but to prove if according to holy doctrine, every
point needs a whole day, and so the debatyng of this matter would require
whole months.

This has been the cause why at this time I have charged my self of two
points only, whereof the principal is to separate them, and to make them
strangers: the other is the only rule, whereby we may measure our controversies,
and so come to agreement.

This latter is of the Catholic church, of the authority of the Scripture,
of the holy councelles, and interpretations of the fathers: 1. Tim. 3
which point, I will first entreat of, and the other is of the verity of the
body and blood of JESUS CHRIST in the holy sacrament of the Eucharistia. The
one is the pillar, the strength the stay and establishment of the truth: The
other is the sacrament of our unity, being by hollye communion and
participation of the body and blood of our lord united and incorporated to our
savior, and made all members of one body well composed and agreing, whereof
JESUS CHRIST, is the head. It is six score years and more before the counsel
of Constance, before which counsel there were some did affirm, that the church
was of the chosen only, and that whosoever was a sinner could not be accounted
of the church, and namely that a bishop whom God had reproved, and so
consequently which was a member of the devil had no power over the faithful:
There followed them other which, said, that the universal church was only of
such as were predestinate. Proffes that the Church consists in good and evil
Mat. 3. Luc. 3. Mat. 22. Mat. 25. Joan. 15. Esai. 5 Math 2 Mat. 12 Luc. 2
These errors and the renuers of them were in that council reproved and
condemned as altogether wholly repugnaunt to the holy scriptures, wherein it is
said, that in the flower of our lord there shall always be found chafe with
the corn, which shall continue to the end, at what time the same shall be
purged and cleansed by the fan of JESUS CHRIST. The flock of our lord does
conteyne both sheep and goats, and the same shall not be separated until his
return All the world is bidden to the banquet, but upon the view which god shall
make, he that is found evil apparailed, is driven thens: Among the virgins were
found five fools, against whom the gates were shut. The vineyarde of our
Lord has not brought forth good grapes, but also bastard grapes, which was
not only tilled by good husband men, but also by evil whom god will destroy
and let out his vineyard to others. And the kingdom of heaven which is the
church, Mat. 13.
is compared to nets: that gather fyshe of all sorts, which shall not be
separated or divided until the net be full, that is to say, in the
consummacion and end of the world, at what time the angels shall sever the
evil from among the just. 2. tim. ^
And in this great house there be many vessels, some appointed to honor, and
some to dishonor. To be short among the xii. Apostles Judas was reproved, and
of him it is written in the acts, that the place of his apostleship should be
filled, Act. ^. Psalm. 10^
and as the psalm says, An other should take his bishoprike: And
notwithstanding all these express testimonies of the scriptures contrary to
this opinion sundry inconveniences have risen, making this church to be
unknown and fantastical, whereby the state thereof should be so uncertain,
that neither bishops nor priests should be certain, no assured baptism, and
all the administration of the sacraments uncertain. For Predestination or
reprobation be among the highest secrets of God, the certain knowledge
whereof we can not attain. And notwithstanding this mixture of good and badde
together, 1. Tim. 3 Ioh 14.16. Mat, 16. Mat ^5. Mat. 24 Marc 13 2 The 2 1 Timothy 4
1 Timothy 3 2 Pet. 3. Epi 119. ^p 19. The fame and glory of the church. Pro. 40.
2. Re. 22 Ephe. 6. Psalm. 119.
the church cease not according to the saying of S. Paul to be the pillar
and foundation of the truth, wherein she is thoroughly instructed by ye holy
ghost, and builded upon that stone, against which hell gates shall never
preuail: with whom JESUS CHRIST her true spouse shall remain to the worlds
end, although she is advertised by her lord, and by the holy scriptures of
the assaults which she should suffer by means of false Christ's, false
prophets, false apostles, and of the abuses, errors, and heresies, which
should invade her. Howbeit, as saint Austine answers very well to Ianuarius
saying, The Church being set and placed among so much chafe and cockle
suffers many things, but those things that be against the faith or good
life be not by her in any wise allowed or made, wherein she does neither how
her peace, nor yet dissemble, upon which sense we acknowledge that she can not
go out of the way, nor yet err, either in the faith, or in good life, which
we confess and affirm as a thing that no christian man can denaie, and
accursed be he that gothe about to obscure her glory and fame. The first
place and chiefest authority belongs to this shield, which is the
brandishyng sword of all those that put their trust in God. The true light
which leads and gives light to our feet, 2 Pet. 1
and is the lantern of our ways and paths: profitable to teach, to argue,
to correct, to instruct a man in justice, that he may be perfect and ready to
all the good works of God: and that it is the word of God which abides, and
shall abide for ever, 2. Tim. 12 Pet. 10
which by the prophets and apostles has been preached unto us. Moreover,
with this we acknowledge his spirit that gives life, and not the dead letter
that kylleth. 21. Co 3
And to use saint Hieromes own words, Let us not think (says he) that the
Gospel is in the words of the Scripture, but in the sense thereof. It is in
the marowe, not in the bark or outward apparaunce of letters, in the root of
truth, not in the leaves of words. And this word of God we say, is of more
antiquity, and before the church, as it appears in the creation of the
world, and in the commandementes made to our first father, how be it the
church was long before any written word. For Moses was the first that did
put the ordinances of God in writing. And our savior CHRIST, being a long
space in the world. And after his departure in long success of time his word
was taught and preached by the Apostles, after his ascension, before they
began to write, which gives us to understand that the word of God is as
well to be received and acknowledged of us which is delivered us by the
traditions of the Apostles and their successoures unwritten, as that which is
left unto us in writing. 8. The. 2
And we ought (says Saint Paul) to bold fast the traditions which we have
been taught either by word, or sent by Epistle. In like sort as
commandment to obey and keep them is given in the Acts of Thapostles. Act
15. 1. Cor. 11
And against such holy traditions if any be found contentious, let it be
said unto him for a full answer, we nor the Church of God, have no such
custom, by authority whereof, we know, what Scriptures be Canonical,
Vince^t. Lyrine^sis.
and what be Apocriphall. The Cannon whereof, although it be perfect and
sufficient, yet ought not the authority of the understanding of the Church
to be coumpted superfluous, for that the holy and sacred Scripture, by reason
of her hyghenesse and majesty, is not all together received in one sense and
understanding, by reason of the diversity of opinyons in sundry sorts of
men. Wherefore, it is very necessary to address the ligne of
thinterpretation of the Prophets and Apostles, according to the true rule
and exposition of the Catholic Church, quod vbique
I speak namelye of this church Catholic, to the end that gatherynge the
force and meaning of the word, we may hold that for Catholic and
universal, which has been in all places where the Gospelle has been
preached, quod se^per. quod ab omnibus
believed, which always and in all times, from the time of JESUS CHRIST unto
our time of all men has been approved and allowed: which order we
purpose to follow and practice. In Universality if we do confess that to
be the true faith, which thole church throughout the world does
confess. In Antiquity (meaning that which has been said and spoken in all
times) if we do receive none other sense and interpretation, then that which
our honorable forefathers have approved. In Consent, which I speak
generally of that antiquity, wherein we do follow the definitions and opinions
of all the holy Martyrs, Bishops and priests, Aug ep. 118. cap. 1 ad Ianuarium.
Act 15. Theffect and description of general counselles. Mat. 18. chrysologus
ser. 132. Nice. li. 15. ca. 19.
and all other our ancient masters and instructours.

THIS causes me to speak of the Councels, especially of those that be
general, the authority and usage whereof has alwais ben very wholesome and
profitable in the church. the same being instituted by God, from who^ their
authority proceeds, and first practiced and put in use by the apostles, as
appears in their acts: Al which being well considered what other thing is it,
tha^ an assemble of all the pastors and doctors before dispersed in the
church, and a congregation of them in one certain place in the name of our
Lord God? And if our Lord have assured and promised by his word one or two
being gathered together in his name, to be in the myddest of them: should he
refuse to be among such then, as are far better, and in more nombre
laufully assembled and we ought truly then to cry out with David; Psalm. 110
Great are the works of our Lord in the council of the just, and in their
congregation. But it has been declared unto us, that not only the provincial
counsels have been corrected by the general counsels, but also which is a more
matter) that one general counsel has been amended by an other. De baptism. 11
2. cap. 3.
We know this to be saint Augustins saying, which we say is to be understand
when there is question of customs and of discipline, which do change according
to the time, and will be changed according to the quality of the places,
times, and persons, as it is seen by experience, De sanguine and suffocato.
But in tharticles of the faith and in things necessary to our salvation, the
holy ghost is the director, in whom is no contradiction or contrariety, and so
we believe it. That it is otherwise it ought to be proved or else no more spoken
of. For if it were so, in vain and without profit our ancient fathers have
had thereunto such recourse, and reposed in them so great affiance in all the
myseries and calamities of the church, and should not thereof have found by
experience the success so happy. Of which good fathers that are gone before
us, behold what we say, That every of them was a man, and so might err. But
that all in one self same article, or assembly, in one self same do at
diverse times dispersed throughoute the churches have erred, Godly counsel and
admonition to know the church.

Vince^t Lyrine^sis.


we deny and maintain it to be impossible, groundyng the same upon gods
infallible promise. Very profitably therefore one among those fathers for the
conclusion of this purpose, does give us council, and faith in this wise,
What shall we do (say the catholics) if any part of the church does
separate it self from the communion of the universal faith: prefer the body
being yet holle before a corrupt and sick membre. But if the sore have thupper
hand and begins to attempt thinfection of the church, then lean and
clean unto the antiquity, and return to the mothers, which are the
principal and first churches. Among whom all the antiquity has had recourse
unto the Romain church, and has always accounted her to be the first and
principal among the Apostolical churches, as Ireneus, Tertullian, and S.
Austen do bear witness, recountyng the bishops until their times) who with
all other ancient fathers have alwais, acknowleged that church as the chief
See of all Christendom, calling the Bishop thereof, Primae Sedis Episcopum.

Now if in this antiquity there be found any error either in any author, or
in any particular town or province, then against such ignorance and temeritie
of a few persons, lay the decrees of ancient and universal counsels, and if
in those counsels ye find nothing, search diligently the sentences of all
the ancient fathers, approved by the church written to that purpose, and gather
and collect them together from all times, and from all places, as though they
were all together present at a Council: And that which all they have openly
and at sundry times with great continuance agreed, accorded, written and
witnessed with one consent: Know ye that without any doubt ye ought the same
to believe, and thereunto to submit and subject your selves. And above all
things give place (as they do) to the express word of God, and to the
testimony of the scripture. This is that we have entreated concerning the
first point, This is the authority that we give to the holy scriptures, to
the determinations of the counsels, and to the writings of the old and
ancient fathers: which order we purpose to observe, both for the confirmation
of our flocks in the faith, and also to bring home again such as are gone
astraye, which can devise none other way to have their doctrine and private
interpretation to be credited and believed, but to despise and condemn
thautoritie of the hole, who reiectyng thantiquitie go about to bring in
estimation of their own novelties and devises. A thing truly wherewith the
Arrians were greatly troubled and did very well disclose Nestorius,
Samosatenus, and diverse other, Euse. li. 7. ca. 30. Socrat. lib. 7. capit. 32.
and doubtless shall reuele all such as will discern a straw in their
neighbors eye, and can not see a block in their own. Now I come to the last
point of my oration, which although it be last, yet in very deed the
principalst. We have conceived an extreme grefs and sorrow, such a one as can
not be disse^bled, which is, yt the most holy and blessed sacrament of the
Eucharistie, which our lord left unto us for a band of unity and of his
peace: by a certain curiosity (I can not term it more gently) of searchyng
things above our capacity, Eccle 3.
which contrary to the counsel of the wise man, is made not only an argument
of infinite controversy and altercatio^: but also a right way wholly to
destroy the truth, or at the lest to expel and drive away the same. And in
nothing else truly is the common proverb (By to much disputyng and debatyng the
truth is lost) more ve^fied, than in this. For not only the truth does
perish, The Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 10. Math 5.
Joan 6
but the fruit also which we should thereby receive if we use it well. which
consists in four points. The first is the unity and reconciliation which
we ought to have and make one with an other. For it is written, that we being
many in number are al but one body, which do participate of one bread and of
one cup. And it is commanded, that when one does make his oblation to the
altar, he ought first to reconcile himself to his brother. The second is the
unity with JESUS CHRIST Who says, he that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood dwells in me, 1. Co. 10
and I in him. The bread which we break is it not ye communion of the body of
Jesus Christ, and the cup is it not the communion of his blood? The third
fruit is the forgiveness of sins. For truly this blood is shed for ye
remission of sins. The fowerth and last is the attaynyng of life everlasting.
For he yt eats this bread (says our lord) shall live euerlastyngly. All the
contrary whereof comes by this disputation. Division among us, separation from
god, privation from the remission of sins, and from atteinyng of life
everlasting. For out of the church there is no salvation, and who so is put
out of the Church, he ought to be unto us as a heathen or publican. And
although that in this poyncte there is but one only and simple verity, yet
good God, how many sorts do we see of Sacramentaries? That would to God you
would in deed refer them as you seem by word in the.xxviii. article of
your confession prynted. How often do they reprove one an others opinion, and
yet how often do they change their own? In such sort, that in the
exposition of the words of our Lord in his supper, they be so among them
selves divided, that a man way easily show you eighte opinions at the least,
not only diverse, but some of them also clean contrary. How much better
were it to persevere in the opinion which the Catholic church delivered unto
us from the beginning, which in few words is this. The opinion of the
sacrament in the beginning.
That the very and lyuinge body of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, and his very blood
is present in this holy sacrament, and is there received. And these be those
reasons besides an infinite number of other, that keeps within the universal
church in this simplicity of confession and purity of faith, my reverend
brothers the archebishops and bishops, and al other that before the religion
here assembled. First and formoste, the very and express words of our
Lord, This is my body, This is my blood. Which words, if they be not of so
great force as they be in word and sound, why be the self same words, and
the like in all poynctes repeted by the three Evangelists, and by thapostle
Saint Paul? Wherefore after the saying of Saint Mathewe, the first of the
Evangelists, Saint Mark, Saint Luke, or saint Paul do not write after
such fashion as our sacramentaries so long time after would make exposition,
since that it is not a thing contrary to the custom of the said Evangelists,
that in a matter of far less importance, they themselves sometimes do make
exposition, and sometime the writing of the one is made plain by the other. As
where the first and the third says, That it is a hard thing, yea and
impossible for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. The second
(as it were) expoundyng the other, calls him the rich man, which puts his
trust in his richesse. The other.iii. also do say, that that thing which to
men is impossible, is possible with God, The like also is to be seen in other
places sufficientely, which for brevity I do omyt. So says that holy martyr
and philosopher Justin in his second apology to the Emperor Antonine that the
apostles have taught us in their writings which be called the gospels, that
this holy meat which we call Eucharistia, is the flesh, the body and blood of
our savior JESUS CHRIST. But in this point there is much more: And because
that in these few words (Hoc est corpus meam) spoken by saint Matthew and
saint Mark there should remain no doubt, Saint Luke has expressed the same
by words, The opinion of the Evangelists,
making thereof no manner of doubt or ambiguitie. This is my body (says he)
which is delivered for you, as though he would say, not a mystical body, as
the church is called by S. Paul, but the body of the flesh of Jesus Christ
certainly true and conceived by the workyng of the holy ghost, of the purest
blood of the most blessed and perpetual virgin Mary. This body of flesh I say,
wherewith (the day after he spoke these words in his supper) he did reconcile
us by his death unto God his father. And here we must note that in these
words there be four things, Four things to be considered in the sacrament.
Psalm. 18
An history written, plain, true, and without doubt, a most clear and evident
commandment, For ye commandment of our Lord, does lighten and illuminate our
eyes. A Testament confirmed by ye death of the testator, and therefore of
strength and force. Which ought not to be so obscure as to cause the heirs to
be in controversy and suit about his will made so plain and manifest by the
words of the testament, Romans 8.
whereby we be heirs of God, and the coheires of JESUS CHRIST. It is also a
sacrament, which makes and exhibiteth that which it doothe figurate. Which
four things ought not to be understood allegorically, or spoken by
parable, but the sense thereof to be kept, which we observe, For nothing can
be spoken more plain. And yet notwithstanding ye will not acknowledge this
sense, who shall be judge of this controversy or rather who herein should be more
indifferent and just, then our common mother? The Church I say which went
before us, and has regenerated us all in Jesus Christ. And this is the
universal consent of our old and holy fathers, being either assembled in
general councils, or else written by them when they were dispersed throughout ye
churches, and in all times. And first touching the councils, forasmuch as ye
first.iiii. General councels approve the verity of Christ's holy in the
sacrament.
general Councils be by ye aproued and acknowleged. This same faith whereof we
have made profession here before is written in ye acts of the counsel of Nice,
which was the first, and in the council of Ephesus which was ye third. In all
other councils which have been sythens that time celebrated, there can
nothing be found to the contrary, albeit that always even before those iiii.
great councelles this doctrine has been thus preached and so of all men
written. And the church of god during so troublous times wanted not false
bishops, false ministers, and false christians, lovers of dissentions and
diuisio^s, who knowing all kind of Idolatrye had no more power to dissemble
their faith herein then these holy bishops to abide and suffer the same. And
thus much touching Councelles.

But which way shall I begin to enter in the testimonies of our fathers? shall I
begin from this year until ye apostels time, following the order and succession
of our bishops and the names of the churches, wherein God has been called
upon? Shall I speak of this last five hundred years, or of the other five
hundred years to a thousand? Which no doubt be great in number, and sufficient
to prescribe against an Innouatour. But you desire an other thing. Let us
speak then if ye will stand thereunto, of the first five hundred years, which
immediately followed ye does of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Let us all make I say
of that most pure and holly time a council, where the writings of al our
bishops doctors and pastors of all the churches (whether they were in Asia, in
Europa or Africa) be perused and seen, let us follow the plurality of voices of
al their opinions, not only in the co^trouersy which we have in this holy
sacrament, but in all other, wherein our pain and travail shall not be
great, Doctors and learned men of sundry ages
because we shall find them all to agree. In the first hundred years let us
appeal and call for the apostelles and their successors, as S. Clement, s.
Ignatius, and s. Denis. In the second hundred, Alexander the first, Iustine,
Ireneus, Tertullian, Origene, and Cyprian. In the third hundred years,
Arnobius, Lactantius, Eusebius, Athanasius, saint Hyllarie, Emissene,
Isichius, Nazianzene, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, and S. John
Chrysostom. In the fourth hundredth, Leo the great, Prosper, Theodorite, and
Cyrill. And in the.v. hundred let us come to S. Gregory: and further more if
ye will, let us call Damascene, and long after him S. Bernard. These shall be the
judges of our controversies, which be not to be suspected: and of those which
be most notable and ancient, ye shall have a brefe repetitio^ or recital, to
the intent ye may acknowledge, yt by the common and universal agreement of the
holy Fathers, there is no place or occasion left unto us herein, Hilla. li.
^. de trinitate.
to doubt of the verity of this body and blood. For by ye words of our lord,
and by our faith, It is verily flesh and verily blood, which being received (
Accepta ait and hausta, do so work and make, that we be in him, and he in us.
Is not this tho truth? But this can not be true to them (which wholly deny
Jesus Christ to be very God) and to be the same which has always been in the
church of God so generally in all men's mouths, that among the sacraments of
the common faith, the verity of the body and blood of JESUS CHRIST, was not
had in silence, no not by the mouths of infantes, Leo epi^. 13
unto whom, as to all other (for otherwise we should not believe it, and much
less understand ye same) it was and is daiely said, and shall be uttered by
the most grave authority of the Church, that the same which is taken of the
fruits of the earth, and in the celebration of this sacrament, placed upon
thaltare, received after the custom of religion, consecrated by mystical
prayer, offered, and given, and after the celebration finished, as it
appertains, received to spiritual salvation, used or consumed in the
remembrance of the passion, is the body and blood of Jesus Christ? which we
perfectely believe, has appeared in the kind of human flesh, and that this
likour or drink did run down and distill from the side of him that was
perced upon the cross. Augu. li. 3. de trinite 4. and. 10
These good Fathers (I say) did teach their Auditorie to doubt nothing at all
before they should communicate at this holy table of the verity of the body
and blood of JESUS CHRIST. John. 19 Leo sermo. 6. de Ieiu. 7. men's. Chrysostom. hom.
7. operis impfect 1. Cor. 1. Isychius Leui. 22
For that is by the mouth received, which by the heart is believed. And in
vain they answer Amen, which disputes against that which they receive. They
made no difficulty to say, that by the hand of the priest there is given and
received, not only that which is seen, and sanctified by him that gave it: but
also that which there is understood, is that sanctification, which
sanctifies the receauour, even the body without doubt of our Lord, which as
Saint Paul writes, was made a sanctification for us by the Father. Contrary
wise do they affirm, that he which ignorantly or through ignorance receaueth
this holy mystery there, not withstandyng he knows not the virtue thereof,
yet the same is the true body and blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. In this
wise and thus plainly did the holy doctors both Greek and Latin speak
touching this matter now long since. Whose words, specially of some of them,
we have repeted so faithfully as we could. So plainly (I say) have our ancient
fathers written, that one of them being the first, Bere^garius apud Gu.
Malingberien. lib. 3 de gestis Anglo.
which long time after the^ did otherwise teach (that is to say) yt the body
and blood of Jesus Christ, was none otherwise in this sacrament, but as a token
or sign. And after he had thereof well advised himself, disputed, and reasoned,
did not only in his life time, change his opinion, but also at the point of
death, which is the time to confess ye truth, or never, in his last words
affirmi^g, and steadfastly spoke as follows. Truly we believe these mysteries
after the benedictio^, or ecclesiastical consecration, to be ye very body and
blood of our savior, being induced and persuaded to believe ye same, by
thauctoritie of thancient church. We tha^ believe and confess acording to ye
saying of ye scripture, and of ye holy fathers yt the body and blood of Jesus
Christ, by thunspeakable operation of ye grace of god and ye power of his holy
spirit, is in these holy mysteries present, given, and received, we pass over
to speak of the greatness thereof. Chrysoh^ i. 8^ in Mat.
Whereby we should seem to make our lord to be here outwardly visible, sensible,
or perceptible. Nothing says a holy father, is here given unto us sensible:
but under visible signs, invisible things are there delivered unto us. Ho. 60
ad popu antioch
We abstain also from such manner of speech, whereby contrary wise we might
here seem only to represent our said savior, being absent as in a tragedy or
comedy. Truly the manner and facion whereby he does here present him self to
us, whereby he gives himself, The manner of Christhi being in the sacrament.
John. 1. Cy. li. 4. in l 3. ca 1, 14. Cy. Lu. 22 cita^te Tho. 3 part que. 25
articu. 1. Joan. 6
where by he is received and participated, is secret, not human or natural,
and yet not therefore the less true. We comprehend it not by sense, reason or
nature, but by faith. By which as the holy counsel of Nice the first of the
four chiefest does teach us not to basely respectinge the visible elements,
but lifting up the spirit, we consider by faith the la^be of god to be there
set in this holy table, taking away the sin of the world: and truly we there
receive his precious body and blood. Better it is to follow the council of the
auncientes firmly to believe the words of our lord god leaving unto god of
this his work the mean, the way and knowledge: then in so high a matter to
think or utter this Jewish word Quamodo, a word (I say) of incredulity and
perdition to the Jews, and such as follow them. Believe says the holy fathers
upon these words so often repeted, Hoc est corpus meum. Make no doubt thereat,
whether they be true, but receive by faith the saying of our savior. For
seeing that he is the truth, Bernat ser. 2 de caena.
he cannot lie. Great meruelies (my brethern) and things to be wondered at,
are said of this sacrament, faith is there necessary, Reason superfluous,
knowledge does build her foundation upon reason, but faith upon authority. Let
faith therefore believe, and search not thunderstandyng. These things (my
brethern) do require necessarily faith, and does not admit reason. They require
a simple beleuer, and reprove a curious questioner. We must therefore believe
simply that which cannot profitably be serched out. It is nto I sure (I say)
thus humbly to think and speak. But seeing there be some that so highly do
think, and more tha^ behaueth as we suppose, questioning so much, and pressing
us so near of the manner of his presence, we are contented freely to follow
their desires, since so much against our minds they thus force us.

They cannot dissemble but they and theirs be grievously offended with this
word Corporaliter, in this matter. But I take them to be men to much
exercised in the ancient writers, whereby they can excuse them selves, but
that they have found that word expressed in their writings. Cy. lib. ^o.
cap 13 in Joan. H^ 8. de Trinita de Chrysostom ^ Hom. 15 in Joan. 83. Hom. in
Math. 60. ho. ad popu antioch
For the same and such like be eft soones among them found and repeted.
Wherefore better it is with modesty to interpret them, then to take them in so
evil part. The fathers therefore both Greeks and Latins do deny, that the
christen men have unity of being or conjunction, only by lively faith and
pure charity, or, that (which is to one effect) we be only by faith, hope,
and love, by religion, obedience and will, spiritually joined and united to
him. But they with a more efficacy do protest, that by the special virtue
and effect of this sacrament duly and woorthily received, Jesus Christ does
really and in deed communicate himself to us by true receiuyng and
participation of the nature and substance of his body and blood, and that
verily he is, and dwells in us: as we have already said, that these things
taken and perceived, makes that we be in Jesus Christ, and JESUS CHRIST in
us, according as he says, Joan. 6^
he that eats my flesh, dwells in me, and I in him. For the better
exposition (and the same also to recommend unto us) of the said dwelling unity
and coniunccion of him with us, and of us with him, they did not abhor these
aduerbes, Substantialiter, naturaliter, corporaliter, especially S. Hillarie
uses to this purpose this word carnaliter, that is to say, according to the
verity of the substance and nature of the flesh of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ: In such sort, that in no other place so much or more then
here, has place, and is true and accomplished that which saint Paul
says. Quod sumus Christi comparticipes, Ep. 3 5^ Cy. Hic ^soli^. 4. antioch.
corporaler (addo, (vt ita loquar) consanguine^) quia membra sumus corporis
eius, de carne eius, de ossibus eius, That we be of the self same flesh and
blood with him, members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. And we
vsyng sometimes after, and with them these terms, we mean not therefore, or
say, that the manner of this so familiar and inward dwelling, unity and
conjunction of our savior with us, and of us with him, should be thereby
natural, substantial, corporal, or carnal: but clean contrary we confess
it to be, and more if it may be spoken then supernatural, superstantial,
spiritual, invisible, unspeakable, special, and proper to this Sacrament: not
withstanding true, and not only figurative, or significatiue. And as touching
ye presence, as little or rather less we say it to be local, circu^scriptiue,
diffinitiue, and subiectiue, or of any other physique, or natural manner. To be
short in this matter we receive no manner of Esse in, which Aristotle or any
other philosopher has. For as we have already said, we do not comprehend it
by sense or understanding, by reason or nature, that this true precious body,
and glorious blood is here present, or exhibited unto us: but by the only
faith grounded upon the aucthority of the word of God, which faith being so,
is as Saint Paul says it, Hebr. 11
of things invisible, and not apparent, we believe also that our savior
gives us here his divinity, his humanity, with all his gods, tresoures,
graces, and merits, inuisibly, or by an invisible manner, true
notwithstanding, as we have always said: being assured, that even as if we
believed it not, we shall never understand it, as the prophet does threaten:
so also if we humblye do beeleue, we shall understand it, Esa. 7. Psalm. 83.
and see it above, when we shall see the God of Gods (as David says) in
Syon. Which being contrary to judgment, and speculation of understanding,
and contrary to the capacitye of man's wit, and inward spirit, we must
always oppose and set the formalitie of these worees. Hoc est corpus meum,
which shall be fire and lightnyng to all consciences, in leauyng the propriety
as the fathers does teach us, preaching these words, Let us believe in our
lord, and obey him in all, and through al. Let us not speak against him, Chr.
ho 60 ad po. 83 in Math.
although that which he shall say unto us, shall seem very absurd, not agreeable,
and cleanco^trary to our senses and understandings. That his word surmounteth
al thing, and is to us (as in deed it is) more worthy then al other things.
Which thing is mete for us to do in all things but specially in ye holy
mysteries. Let us not regard so much the things only which we see, but let us
keep our selves to his words. For his word is infallible, and cannot be
false, or deceauable: Co^trarywise the sense is easy to be begiled, and
oftentimes is deceived. Seeing then he has said, This is my body, let us not
doubt, but believe and obey: and with the eyes of our understanding, behold
him. Ma. 18 28
The propriety (I say) of these words, and consequently the presence of his
body here, does agree with the other places of the scripture, which speak of
his presence with us, and repugne not with any article of our faith, especially
with that article of the Ascension of our lord above all the heavens, and of
his setting at the right hand of God his father: The article of the creed not
repugnant against the presence of Christ in the sacrament. Chr. ho. 2. ad po.
Concerning which articles ye ar the first (to my knowledge) in the
remembrance of man, that ever objected them, or made them to be repugnant,
against the presence of our savior in his supper. The holy fathers were not so
subtle, crafty, or curious: but simply, and humbly preached, that the son of
god together had his flesh when he ascended up to heaven, and also left it
unto us in these holy mysteries. To be here, to be there, Sursum helias,
Deorsum helias, says one of them and much better then Helias, who being
ravished into ye air, did leave and cast his cloak to his disciple. They
prayed thus in the celebratio^ of this sacrament, Thou, which sit above with
the father, and art here conversant inuisibly with us, vouche safe from thy
mighty hand, Notable places of tha old fathers to prove Christ to be in heaven
and here also in the sacrament. 103. de sacerdo
to give us thine immaculate body and precious blood. O what a miracle is this
(they cried) O ye great goodness of God. He which on high sits with the
father, in the self same instant, is between our hands, be gives himself to
all, which will receive him, and does this in ye open sight of al ye assista^ts
without any deceit) or illusio^. Wherefore I se not but there should be here a faut,
if the things there represented, were not also present. They said, Our lord has
lifted up into ye divine throne that, which he gives us to eat, and ye earth to
be our heaven, when as yet we are here remaini^g. this roial bodi in heaven, which
there is wortht of souerain honor, is set before us in earth, and showed to us to
see, to touch, and to rate. They introduced, Sermo debreuitate vite. ho. 55. ad
popu. 15. (...) 1. ad Timoth.
JESUS CHRIST, speaking in this wise of this holy table to them, which
camthither to receue, Eat me, drink me, I have left the in heaven above, and
here in earth beneath: I am joined and united unto thee: not simply, or in
such sort as I am received of the, but I am distributed unto thee, eaten and
drunk of thee, in such sort, that there is so great an unity and
conjunction made between us, that being so united and joined, we are not
separated one from an other by any mean or distance, but as of two made one.
In this wise they did comfort the chirch, wandering here in earth like a most
amiable spouse, saying: Thou haste here in earth thy husband in the
Sacrament, whom thou shalt have in heaven without cover or vaille, and yet
here verily, but under cloak and vaille, but there manifest. They were bold
thus also to speak to the husband. Bernardus 2. sermons de caeodomin.
How chances this sweet Jesus, that we little worms craulyng on the earth, we
I say, duste and ashes, have thee before our hands and eyes, and in the mean
while, thou art all wholly sittyng at the right hand of the Father, who in one
moment of an hour, from the east to the weste, from the north to the southe
art present, and assistant to all men, one in many, thy self in diverse places,
whence comes this? Amb. 1 precari. ad missi
Truly not by our means or desert, but of thy will and good pleasure, and of
thy goodness. They prepared the priest, before he should celebrate, to adresse
himself in this wise to our Lord, with what contricion of heart, abundance of
tears, reverence, chastity of heart, and purity of spirit, ought we to
celebrate this celestial and divine sacrifice, wherein thy flesh is verily
received, wherein thy blood is verily drunk, wherein the highest things are
joined to the lowest, and the divine things to the humain? Truly they that
teach and preach thus, douteth not, but that the body of our Lord, so many
hundredth years passed being received above in heaven, is there, and here also
together to be unto us in this sacrament present, presented, and exhibited. If
thou require the manner (so often to repete it, Da^. li. 4. ca. 14.
and never to attain the knowledge? how this is done: let it be sufficient for
the to understand that it is the work of the holy ghost. And we know nothing
more, than that the word of God is true, of great efficacy, and almighty,
but the manner there of is inscrutable. They thought nothing less than affirm,
that the said body of our Lord came down from heaven, or did remove or depart,
or that it was drawn out, as one of them said very well, Non quod ipsum
corpus assumptu^, ex coelo descendat. etc. With whom we agree, and mind with
the^ nothing less tha^ to make him com down, to pluck him from his fathers
right hand, or to assent to all other such unfit and unseemly terms. For
contrariwise, more than every day in this holy mystery, we make profession of
the faith which we believe of those articles, singyng, Qui seeds ad dextera^
patris, miserere nobis. Et, Sursu^ corda. Habemus ad Dominu^. And yet not
withstanding, they lay to our charges such, and so unworthy absurdities, as
though in this Sacrament, Nos Christum Dominum coelo vel dimoueremus, vel
eliceremus, vel etiam descendere faceremus. Thom. 3. part. quest. ^ artic. 3.
Epist. 25.
For even our school men do teach the contrary. With like true meaning
our adversaries would make S. Augustine of their part, alleagyng him Ad
Dardanum, although they can not be ignorant if they read the whole epistle (as
I doubt not but they do) that there is no mention at all made in that place
of this holy Sacrament. And forasmuch as so often times this holy man,
Leuit. 13
has in other places, both preached and written, we ought to draw out his
meaning touching this point, rather from al his other places, then out of this
epistle: the meaning whereof, we have presently answered, not wa^tyng other
solucions in that behalf. Of like simplicity and true dealing be our
adversaries here present, that is to say, being far from Almaigne, and as one
would say, contrary to the law, slaunderynge the deaffe, do impugn that,
which we do not defend, that is to say, the Consubstantiation, which for
that it is not received in our french church, we will leave it to the princis
and preachers of the holy Empire, which be called Protestants to mainteyne,
who at the least in this point do agree with us against them whom Germany
together with us calls Sacramentaries. Pref. 4. centur. Magdeburgen.
And those Germains accordingly following the most plain, most true, and most
mighty words of our savior, do at this day consta^tly hold and mainteyn the
presence, and communication of ye body and blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST to
be in this Sacrament.

But now I come to that point which you have both here and else where written
of this Sacrament, over and besides that which is contained in the confession
presented by you in the name of you all. If you do not esteem Jesus Christ, to
be in this world touching the flesh since his ascension, more than he was
before his incarnation: If you do not believe no other body then visible, De
consecr. dis 2. can. Nos au^^ ca^. Hoc est. Gala. 3.
albeit S. Austen whom you would to be of your side, calls it so often
invisible if you think it not to be otherwise, although more effectual in the
usage of ye Sacraments, tha^ in the preaching of his word, or if you esteem
them things alyke, to put on JESUS CHRIST in baptism, and to eat his body
and drink his blood at his holy table: To be short, if you or any other, do
so fasten and lodge Christ only in heaven, that in no wise you will have him
found upon earth, and so no more. In caena, quam in scena, Imo quam in
coeno. Which words be not requisite to be translated, for fear of such as be
weak. we contrariwise, being taught that the supper is celebrated here
benethe in this world, and not above in heaven: and being not so quick witted,
subtle, or wise, that we can comprehend a thing verily, and in substance
absent from the said supper, to be not withstandyng verily, and substancially
exhibited and received: and for a conclusion, to be there, and not to be
there, for fear to dispoyle and euacuate the holy signs of things only
figured and represented: and not presented or to be presented, to separate,
absent, and sever them, as far as heaven is from the earth. Whereunto we
answer you with like words, That we be as far of from your opinion in this
case, as the highest part of the heavens is from the lowest part of the
earth. Or let them all see and judge which measures the points of our
religion as they ought to be measured by Theology, and not by philosophy:
whether of us does attribute more to Jesus Christ our lord and god, whether
ye or any other among you which do maintain that there is a place so
prescript in heaven, whereunto he is ascended, wherein only he is according to ye
body, and else where he cannot be: or we, who although we believe him to be in
heaven, do not for all that cease to believe yt he is in all places where his
holy mysteries are celebrated: and not otherwise, making no further inquiry
of the manner, than as his omnipotent word does teach. Grant most puissant
and mighty god, August. in psalm. ^in. de co^sec di. ^ can. prima heresis
Joan. 6.
yt as the first heresy among ye disciples of his son our savior took ye
like occasion of his word, Durus est hic sermo, which was so difficulte, that
diverse of them murmuryng went back and followed him no more, so also that this
new and last controversy, This Sacramentarie war (I say) which so often
does renew) take not away from us thoccasion of commune accord and consent, of
reducyng and appeasing things to a better quietness of our bodies and souls,
and to a more tranquillity to ye realm, and above all things that it may not
trouble or let our reformation presently in hand, which we have begone in such
sort, as it is most necessary both for us and our flocks. But principally
that it will please him to preserve us, that in these latter days and most
perilous times that prediction do not chance, which a man of great name
and estimation among our adversaries, Mela^ch. ad Oecolam. an. 1525.
dissuading a companion of his in the beginning, to remove from him this
filthy tragedy, foretelling him, and almost prophecieng, that it threatened
an horrible mutation, not only to kyngdoms and empires, but also to ye hole
church. To Beza and his company the protestants
Me think I have be^ more troublesome unto you, by reason of my long process
tha^ I would have been: and yet not so much persuaded you, as I was desirous to
have done, which if you will without authority or reason continue, and believe no
time of years passed, even from the death of our savior, and from the primitive
church, until your own separation, we will commit you to your own choice. And
if without cause for mainteining a quarrel so just you have us in such hatrede,
and that so by open confession, you will divide your selves from us, that we
seem not worthy in your sight to live, or remain with you, nor in the self
same temples (I tremble at the speaking of it) to pray and make sacrifice to
God, and to administer the Sacraments: yet at the least refuse not the Greek
church for judge, in this controversy, if you so much abhor the Latin, that
is to say, the Roman church, taking recourse to a particular church, seeing
the universal church doothe myslike you. What do I speak of the Greek
church? Nay believe the confession of Ausbrough, and the churches that has
received the same, and you shall find your selves vanquished of them all. But
if you can not find place with them which be divided from us: and that you
agreyng with them almost in all other points, and in this point of this
most precious sacrament you can not agree, what other hope of agreement with
us (but only by words) can we conceue, which differ from you both in this,
and in many other points? And if you be so sore addicted to your solitary
opinion, become in effect solitary: If you will come no nerer to our faith,
and to our actions, get you also further of from us, and trouble not the
flocks whereof you have no charge, nor yet any laufull administration. (For the
same to us appertains) according to the authority which we receive from God.
And geuyng leisure to your new opinions to wax old so long if God permit
it, as our doctrine and traditions have done: For we lay unto you the
prescriptio^ of the sens of the scripturs, with more reason than was done in
Tertulians time, which shall be a cause to restore peace to so many troubled
consciences, and to leave your country in quietness and rest.

To the king.
Wherein Sire, we all do most humbly beseech you in the name of God, by whom
you are called to this estate, to hold your hand, and that it will please you
to continue in this holy profession of Faith, which we have here presently
declared unto you, according to that which the Universal church has
ealwayes taught, which is agreeable to the word and ordinance of God. And in
this so doing, you shall resuscitate and in you plentuously revive ye graces
which god has placed in holy religion, not only in your gra^dmother, Queen
Claude, Queen Claude Queen Katharine. King Fraunces the first. King Henry the
second. Fraunces the second.
and in your mother Queen Katherine our sovereign lady, not only I say) in
that mighty and wise king Francis the first your grandfather, in that good
and so well-beloved Henrye your father, in that well condicioned king Francis
your brother: but also in as many kings, all your predecessors, and all our
sovereign lords, from that first king Clouis even unto you, of whom never
was there one that strayed from this holy Catholic faith, no not one ever
found to forsake the religion of his ancesters, and they all have by
succession left and transmitted unto you this name of most christian king, and
first son of the church. God almighty grant, that your successors may
receive the same from you in like integrity and perfection, and that our God
upon you our sovereign lord, nor upon your subjects, do exercise his mighty
hand and the punishementes of his just judgments. And you madam, seeing the
whole realm has given unto you all manner of administration and government,
during the minority of our king and sovereign LORD, keep us well this
jewel so precious, and render him again unto us, when he shall have
accomplished his full years, of the self same religion and faith, wherein he
is delivered unto you, and wherein hitherto you have so carefullye instructed
him. And herein you shall do an act so great as that holy queen Clotide did,
which is set before your eyes to follow, who by her holy instructions, was
the mean and cause of bryngyng of Clowis her husband to the christian
religion. And you madame herein shall keep the king your son well instructed,
To the queen's mother
according to the intent and will, of that good king Henry your husband.
Wherefore madame, in the name of your said beloved husband, we most humbly
beseech you, that like as we have nothing, that next after God more dear unto
your grace, than your commune, and ever pardurable and indissoluble love, even
so therefore as well in this poinct, as in all others, ye will follow and execute
his sacred will, and not to suffer his memory to be condemned, nor yet the
remembrance of that mighty king Frauncis your father in law which called you
to the great and happy marriage of his son, to the intent their good
expectation in you, for the bringing up of their children, should not be
altogether frustrate and deceived. To the king of Navarre, and princes of the
blood.
We doubt not but in this doing you shall be well asisted by the king of
Navarre, and by our lords the princes of the blood, who will not degenerat
from their most christian progenitors. The self same counsel, will those noble
me^ give unto you, which are called to the honorable state of ye kings counsel.
The same also the Peers and officers of France, all which have been nourished
and advanced by these good kings, and therefore will call to remembrance their
will and pleasure. And ye most noble and christian assembly present, in this
thing shall show your selves not only true christians and faithful servants
to god, but also most loving and hearty subjects to your king, whereby we al
trust by gods help that this whole realm shall be sound in one unity. And
to make an end Sire we all with one heart, with one voice, and in the name of
all the french church do vow unto god, and solemnly promise unto your grace
never to depart from this holy, true, and catholic doctrine. Which we will
take pain to publish in our churches, and for the maintenance thereof, we will
not spare to spend our hole blood and lives, as in like manner we will show our
selves alwais both ready and mindful touching any affairs that shall concern
your majesty's service and the maintenance of your croune.

FINIS.

