AN EDICT OR ORDONANCE OF THE FRENCH King, containing a Prohibition and
Interdiction of al preaching and assembling, and exercise of any other
Religion, then of the Catholic, the Apostolic, and the Roman Religion.

ITEM AN OTHER EDICT OE THE SAME KING, Removing al Protestants from bearing any
Office under the King, in the Realm of France.

Newly translated out of French into English.

LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum, Anno 1568.

An Edict, or ORDONANCE of the French King, containing a Prohibition and
Interdiction of all preaching, assembling, and exercise of any other Religion
then of the Catholic, the Apostolic and the Roman Religion.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of France to all for the time being and for
the time to come. It is well known to all men, that the deceased Kings of
most worthy memory our Father, and Graundfather (whose souls God pardon)
bearing them selves as most Christian Princes and defendours of the holy
Church, have endeavored and travailed by Edicts and Ordonances, and by ways
of justice, to preserve the unity thereof, and to repress the division of
Religion in their time, which had gotten into this realm by preachinges, by
secret practices and assemblies, and by casting abroad of inhibited books. It
is well known also, that after the lamentable death of our said Lord and
Father certain of the Nobilite provoked thereto by the ministers of the new
opinion, have discontented and separated them selves, not for any zeal of
any Religion one or other, but through ambition and desire to have in their
hands the government of this said realm under the deceased our most dear and
most beloved Lord and elder brother King Francis second of that name,
notwithstanding that he was a married man and of full years by the laws of the
said realm, and one that had the authority, the judgment and the meaning to
govern and to command rightly with the most prudent counsel of our most
excellent Lady and mother the Queen, and of other great and worthy
personages, which had always ben near about the said deceased King our
Father, and were continued by our said deceased brother, as one that minded in
all points to follow his Fathers steps: the which he has well declared by
his deeds during the time of his reign, who had also settled his said realm
in such peace and quiet as he found it in at his coming to the Croune, if it
had pleased God to have lent him longer life, for so much as his estate had been molested and disquieted by the disagreeme^t of certain of the Nobilite,
who daring not openly to show them selves, stirred up by the help of the said
ministers, the tumult of Amboies, under the color of presenting a certain
request with a confession of their faith to the said King: who though he knew
well the very fountain and first Authors of that mischief, yet through his
singular and natural clemency following the example of our heavenly Father, and
hoping by his grace to do more good by way of pity, then by rigor of
justice, gave (by plain Edict made at Amboies in the month of March in the
year 1559) a general Pardon to all such his deceived and seduced subjects in
the faith, as would come home* again, and furthermore by an other Edict made
at Romorantin in the moves of May following, he left those which would not
come home again, to the Ecclesiastical censure only (which reaches not so
far as to blood) in case that they troubled not the common quiet. All this
notwithstanding, the said King was deceued of his expectation through the said
secret practices of the said Noble men, obstinate in their purposes: and
assayinge by force of Arms, to molest this said Realm, how be it under
pretense of Religion. Whereof the said King being fully advertised, remaining
then at Fontaine-bleau, was constrained to remove to Orlians with force of
Arms also, for to set things there in good order. Who also for the same
purpose had commanded a meting of the general Estates, at which time and
place it pleased God to call him to his mercy, geauing into our hands the
Kingdom, we being then of age between ten and eleven years, less able to
govern this said puissant Realm.

Moreover the chief succor which God had left unto us in our affairs,
which was the wise and prudent government of our most excellent Lady and
Mother, (...) was excedingly let and disapointed through the contempt of our
minorititie, which certain of the Nobility (the chiefest next after our most
dear and most well-beloved brethren) had conceived, and through parts taking
and contradictions which they with their Adherents, stirred against our said
most excellent Lady and Mother, who also to make their part stronger took
upon them the protection of the said new opinion, which by their support and
favor was greatly augmented.

For remedy whereof, at our returning from our Anointing and Coronation, we
came to the suburbs of S. German in the fields nigh to Paris, and we cawsed
to be assembled in our Parliament the Princes and those of our privy counsel,
with all the courts of the same parlame^t in the months of June and Iulie of
the year 1561. At what time by their advise at S. Germans in Lay we made
the Edict of the said month of July in the said year, by the which Edict, we
forebad al other exercise of Religion, then such as was according to the
received custom and manner observed in the Catholic Church, from and sense
the time of the Christian faith received by the Kings of France our
Predecessors, and by the Bishops and Prelates, Persons and Vicares, and their
Deputies. This the said protectours of the said new opinion perceiving, and
seeing that their ambitious enterprise was by this Edict utterly disappointed,
would not suffer it to take place: but caused through our whole Realm, those
of the said new opinion, to rise up and to stop the execution thereof. And then
by reason of such troubles, which they them selves had stirred, and caused to
be stirred in diverse places, they would make men believe, that it was
impossible, to execute the said Edicte, and therefore they called upon an
other assembly of a certain number of Presidentes and Counselors of all the
high Cou^rtes of this said Realm, that this might be a matter of greater
authority. Although yet the same assembly was less by two parts of the
three, then the other, which was made in our said Parliament of Paris, being
of the two ordinary companies. Beside that in their assembly, were such men
as they chose them selves, they being the stronger part of our privy
Counsel, having also placed therein a greater number of the said new opinion
then of the Catholics, to bring so at length their matter about, which they
did in deed, obteining a toleraton for the exercise of both Religions by our
Edict, made only by way of provision, the seuententh of January, in the said
year, 1561. The which Edicte our said most excellent Lady and Mother, being
then not able to withstand, was forced against her opinion, to let pass: she
being always otherwise most Christian. In like manner also, were forced our
most dear and best beloved Cosen, the Cardinal of Bourbon, with our most
dear and well-beloved Cousens also the Cardinal of Tournon, the Duke of
Montmorency, Constable, and the Mareshal of S. Andre: who were the principal
and most ancient Counselors, and Officers of our Crown, that the deceased
Kings, our said Lords, our Father, and Brother, had left unto us. Who also
among other occasions, which moved them to the toleration above said, declared
to our said most excellent Lady and Mother, that this was yet the less
mischief, that then could be suffered: Provided always, that this tolerated
exercise of the said new opinion, should not in any wise enter into any town.
And that also it was to be hoped, that we should be able to redress this
mischief, at what time we should come to our full years, authority, and
power: al which should make our subjects more obedient unto us. Upon the
which hope our said most excellent Lady and Mother most gredily attending,
disposed her self to go foreward with all diligence possible, in the bringing
up of us, and of our most dear and best beloved brethren, and of our most
dear and best beloved Sister, in the true Religion of the Catholic,
Apostolic, and Roman Church: which the most Christian Kings our
Predecessors, have kept and maintained, almost these eleven hundred years:
whereof we and our subjects, are greatly bound and beholden unto her. And
though that by the said Edicte of January, those of the new opinion, had good
cause to quiet and content them selves, if some other ambition and practice
had not rather pricked them, then the quieting of their consciences, as do
sufficiently witness unto us their behauiours, going ordinarily to their
preachinges and assemblies, with arms and weapons: yet notwithstanding they
not contenting them selves with the said license and toleratio^, straight
after our Edict published, declared most amply and manifestly to the whole
world, their wicked intention and purpose, arming them selves upon their own
private Authority against us. Taking up our towns: bringing strangers into
our said Realm, and doing all Acts of hostility and open enmity, even so
far, that they gave us a Battle under the town of Dreus. In the which God
gave us the victory, having compassion of his people subjected unto us, and
that we might once again overcome by Clemency our rebellyous Subjects, and
reduce them under our obedience.

Again hoping that in time, the goodness of God, by the means of our ripe
years, would bring them also under the obedience of his Church, with
continuance of the common quiet, we granted unto them being yet in our
Minority, the Edict of Pacification made at Amboyse, the xix. of March, in the
year. 1562. In the which we permitted unto them the exercise of their Religion,
such as is there more amply contained. And though that afterward, to take away
from them all manner of fear, mistruste, or surmise that possibly might be
conceived, we did publish even by their own advise and after their own
meaning, diverse declarations, Rules, and Ordonances, all tending to a common
quiet, and reuniting of all our subjects, yet notwithstanding they for their
part have daily and licentiously infringed and violated our said declarations,
Rules, and Ordonances. Yea though that by the same Declarations, Rules and
Ordonaunces, our said Edicte (which yet was never other then by way of
provision only, and by us at all times reuocable) was the better maintained,
only to avoid tumultes, and calamities ensuing thereupon, not giving them
thereby so much as the lest occasion in the world to take weapon and arms
again: as they did notwithstanding at Michelmas last, and set upon us in the
way between Meaus and Paris, we being then accompanied with our said most
Excellent Lady and Mother, and our said most dear, and best beloved brethern,
and Sister. Pretending afterward, that they meant the same time to present us
a Supplication for the maintenance of their Religion. And yet did they
notwithstanding, without intermission continue open war against us, so far,
that they beseaged us in our Head City of Paris: that they burned the milles
to famish us, that they took up many of our Cities, that they brought in
strangers once again into our Realm, and forced us at last to give them
battle even under the gates of Paris, to raise the siege which they had laid
against us, briefly using all ways and means, of open enmytie and hostility.

All this notwithstanding, we desiring to spare the blood of our Nobilytie, and
of other our subjects, hoping still to win them by Clemency and gentleness,
and having great pity upon the poor people spoiled and devoured by both
Armies, being required of them to have a pacification made by our letters
patentes, to be given at Paris the xxiij. of March last, we granted to them
the self same former Edict of pacification made the xix. of March in the
year. 1562. upon promise made to us, that they for their part should entierly
and fully observe it and keep it, and trouble no more our said Realm. The
which promise they breaking (though we in the mean failed not to keep and
observe the said Edict to the uttermost) they breaking, I say, their promise
made unto us, for so much as they would not render up unto us, our towns of
Rochelle, of Montaubam, of Castres, and of diverse other, as well in Languedoc,
as in the Dolphyne, which they promised to do, for so much as also in
certain places of our said Realm, they have caused metinges in arms, which
have murdered many of our Catholic subjects, and have farther practiced with
strangers, pretending to them that certain of their Religion have been killed
by the Catholics sense the time of the Edict of pacification, of which
matters upon their complainte, we have given forth commission to take
information, and to do Justice upon such trespasses, they (as I say) these
many ways breaking their promise, have within five months after their promise
made, taken weapon again, and arms against us. They have retired again to
the said Rochelle, and the Country there about, making there open war.

Wherein, we seeing them so often and so many times to abuse our Clemency and
favor, that we can no more doubt of their wicked and damnable enterprise,
which is to establish, and to set up in this said Realm some other
Soueraintie and Supreme Government, to the overthrowing of ours, ordained and
set up by God, and by such practices to pluck from us our good subjects, by
the means of the permission and toleration of the said exercise of their
Religion, and of the assemblyes which they make under color of their
prechings and communions, at the which they make gatherings of money, billing
of men, oaths, co^federacies, conspiracies, practices, and devises: and by
Arms as well within as without our said Realm, they trouble it and disquyet
it: yea and having their weapons in their hands, they deal with us as fellows
and companions, not as obedient subjects, as they declare them selves well,
both by word and by writings: yea and do the deeds of very mortal enemies:
such as it is not possible for us to quiet and to stay, but do increase daily
more and more, utterly to overthrow, if they were able, our Religion and
Estate, that they might thereby remain the only Lords and masters, by means
of the said exercise permitted unto them during our Minorite, and somewhat
after continued, for the love of peace and quiet: and to avoid thereby a worse
inconvenience, directly against our own will and mind: we have at all times
fast settled in our heart the true Religion, as most Christian Kings ought to
have: and who be fully resolved to live and dye therein: acknoweleadging herein
the Grace, that God by his infinite goodness has given us, as to have preserved
our said Religion and Estate, from the time of our first coming to the Crown
hitherto, against so mighty practices to the contrary, and to have given us
now the Age, the wit, and the Judgment sufficient to govern our selves,
and all that is committed unto us: As also to have given us for our aid and
comfort our most dear and best beloved Brother the Duke of Anjow, a man also
as we are, our Lieutenant General, most entierly affectioned to our Person, and
Service, knitte and united in Religion with us, as is also our other most
derelye beloved Brother the Duke of Allenson.

For these Causes* and other great and weighty Considerations moving us
hereunto, having had herevppon the advice of our most Excellent Lady and
Mother, of our said most dear and best beloved Brethren, of other Princes of
our Blood, and of other men of Honor, the Lords and the Honorable of our
Privy Council, we have by Edicte and Ordonaunce perpetual and irreuocable,
inhibited and forbidden, we do inhibite and forbid upon pain of
confiscation of body and goods, to all persons, of whatsoever dignity,
condition, or quality so ever they be, within our said Realm, and Land of
our obedience, all manner exercice of any Religion, then only of the
Catholic, and Roman, the which we hold and maintain, and the Kings our
Predecessors have holden and maintained. And to this effect we ordeine, that
all Ministers of the said Religion pretended reformed, be bound within xv.
days after the publication of these presents, to avoid and depart our said
Realm, and Land of our obedience, upon the pain above said.

This not withstanding, we mean not, ne will not, that those of the said
Religion pretended reformed, be by any means examined upon their consciences,
so that they refrain from the exercise of all other Religion, then of the said
Catholic and Roman: hoping that hereafter by the inspiration of God, and by
the great diligence which we purpose to use, to see that al Bishops and
Pastors of the Church of our said Realm do their endeavor and duty also,
hoping, I say, that our said subjects of the said pretended Religion, will
return and join again with us, and with other our subjects, in the unity
of the holy Catholic Church. Farther to all such our said subjects as
obeying to this our present Edict, will lay down their weapon, will break
up their assemblies, and will retire home again, living as good and loyal
subjects ought to do, within twenty days after the publication of these
presents, to all such we have geauen a general Pardon, and Remission of all
that has been by them committed, as well against our Person, our said most
honorable Lady and Mother, our said most derely beloved brethren, as against
any other persons, in respect of these present troubles, and of the former,
or of their Religion, until the day of this present Edict: in such sort,
that in this respect, they need not to take any other pardon or special
remission from us, so that they, within the said time, do render and restore
unto us, our Towns and Places, by such as do hold them, or have their power
in them.

All the which persons obeying unto us, we take and receive into our
safeguard and protection, in like sort, as our other subjects. Forbidding
most expressly all our said subjects, to reproach them with any matter that
is past: forbiddinge also all our Judges and Officers to trouble them, or to
molest them, either in their persons, or in their goods. We will also and
ordain, that al private quarrels, or particular grudges, be they between high or
low, co^munalties or Cities, or any other persons of what qualite so ever
they be, proceeding of the said troubles of Religion, be quenched and
extinguished, without any more word speaking thereof, or any more search made
after them, upon pain to be punished as guilty of treason, and as distourbers
of the common quiet. Forbiddinge moreover to all our subjects, that they
provoke not, nor reproach not one an other, either by word or by deed. We
declare also, that the said twenty days being passed, we will proceed against
the obstinate, and disobediente, against all their adherentes and accomplices,
by all ways and manners dew and permitted of God in such case, without any
more showing of favor for ever, and without exception of any.

We give also in commandment by these presents to our beloved and trusty,
such as hold our Courts of Parlame^t, Baillyes, Stewards, Preuosts, or their
Lieutenants, and to al other our Iusticers and officiers, and to every one of
them, as it shall to each one appertain, that our present Edict, Ordonance,
will, and Intention, they cause to be read, published, and inregistred, that
they intertayne it, keep it, and observe it, and cause it to be intertayned,
kept and observed, inuiolably and without breach. And to have this done and
suffered, that they constrayne, and cause to be constrained, al, to whom it shall
apperteine, and all which for this purpose they shall cause to be constrained:
And to proceed most expressly all our said subjects, to reproach them with
any matter that is past: forbiddinge also all our Judges and Officers to
trouble them, or to molest them, either in their persons, or in their goods.
We will also and ordain, that al private quarrels, or particular grudges, be they
between high or low, co^munalties or Cities, or any other persons of what
qualite so ever they be, proceeding of the said troubles of Religion, be
quenched and extinguished, without any more word speaking thereof, or any more
search made after them, upon pain to be punished as guilty of treason, and as
distourbers of the common quiet. Forbiddinge moreover to all our subjects,
that they provoke not, nor reproach not one an other, either by word or by
deed. We declare also, that the said twenty days being passed, we will
proceed against the obstinate, and disobediente, against all their adherentes
and accomplices, by all ways and manners dew and permitted of God in such case,
without any more showing of favor for ever, and without exception of any.

We give also in commandment by these presents to our beloved and trusty,
such as hold our Courts of Parlame^t, Baillyes, Stewards, Preuosts, or their
Lieutenants, and to al other our Iusticers and officiers, and to every one of
them, as it shall to each one appertain, that our present Edict, Ordonance,
will, and Intention, they cause to be read, published, and inregistred, that
they intertayne it, keep it, and observe it, and cause it to be intertayned,
kept and observed, inuiolably and without breach. And to have this done and
suffered, that they constrayne, and cause to be constrained, al, to whom it shall
apperteine, and all which for this purpose they shall cause to be constrained:
And to proceed against the tra^sgressours, by the pains above said.

We command also, that our said Baylies, Stewars, Preuostes, and other our
Officiers, do advertise us, and put us to knowleadge, within a month after the
publishing of these presents, of their endeavor and diligence that they have
used, for the execution and observation of the same. For such is our pleasure.
Al manner of Edicts, Ordonances, commandments, or Inhibitions to the contrary,
notwithstanding. All the which, in regard of the contents in these presents,
not yet in other matters preiudicating unto them, we have abrogated, and do
abrogate.

In witness hereof we have signed these presents with our own hand, and have
caused to be put thereunto our Seal.

Given at S. Maur de Fosses, in the month of Septembre, in the year of grace.
1568.

And of our Reign, the eight.

Signed, CHARLES.
And upon the fold, By the King, the Queen his Mother, my Lords, the Duke of
Anjou, and of Allenson, brothers of the said King. My Lords the Cardinals,
of Bourbon, of Loraine, and of Guise. The Dukes of Nemours, of Longueuille, and
of Aumale. The Mareshals of Dampuille and of Cosse. The Duke of Vzez. The Lord
of Moruillier. The Archbishop of Sans, the Bishops of Anxerre, and of
Lymoges, Al respectively Counselors in the privy Counsel of the said King.
The Lords of Lansac and of Carnauallet, present.

Signed, DE L'AVBESPINE.


And underneath, Visa. And sealed in grene wax, upon laces of silk read and
grene.


Read, published and inregistred, the Kings Attorney General hearing,
requiring, and consenting, at Paris in Parliament, the xxviij. day of Septembre,
in the year. 1568.

Thus signed. Du Tillet.



An Edict, or ORDONANCE of the French King, containing a Declaration, that he
will not from hence forewarde, use for his Officers, either in matters of
Judgment, or in the Courts of his Receites, such as are of the new
pretended Religion.
CHARLES by the grace of God, King of France, to al those that shall see these
present Letters, greeting. The evil behavior, which we have heretofore
known and perceived in many of our Officers, as well in matters of Judgment,
as in the Courts of our Receites, which make profession of the new pretended
Religion, shewinge themselves so blind in their affections, and so little
remembringe their duty toward us, that some of them, instede of well and
truly discharging their Offices, have found the means to take up certain of
our Cities, and to pluck them from our Obedience: Other have seized upon our
Revenues, and with the same have relieved, succored, and abetted such as
took Arms against us, to the great hinderance, dommage, and prejudice of our
affairs: geaueth us fair warning in this time of troubles, renewed yet again
by those which make profession of the new pretended Religion, taking Arms
against us, and doing all acts of hostility and enmity against the
Catholics, our good and loyal subjects, to take advise, that some good order
may be set therein, for the preservation of our said good and loyal subjects,
who do verily persuade themselves, that they shall never obtain any dew and
lawful administration of Justice, at the hands of those of the new pretended
Religion. And as little hope have they, that our Revenues by them to be paid,
will be at any time by them faithfully bestowed and employed to our Service and
use. Who also for this cause desire, that some provision be made accordingly,
and that nothing beforgotten, which may seem to the preservation and
maintenance of our Estate in all suerty and safety.

We give therefore to understand, that we, by the advice and deliberation of the
Queen, our most excellent Lady and Mother, of our most derely beloved Brother,
the Duke of Anjou, and of Bourbonnoys, and our Lieutena^t General, representing
our person, throughout our whole Realm, Land, and Subjects, of the Princes of
our blood, and other Princes, the honorable and chief Personages of our
Privy Counsel, have declared, and do declare by these presents, that we will
not use hereafter, the service of such our said Officers, of the said new
Religion, whether they be of our Courts of Parliament, of our Exchecker, of our
Grand Council, Treasurers of France, and Generals of our Revenues, Masters of
our Mintes, Bailies, Stewardes, Preuostes, or their Lieutenants, and other
Officers whatsoever, being of the said new Religion, as well in matters of
Judgment, and Courts of our Receites, as in any other sort. Discharging them
for this intent, as moreover we do discharge them, of those Estates and
Offices to be herafter by us disposed, and to be bestowed upon such Catholic
persons, sufficient and capable, as shall to us seem good.

Notwithstanding for so much as, amongst these our Officers, of the said
Religion, some there are, which are in Arms, in company of them, which have
a fresh taken Arms against us, which retain unto them, assist them, help
them, and abbette them with their counsel, relief and possessions: and other
some there are, which have stayed and do stay them selves quietly under the
toleration of our Edictes, of whom it is reason a difference be made, and that
they be not dealed withal, in like manner as the other* We will and ordeine,
that such our Officers of the said Religion, which have not borne Arms with
the said Rebels, neither have no manner of dealinge or intelligence with them,
that within. xx. days of the publicatio^ of these presents, they send unto us
their Proxes, to give up into our hands their said Estates and Offices. In
which rooms we will place Catholic Persons, sufficient and capable thereof,
as has been said. And touching such paiementes of money as shall fall out, by
composition made for those Offices, we shall cause a rent to be assigned unto
them, upon the town house of our good City and town of Paris, which they
and their heirs shall plainly and peaseably enjoy.

We give also in commandment, to our beloved and trusty of our Courts of
Parlements, of our Exchekers, of the Court of aids, Baillyes, Stewards,
Preuosts, or their Lieutenants, and to all other our Iusticers, Officers and
subjects, that our present declaration, pleasure, Intention, and that is here
above contained, they cause to be read, published, and inregistred, maintained,
kept, and observed inuiolably, without contradiction, or suffering of any
Contradiction. Ceasing, and causing to be ceased, all troubles and lettes to
the contrary. For such is our Pleasure.

In witness whereof we have signed these presents, with our own hand, and
have caused our Seal to be put thereto.

Given at S. Maur des Fossez: the xxv. day of September. In the year of
Grace. 1568. And of our reign the eight.

Signed, CHARLES.
And upon the fold: By the KING, being in his Counsel: Fizes And upon the
side, Visa.

And sealed with grene wax, in laces of silk red and grene.


Read, published and inregistred, the Kings Attorney General hearing,
requiring and consenting, at Paris in Parliament, the xxviij. of Septembre. In
the year. 1568.

Thus signed. Du Tillet.


Viri qui contenta horum Edictorum legerunt and approbaru^t sunt Anglici
Idiomatis and sacrae Theologiae peritissimi, quibus merito credendum esse
Iudico, and proinde haec tuto and secure imprimi posse. 29. October.

Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri Louanij. Anno. 1568.



RESPICITE VOLATILIA COELI, ET PVLLOS CORVORVM



