THE Widdovves Tears A Comedy.

As it was often presented in the black and white Friars.

Written by GEOR. CHAP.

LONDON, Printed for John Brown, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleet Street in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1612.

To the right Virtuous and truly noble Gentleman, Mr IO. REED of Mitton, in the
County of Gloucester Esquire.
SIR, if any work of this nature be worth the presenting to Friends Worthy,
and Noble; I presume this, will not want much of that value. Other Country men
have thought the like worthy of Dukes and Princes acceptations; Iniusti
sdegnij; Il Pentamento Amorose; Calisthe, Pastorfido, etc. (all being but
plays) were all dedicate to Princes of Italy. And therefore only discourse to
show my love to your right virtuous and noble disposition; This poor Comedy
(of many desired to see printed) I thought not utterly unworthy that
affectionate design in me: Well knowing that your free judgment weighs
nothing by the Name, or Form; or any vain estimation of the vulgar; but will
accept acceptable matter, as well in Plays; as in many less materials,
masking in more serious Titles. And so, till some work more worthy I can
select, and perfect, out of my other Studies, that may better express me; and
more fit the gravity of your ripe inclination, I rest.

Yours at all parts most truly affected. GEO. CHAPMAN.

The Actors.
Tharsalio the wooer.
Lysander his brother.
Their. Governor of Cyprus.
Lycas ser. to the widow Countess.
Argus, Gent. Usher.
3. Lords suitors to Eudora the widow Countess.
Hyl. Nephew to Tharsalio, and Son to Lysander.
Captain of the watch.
2. Soldiers.
Eudora the widow Countess.
Cynthia, wife to Lysander.
Sthenio.
Ianthe Gent. attending on Eudora.
Ero, waiting woman to Cynthia.
The Widows Tears. A COMEDY.
Actus Primi.
Scoena Prima.
THARSALIO Solus, with a Glass in his hand making ready. Thou blind
imperfect Goddess, that delights
(Like a deepe-reaching Statesman) to converse
Only with Fools: Jealous of knowing spirits;
For fear their piersing Judgments might discover
Thy inward weakness, and despise thy power;
Contemn thee for a Goddess; Thou that lad'st
Th'vnworthy Ass with gold; while worth and merit
Serve thee for naught; (weak Fortune) I renounce
Thy vain dependence, and convert my duty
And sacrifices of my sweetest thoughts,
To a more Noble Deity. Sole friend to worth,
And Patroness of all good Spirits, Confidence.
She be my Guide, and hers the praise of these
My worthy undertakings.
Enter Lysander with a Glass in his hand, Cynthia, Hylus, Ero. Lysand. MOrrow
Brother; Not ready yet?


Thar. No; I have somewhat of the Brother in me; I dare say, your Wife is many
times ready, and you not up. Save you sister; how, are you enamoured of my
presence? how like you my aspect?


Cynth. Faith no worse then I did last week, the weather has nothing changed
the grain of your complexion.


Thar. A firm proof, it is in grain, and so are not all complexions.

A good Soldiers face Sister.


Cynth. Made to be worn under a Beuer.


Thar. I, and 'twould show well enough under a mask too.


Lysand. So much for the face.


Thar. But is there no object in this suite to whet your tongue upon?


Lysand. None, but Fortune send you well to wear it: for she best knows how
you got it.


Thar. Faith, it is the portion she bestows upon younger Brothers, valor, and
good clothes: Marry, if you ask how we come by this new suite, I must take
time to answer it: for as the Ballad says, in written Books I find it.
Brother these are the blossoms of spirit: and I will have it said for my
Fathers honor, that some of his children were truly begotten.


Lysand. Not all?


Thar. Shall I tell you brother that I know will rejoice you? my former suites
have been all spenders, this shall be a speeder.


Lysand. A thing to be heartily wished; but brother, take heed you be not
gulled, be not too forward.


Thar. 'T had been well for me, if you had followed that counsel: You were
too forward when you stepped into the world before me, and gulled me of the Land,
that my spirits and parts were indeed borne too.


Cynth. May we not have the blessing to know the aim of your fortunes, what
coast, for heavens love?


Thar. Nay, it is a project of State: you may see the preparation; but the
design lies hidden in the breasts of the wise.


Lysand. May we not know it?


Thar. Not unless you will promise me to laugh at it, for without your
applause, I Will none.


Lysand. The quality of it may be such as a laugh will not be ill bestowed
upon it; pray heaven I call not Arsace sister.


Cynth. What? the Pandresse?


Thar. Know you (as who knows not) the exquisite Lady of the Palace? The late
Governors admired Widow? The rich and haughty Countess Eudora? Were not
she a Jewel worth the wearing, if a man knew how to win her?


Lysand. How Is that? how is that?


Thar. Brother, there is a certain Goddess called Confidence, that carries a
maine stroke in honorable preferments. Fortune waits upon her; Cupid is at her
beck; she sends them both of errands. This Deity does promise me much
assistance in this business.


Lysand. But if this Deity should draw you up in a basket to your Countesses
window, and there let you hang for all the wits in the Town to shoot at: how
then?


Thar. If she do, let them shoot their bolts and spare not: I have a little
Bird in a Cage here that sings me better comfort. What should be the bar?
you will say, I was Page to the Count her husband. What of that? I have there by
one foot in her favor already; She has taken note of my spirit, and suruaid
my good parts, and the picture of them lives in her eye: which sleep, I know,
can not close, till she have embraced the substance.


Lysand. All this sauors of the blind Goddess you speak of.


Thar. Why should I despair, but that Cupid has one dart in store for her
great Ladyship, as well as for any other huge Lady, whom she has made stoop
Gallant, to kiss their worthy followers. In a word, I am assured of my
speed. Such fair attempts led by a brave resolve, are evermore seconded by
Fortune.


Cynth. But brother? have I not heard you say, your own ears have been
witness to her vows, made solemnly to your late Lord; in memory of him, to
preserve till death, the unstained honor of a Widows bed. If nothing else,
yet that might cool your confidence.


Thar. Tush sister, suppose you should protest with solemn oath (as perhaps
you have done, if ever Heaven hears your prayers, that you may live to see my
Brother nobly interred) to feed only upon fish, and not endure the touch of
flesh, during the wretched Lent of your miserable life; would you believe it
Brother?


Lysand. I am therein most confident.


Thar. Indeed, you had better believe it then try it: but pray Sister tell me,
you are a woman: do not you wives nod your heads, and smile one upon an other
when ye meet abroad?


Cynth. Smile? why so?


Thar. As who should say, are not we mad Wenches, that can lead our blind
husbands thus by the noses? do you not brag amongst your selves how grossly you
abuse their honest credulities? how they adore you for Saints: and you believe
it? while you adhorne their temples, and they believe it not? how you vow
Widdow-hood in their life time, and they believe you, when even in the sight of
their breathless corse, ere they be fully cold, you join embraces with his
Groom, or his Physician, and perhaps his poisoner; or at least by the next
Moon (if you can expect so long) solemnly plight new Hymineall bonds, with a
wild, confident, untamed Ruffine?


Lysand. As for example.


Thar. And make him the top of his house, and soueraign Lord of the Palace, as
for example. Look you Brother, this glass is mine.


Lysand. What of that?


Thar. While I am with it, it takes impression from my face; but can I make it
so mine, that it shall be of no use to any other? will it not do his office
to you or you: and as well to my Groom as to my self? Brother, Monopolies are
cried down. Is it not madness for me to believe, when I have conquered that
Fort of chastity the great Countess; that if another man of my making, and
metal, shall assault her: her eyes and ears should lose their function, her
other parts their use, as if Nature had made her all in vain, unless I only
had stumbl'd into her quarters.


Cynth. Brother: I fear me in your travail, you have drunck too much of that
Italian air, that has infected the whole mass of your ingenuous Nature;
dried up in you all sap of generous disposition, poisond the very Essence of
your soul, and so polluted your senses, that whatsoever enters there, takes
from them contagion, and is to your fancy represented as foul and tainted,
which in it self perhaps is spotless.


Thar. No sister, it has refined my senses, and made me see with clear eyes,
and to judge of objects, as they truly are, not as they seem, and through
their mask to discern the true face of things. It tells me how short lived
Widows tears are, that their weeping is in truth but laughing under a Mask,
that they mourn in their Gowns, and laugh in their Sleeves, all which I
believe as a Delphian Oracle: and am resolved to burn in that faith. And in
that resolution do I march to the great Lady.


Lysand. You lose time Brother in discourse, by this had you bore up with the
Lady and clapped her aboard, for I know your confidence will not dwell long in
the service.


Thar. No, I will perform it in the Conquerours style. Your way is, not to
win Penelope by suite, but by surprise. The Castle's carried by a sudden
assault, that would perhaps sit out a twelue-moneths siege. It would be a good
breeding to my young Nephew here, if he could procure a stand at the Palace, to
see with what alacrity I Will a-coast her Countesship, in what garb I will woo
her, with what facility I will win her.


Lysand. It shall go hard but we will hear your entertainment for your
confidence sake.


Thar. And having won her Nephew; This sweet face
Which all the City says, is so like me,
Like me shall be preferred, for I will wed thee
To my great widows Daughter and sole Heir,
The lovely spark, the bright Laodice.

Lysand. A good pleasant dream.

Thar. In this eye I see
That fire that shall in me inflame the Mother,
And that in this shall set on fire the Daughter.
It goes Sir in a blood; believe me brother,
These destinies go ever in a blood.

Lysand. These diseases do, brother, take heed of them:
Fare you well; Take heed you be not baffeld.

Exeunt. Lys. Cynth. Hyl. Ero. manet Thars. Thar. Now thou that art the third
blind Deity
That gouernes earth in all her happiness,
The life of all endowments, Confidence;
Direct and prosper my intention.
Command thy servant Deities, Love and Fortune
To second my attempts for this great Lady,
Whose Page I lately was; That she, whose board
I might not sit at, I may board a bed
And under bring, who bore so high her head. Exit.

Lysander, Lycus. Lyc. It Is miraculous that you tell me Sir: he come to woo our
Lady Mistress for his wife?


Lys. It Is a frenzy he is possessed with, and will not be cured but by some
violent remedy. And you shall favor me so much to make me a spectator of the
Scene. But is she (say you) already accessible for Suitors? I thought she
would have stood so stiffly on her Widow vow, that she would not endure the
sight of a Suitor.


Lyc. Faith Sir, Penelope could not bar her gates against her woers, but she
will still be Mistress of her self. It is as you know, a certain Itch in
femall blood, they love to be su'd to: but she will hearken to no Suitors.


Lys. But by your leave Lycus, Penelope is not so wise as her husband Ulysses,
for he fearing the jaws of the Siren, stopped his ears with wax against her
voice. They that fear the Adders sting, will not come near her hissing. Is
any Suitor with her now?


Lyc. A Spartan Lord, dating himself our great Viceroies Kinsman, and two or
three other of his Country Lords, as spots in his train. He comes armed with
his Altitudes letters in grace of his person, with promise to make her a
Duchess if she embrace the match. This is no mean attraction to her high
thoughts; but yet she disdaines him.


Lys. And how then shall my brother presume of acceptance? yet I hold it much
more under her contentment, to marry such a Nastie braggart, then under her
honor to wed my brother: A Gentleman (though I sai't) more honorably
descended than that Lord: who perhaps, for all his Ancestrie would be much
troubled to name you the place where his Father was borne.


Lyc. Nay, I hold no comparison betwixt your brother and him. And the Venerean
disease, to which they say, he has been long wedded, shall I hope first rot
him, ere she endure the savor of his Sulphurous breath. Well, her Ladyship is
at hand; you are best take you to your stand.


Lys. Thanks good friend Lycus. Exit.


Enter Argus barehead, with whom another Usher Lycus ioynes, going over the
Stage. Hiarbas, and Psorabeus next, Robus single before Eudora, Laodice,
Sthenio bearing her train, Ianthe following. Peb. I Admire Madame, you can not
love whom the Viceroy loves.


Hiar. And one whose veins swell so with his blood, Madam, as they do in his
Lordship.


Pso. A near and dear Kinsman his Lordship is to his Altitude, the Viceroy;
In care of whose good speed here. I know his Altitude has not slept a sound
sleep since his departure.


Eud. I thank Venus I have, ever since he came.


Reb. You sleep away your Honor, Madam, if you neglect me.


Hiar. Neglect your Lordship? that were a negligence no less than disloialtie.


Eud. I much doubt that Sir, It were rather a presumption to take him, being of
the blood Viceroiall.


Reb. Not at all, being offered Madame.


Eud. But offered ware is not so sweet you know. They are the graces of the
Viceroy that woo me, not your Lordships, and I conceive it should be neither
Honor nor Pleasure to you, to be taken in for an other man's favors.


Reb. Taken in Madam? you speak as I had no house to hide my head in.


Eud. I have heard so indeed, my Lord, unless it be another man's.


Reb. You have heard untruth then; These Lords can well witness I can want no
houses.


Hiar. Nor Palaces neither my Lord.


Pso. Nor Courts neither.


Eud. Nor Temples I think neither; I believe we shall have a God of him.


Enter Tharsalio. Arg. SEe the bold fellow; whether will you Sir?


Thar. (...) way, all honor to you Madam?


Eud. How now base companion?


Thar. Base Madame: he is not base that fights as high as your lips.


Eud. And does that beseem my servant?


Thar. Your Court-seruant Madam.


Eud. One that waited on my board?


Thar. That was only a preparation to my weight on your bed Madam.


Eud. How dare thou come to me with such a thought?


Thar. Come to you Madam? I dare come to you at midnight, and bid defiance to
the proudest spirit that haunts these your loved shadows; and would any way
make terrible the access of my love to you.


Eud. Love me? love my dog.


Thar. I am bound to that by the proverb Madam.


Eud. Kennell without with him, intrude not here. What is it thou presum'st on?


Thar. On your judgment Madam, to choose a Man, and not a By but, as these are
that come with Titles, and Authority, as they would conquer, or ravish you.
But I come to you with the liberal and ingenuous Graces, Love, Youth, and
Gentry; which (in no more deformed a person then my self) deserve any
Princess.


Eud. In your saucy opinion Sir, and sirrah too; get gone; and let this
malipert humor return thee no more, for before heaven I Will have thee tossed in
blanquets.


Thar. In blanquets Madam, you must add your sheets, and you must be the
Toffer.


Reb. Nay then Sir you are as gross as you are saucy.


Thar. And all one Sir, for I am neither.


Reb. Thou art both.


Thar. Thou lie; keep up your smiter Lord Rebus.


Hiar. Use thou thus his Altitudes Cosen?


Reb. The place thou know protects thee.


Thar. Tie up your valor then till an other place turn me loose to you, you
are the Lord (I take it) that wooed my great Mistress here with letters from his
Altitude; which while she was reading, your Lordship (to entertain time)
strodl'd and skal'd your fingers; as you would show what an itching desire you
had to get betwixt her sheets.


Hiar. Slight, why does your Lordship endure him?


Reb. The place, the place my Lord.


Thar. Be you his Attorney Sir.


Hiar. What would you do Sir?


Thar. Make thee leap out at window, at which thou came in: Whores-sonne
bag-pipe Lords.


Eud. What rudeness is this?


Thar. What tamenesse is it in you Madam, to stick at the discarding of such a
suitor? A lean Lord, dubbed with the lard of others? A diseased Lord too, that
opening certain Magic Characters in an unlawful book, vp-start as many
aches in's bones, as there are ouches in's skin. Send him (Mistress) to the
Widow your Tennant; the virtuous Pandresse Arsace. I perceive he has crowns
in's Purse, that make him proud of a string; let her pluck the Goose therefore,
and her maids dress him.


Pso. Still my Lord suffer him?


Reb. The place Sir, believe it the place.


Thar. O good Lord Rebus; The place is never like to be yours that you need
respect it so much.


Eud. Thou wrong'st the noble Gentleman.


Thar. Noble Gentleman? A tumor, an impostume he is Madam; a very hault-boy, a
bag-pipe; in whom there is nothing but wind, and that none of the sweetest
neither.


Eud. Quitt the House of him by 'thead and Soulders.


Thar. Thanks to your Honor Madame, and my Lord Cosen the Viceroy shall
thank you.


Reb. So shall he indeed sir.


Lie. Arg. Will you be gone sir?


Thar. Away poor Fellows.


Eud. What is he made of? or what Devil sees your childish, and effeminate
spirits in him, that thus ye shun him?
Free us of thy sight;
Be gone, or I protest thy life shall go.

Thar. Yet shall my Ghost stay still; and haunt those beauties, and glories,
that have renderd it immortal.
But since I see your blood runs (for the time)
High, in that contradiction that fore-runs
Truest agreements (like the Elements
Fighting before they generate;) and that Time
Must be attended most, in things most worth;
I leave your Honor freely; and commend
That life you threaten, when you please, to be
Aduentur'd in your service; so your Honor
Require it likewise.

Eud. Do not come again.

Thar. I Will come again, believe it, and again. Exit.

Eud. If he shall dare to come again, I charge you shut doors upon him.


Arg. You must shut them (Madam)
To all men else then, if it please your Honor,
For it that any enter, hele be one.

Eud. I hope, wise Sir, a Guard will keep him out.

Arg. Before Heaven, not a Guard (ant please your Honor.)


Eud. Thou lie base Ass; One man enforce a Guard?
I Will turn ye all away (by our Isles Goddess)
If he but set a foot within my Gates.

Lurd. Your Honor shall do well to have him poisoned.

Hiar. Or begged of your Cosen the Viceroy. Exit.

Lysander from his stand. Lysand. This brauing wooer, has the success
expected; The favor I obtained, made me witness to the sport; And let his
Confidence be sure, I Will give it him home. The news by this, is blown through
the four quarters of the City. Alas good Confidence: but the happiness is
he has a forehead of proof; the stain shall never stick there whatsoever his
reproach be.


Enter Tharsalio. Lysand. WHat? in discourse?

Thar. Hell and the Furies take this vile encounter.
Who would imagine this Saturnian Peacock
Could be so barbarous to use a spirit
Of my direction, with such loved respect?
Fore heaven it cuts my gall; but I Will dissemble it.

Lysand. What? my noble Lord?

Thar. Well Sir, that may be yet, and means to be.

Lysand. What means your Lordship then to hang that head that has been so
erected; it knocks Sir at your bosom to come in and hide it self.


Thar. Not a jot.


Lysand. I hope by this time it needs fear no horns.


Thar. Well Sir, but yet that blessing runs not always in a blood.


Lysand. What blanqueted? O the Gods! spurned out by Grooms like a base
Bisogno? thrust out by the head and shoulders?


Thar. You do well Sir to take your pleasure of me, (I may turn tables with
you ere long.)


Lysand. What has thy wits fine engine taken cold? art stuff't inth head? can
answer nothing?


Thar. Truth is, I took my entertainment the better that 'twas no better.


Lysand. Now the Gods forbid that this opinion should run in a blood.


Thar. Have not you heard this principle, All things by strife engender.


Lysand. Dogs and Cats do.


Thar. And men and women too.


Lysand. Well Brother, in earnest, you have now set your confidence to school,
from whence I hope 't has brought home such a lesson as will instruct his
master never after to begin such attempts as end in laughter.


Thar. What Sir, you lesson my Confidence still; I pray heavens your confidence
have not more shallow ground (for that I know) then mine you reprehend so.


Lysand. My confidence? in what?


Thar. May be you trust too much.


Lysand. Wherein?


Thar. In humane frailty.


Lysand. Why brother know you ought that may impeach my confidence, as this
success may yours? has your observation discovered any such frailty in my
wife (for that is your aim I know) then let me know it.


Thar. Good, good. Nay Brother, I write no books of Observations, let your
confidence bear out it self, as mine shall me.


Lysand. That Is scarce a Brothers speech. If there be ought wherein your
Brothers good might any way be questioned can you conceal it from his bosom?


Thar. So, so. Nay my saying was but general. I glanc't at no particular.


Lysand. Then must I press you further. You spoke (as to your self, but yet I
ouer-heard) as if you knew some disposition of weakness where I most had fixed
my trust. I challenge you to let me know what it was.


Thar. Brother? are you wise?


Lysand. Why?


Thar. Be ignorant. Did you never hear of Actaeon?


Lysand. What then?


Thar. Curiosity was his death. He could not be content to adore Diana in her
Temple, but he must needs dog her to her retired pleasures, and see her in
her nakedness. Do you enjoy the sole privilege of your wives bed? have you
no pretty Paris for your Page? No mystical Adonis to front you there?


Lysand. I think none: I know not.


Thar. Know not still Brother. Ignorance and credulity are your sole means to
obtain that blessing. You see your greatest Clerks, your wisest Politicians,
are not that way fortunate, your learned Lawyers would lose a dozen poor men's
causes to gain a lease ant, but for a Term. Your Physician is ielous of his.
Your Sages in general, by seeing too much ouersee that happiness. Only your
block-headly Tradesman; your honest meaning Citizen; your not-headed Country
Gentleman; your vnapprehending Stinckerd is blessed with the sole prerogative of
his Wives chamber. For which he is yet beholding, not to his stars, but to
his ignorance. For if he be wise, Brother, I must tell you the case alters.

How do you relish these things Brother?


Lysand. Passing ill.


Thar. So do sick men solid meats: hark you brother, are you not ielous?


Lysand. No: do you know cause to make me?


Thar. Hold you there; did your wife never spice your broth with a dram of
sublimate? has she not yielded up the Fort of her Honor to a staring
Soldado? and (taking courage from her guilt) played open banckrout of all shame,
and run the Country with him? Then bless your Stars, bow your knees to
Juno. Look where she appears.


Enter Cynthia, Hylus. Cynth. We have sought you long Sir, there is a Messenger
within, has brought you letters from the Court, and desires your speech.


Lysand. I can discover nothing in her looks. Go, I Will not be long.


Cynth. Sir, it is of weight the bearer says: and besides, much hastens his
departure. Honorable Brother! cry mercy! what, in a Conquerours style? but
come and overcome?


Thar. A fresh course.


Cynth. Alas you see of how slight metal Widows vows are made.


Thar. And that shall you prove too ere long.


Cynth. Yet for the honor of our sex, boast not abroad this your easy
conquest; another might perhaps have staid longer below stairs, but upon your
confidence, that surprised her love.


Hyl. My uncle has instructed me how to accoast an honorable Lady; to win
her, not by suite, but by surprise.


Thar. The Whelp and all.


Hyl. Good Uncle let not your near Honors change your manners, be not
forgetful of your promise to me, touching your Ladies daughter Laodice. My
fancy runns so upon it, that I dream every night of her.


Thar. A good chicken, go thy ways, thou have done well; eat bread with thy
meat.


Cynth. Come Sir, will you in?


Lysand. I Will follow you.


Cynth. I Will not stir a foot without you. I can not satisfy the messengers
impatience.


Lys. He takes Thar. aside. Will you not resolve me brother?


Thar. Of what? Lysander stamps and goes out vexed with Cynth. Hyl. Ero. So,
there is venie for venie, I have giuen't him 'ith place speeding for all his
confidence. Well out of this perhaps there may be molded matter of more
mirth, then my baffling. It shall go hard but I Will make my constant sister act
as famous a Scene as Virgil did his Mistress; who caused all the Fire in Rome to
fail so; that none could light a torch but at her nose. Nowforth: At this
house dwells a virtuous Dame, sometimes of worthy Fame, now like a decai'd
Merchant turned Broker, and retailes refuse commodities for unthrifty
Gallants. Her wit I must employ upon this business to prepare my next
encounter, but in such a fashion as shall make all split. Ho? Madam Arsace?
pray heaven the Oister-wiues have not brought the news of my woing hither
amongst their stale Pilcherds.


Enter Arsace, Tomasin. Ars. WHat? my Lord of the Palace?


Thar. Look you.


Ars. Why, this was done like a beaten Soldier.


Thar. Hark, I must speak with you. I have a share for you in this rich
adventure. You must be the Ass chardg'd with Crowns to make way to the Fort,
and I the Conqueror to follow, and seize it. See thou this jewel?


Ars. Is It come to that? why Tomasin.


Tom. Madam.


Ars. Did not one of the Countesses Seruing-men tell us that this Gentleman was
sped?


Tom. That he did, and how her honor graced and entertained him in very
familiar manner.


Ars. And brought him down stairs her self.


Tom. I forsooth, and commanded her men to bear him out of doors.


Thar. Slight, pelted with rotten eggs?


Ars. Nay more, that he had already possessed her sheets.


Tom. No indeed Mistress, it was her blanquets.


Thar. Out you young hedge-sparrow, learn to tread before you be fledge. He
kicks her out:

Well have you done now Lady.

Ars. O my sweet kilbuck.

Thar. You now, in your shallow pate, think this a disgrace to me, such a
disgrace as is a batterd helmet on a soldiers head, it doubles his resolution.
Say, shall I use thee?


Ars. Use me?


Thar. O holy reformation! how art thou fallen down from the vpper-bodies of
the Church to the skirts of the City! honesty is stripped out of his true
substance into verbal nicetie. Common sinners startle at common terms, and
they that by whole mountains swallow down the deeds of darkness; A poor
mote of a familiar word, makes them turn up the white o'th eye. Thou art the
Ladies Tennant.


Ars. For term Sir.


Thar. A good induction, be successful for me, make me Lord of the Palace,
and thou shall hold thy Tenement to thee and thine ears for ever, in free
smockage, as of the manner of Panderage, provided always.


Arsa. Nay if you take me unprovided.


Thar. Provided I say, that thou make thy repair to her presently with a
plot I will instruct thee in; and for thy surer access to her greatness, thou
shall present her, as from thy self with this jewel.


Arsa. So her old grudge, stand not betwixt her and me.


Thar. Fear not that.
Presents are present cures for femall grudges,
Make bad, seeme-good; alter the case with Judges.

Exit. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundi.
Scoena Prima.
Lysander, Tharsalio. Lysand. SO now we are our selves. Brother, that ill
relisht speech you let slip from your tongue, has taken so deep hold of my
thoughts, that they will never give me rest, till I be resolved what 'twas you
said, you know, touching my wife.


Thars. Tush: I am weary of this subject, I said not so.


Lysand. By truth it self you did: I ouer-heard you. Come, it shall nothing
move me, whatsoever it be; pray thee unfold briefly what you know.


Thars. Why briefly Brother. I know my sister to be the wonder of the Earth;
and the Envy of the Heavens. Virtuous, Loiall, and what not. Briefly, I know
she has vowed, that till death and after death, she will hold inuiolate her
bonds to you, and that her black shall take no other hew; all which I firmly
believe. In brief Brother, I know her to be a woman. But you know brother, I
have other yrons on th'anuile. Exiturus.


Lysand. You shall not leave me so unsatisfied; tell me what it is you know.


Thar. Why Brother; if you be sure of your wives loialtie for term of life:
why should you be curious to search the Almanacks for aftertimes: whether some
wandering Aeneas should enjoy your reuersion; or whether your true Turtle would
sit mourning on a withered branch, till Atropos cut her throat: Beware of
curiosity, for who can resolve you? you will say perhaps her vow.


Lysand. Perhaps I shall.


Thar. Tush, her self knows not what she shall do, when she is transformed
into a Widow. You are now a sober and staid Gentleman. But if Diana for your
curiosity should translate you into a monckey; do you know what gambolds you
should play? your only way to be resolved is to die and make trial of her.


Lysand. A dear experiment, then I must rise again to be resolved.


Thar. You shall not need. I can send you speedier advertisement of her
constancy, by the next Ripier that rides that way with Mackerell. And so I
leave you.


Exit. Thar. Lysand. All the Furies in hell attend thee; has given me a
Bone to tire on with a pestilence; slight know?
What can he know? what can his eye observe
More then mine own, or the most piersing sight
That ever viewed her? by this light I think
Her priuat'st thought may dare the eye of heaven,
And challenge th'enuious world to witness it.
I know him for a wild corrupted youth,
Whom profane Ruffins, Squires to Bawds, and Strumpets,
Drunkards, speud out of Tauerns, into'th sinkes
Of Tap-houses, and Stews, Reuolts from manhood;
Debaucht perdu's, have by their companies
Turned Devil like themselves, and stuffed his soul
With damned opinions, and unhallowed thoughts
Of womanhood, of all humanity,
Nay Deity it self.

Enter Lycus. Lys. WElcome friend Lycus.


Lyc. Have you met with your capricious brother?


Lys. He parted hence but now.


Lyc. And has he yet resolved you of that point you brake with me about?


Lys. Yes, he bids me die for further trial of her constancy.


Lyc. That were a strange Physic for a jealous patient; to cure his thirst
with a draught of poison. Faith Sir, discharge your thoughts an't; think 'twas
but a Buzz devised by him to set your brains a work, and divert your eye from
his disgrace. The world has written your wife in highest lines of honored
Fame: her virtues so admired in this I Will, as the report thereof sounds in
foreign ears; and strangers often arriving here, (as some rare sight) desire
to view her presence, thereby to compare the Picture with the original. Nor
think he can turn so far rebel to his blood*

Or to the Truth it self to misconceiue
Her spotless love and loialtie; perhaps
Often having heard you hold her faith so sacred
As you being dead, no man might stir a spark
Of virtuous love, in way of second bonds;
As if you at your death should carry with you
Both branch and root of all affection.
T'may be, in that point he is an Infidel,
And thinks your confidence may ouer-weene.

Lys. So think not I.

Lyc. Nor I: if ever any made it good.
I am resolved of all, she will prove no changling.

Lys. Well, I must yet be further satisfied;
And vent this humor by some strain of wit,
Somewhat I Will do; but what, I know not yet.

Exeunt. Enter Sthenio, Ianthe. Sthe. PAssion of Virginity, Ianthe, how shall
we quit our selves of this Pandresse, that is so importunate to speak with us?
Is she known to be a Pandresse?


Ian. I, as well as we are known to be waiting women.


Sthe. A shrew take your comparison.


Sthe. Lets call out Argus that bold Ass that never weighs what he does or
says; but walks and talks like one in a sleep; to relate her attendance to
my Lady, and present her.


Ian. Who? ant please your Honor? None so fit to set on any dangerous exploit.
Ho? Argus?

Enter Argus bare. Arg. What Is the matter Wenches?


Sthe. You must tell my Lady here is a Gentlewoman called Arsace, her Honors
Tennant, attends her, to impart important business to her.


Arg. I will presently. Exit. Arg.


Iant. Well, she has a welcome present, to bear out her unwelcome presence:
and I never knew but a good gift would welcome a bad person to the purest.
Arsace?


Enter Arsace. Ars. I Mistress.


Sthe. Give me your Present; I Will do all I can, to make way both for it and
your self.


Ars. You shall bind me to your service Lady.


Sthe. Stand unseen.


Enter Lyc, Eudora, Laodice, Reb, Hiar Psor. coming after, Argus coming to
Eudora. Arg. Here Is a Gentlewoman (ant
Please your Honor) one of your Tennants
Desires access to you.

Eud. What Tennant? what is her name?

Arg. Arsace, she says Madam.

Eud. Arsace? what the Bawd?

Arg. The Bawd Madam? she strikes, that is without my priuitie.


Eud. Out Ass, know not thou the Pandresse Arsace?


Sth. She present your Honor with this Jewel?


Eud. This jewel? how came she by such a jewel?
She has had great Customers.

Arg. She had need Madam, she sits at a great Rent.

Eud. Alas for your great Rent: I Will keep her jewel, and keep you her out,
ye were best: speak to me for a Pandresse?


Arg. What shall we do?


Sthe. Go to; Let us alone. Arsace?


Ars. I Lady.


Sthe. You must pardon us, we can not obtain your access.


Ars. Mistress Sthenio, tell her Honor, if I get not access to her, and that
instantly she is undone.


Sthe. This is something of importance. Madam, she swears your Honor is
undone if she speak not with you instantly.


Eud. Undone?


Ars. Pray her for her Honors sake to give me instant access to her.


Sthe. She makes her business your Honor Madame, and entreates for the good
of that, her instant speech with you.


Eud. How comes my Honor in question? Bring her to me.


Enter Arsace. Ars. Our Cypriane Goddess save your good Honor.


Eud. Stand you off I pray: How dare you Mistress importune access to me thus,
considering the last warning I gave for your absence?


Ars. Because, Madam, I have been moved by your Honors last most chaste
admonition, to leave the offensive life. I led before.


Eud. I? have you left it then?


Ars. I, I assure your Honor, unless it be for the pleasure of two or three
poor Ladies, that have prodigal Knights to their husbands.


Eud. Out on thee Impudent.


Ars. Alas Madam, we would all be glad to live in our callings.


Eud. Is this the reformed life thou talk on?


Ars. I beseech your good Honor mistake me not, I boast of nothing but my
charity, that is the worst.


Eud. You get these jewels with charity, no doubt. But what is the point in
which my Honor stands endangered I pray?


Ars. In care of that Madam, I have presumed to offend your chasteies with my
presence. Hearing it reported for truth and generally, that your Honor will
take to husband a young Gentleman of this City called Tharsalio.


Eud. I take him to husband?


Ars. If your Honor does, you are utterly undone, for he is the most
incontinent, and insatiate Man of Women that ever VENUS blessed with ability to
please them.


Eud. Let him be the Devil; I abhor his thought, and could I be informed
particularly of any of these slanderers of mine Honor, he should as dearly
dare it, as any thing wherein his life were endangered.


Ars. Madam, the report of it is so strongly confident, that I fear the strong
destiny of marriage is at work in it. But if it be Madam: Let your Honors
known virtue resist and defy it for him: for not a hundred will serve his one
turn. I protest to your Honor, When (VENUS pardon me) I winckt at my
vnmaidenly exercise. I have known nine in a Night made mad with his love.


Eud. What tell thou me of his love? I tell thee I abhor him; and
destiny must have an other mould for my thoughts, then Nature or mine Honor,
and a Witchcraft above both, to transform me to another shape, as soon as to
an other conceit of him.


Ars. Then is your good Honor just as I pray for you, and good Madam, even for
your virtues sake, and comfort of all your Dignities, and Possessions; fix
your whole Woman-hood against him. He will so inchant you, as never man did
woman: Nay a Goddess (say his light huswiues) is not worthy of his sweetness.


Eud. Go to, be gone.


Ars. Dear Madam, your Honors most perfect admonitions have brought me to
such a hate of these imperfections, that I could not but attend you with my
duty, and urge his unreasonable manhood to the fill.


Eud. Manhood, quoth you?


Ars. Nay Beastly-hood, I might say, indeed Madam, but for saving your Honor;
Nine in a night said I?


Eud. Go to, no more.


Ars. No more Madame? that is enough one would think.


Eud. Well be gone I bid thee.


Ars. Alas Madam, your Honor is the chief of our City, and to whom shall I
complain of these inchastities, (being your Ladyships reformed Tennant) but to
you that are chastest?


Eud. I pray thee go thy ways, and let me see this reformation you pretend
continued.


Ars. I humbly thank your good Honor, that was first cause of it.


Eud. Here Is a complaint as strange as my Suitor.


Ars. I beseech your good Honor think upon him, make him an example.


Eud. Yet again?


Ars. All my duty to your Excellence. Exit. Ars.


Eud. These sorts of licentious persons, when they are once reclaimed, are most
vehement against license. But it is the course of the world to dispraise faults
and use them; that so we may use them the safer. What might a wise Widow
resolve upon this point now? Contentment is the end of all wordly beings:
Beshrow her; would she had spared her news. Exit.


Reb. See if she take not a contrary way to free her self of us.


Hiar. You must complain to his Altitude.


Psor. All this for trial is; you must endure
That will have wives, naught else, with them is sure.

Exit. Tharsalio, Arsace. Thar. Have thou been admitted then?


Ars. Admitted? I, into her heart, I Will able it; never was man so praised with a
dispraise; nor so spoken for in being railed on. I Will give you my word; I have
set her heart upon as tickle a pin as the needle of a Dial; that will never let
it rest, till it be in the right position.


Thar, Why do thou imagine this?


Ars. Because I saw Cupid shoot in my words, and open his wounds in her
looks. Her blood went and came of errands betwixt her face and her heart; and
these changes I can tell you are shrewd tell-tales.


Thar. Thou speak like a Doctrisse in thy faculty; but howsoever, for all
this foil, I Will retriue the game once again, he is a shallow gamster that for
one displeasing cast gives up so fair a game for lost.


Ars. Well, 'twas a villainous invention of thine, and had a swift operation, it
took like sulphur. And yet this virtuous Countess has to my ear spun out
many a tedious lecture of pure sisters thread against concupiscence. But ever
with such an affected zeal, as my mind gave me, she had a kind of secret
titillation to grace my poor house sometimes; but that she feared a spice of
the Sciatica, which as you know ever runs in the blood.


Thar. And as you know, sokes into the bones. But to say truth, these angry
heates that break out at the lips of these straight lac't Ladies, are but as
symptoms of a lustful fever that boiles within them. For wherefore rage wives
at their husbands so, when they fly out, for zeal against the sin?


Ars. No, but because they did not purge that sin.


Thar. Thou Art a notable Siren, and I swear to thee, if I prosper, not only to
give thee thy mannor-house gratis, but to marry thee to some one Knight or
other, and bury thy trade in thy Ladyship: Go be gone. Exit. Ars.


Enter Lycus. Thar. WHat news Lycus? where is the Lady?


Lyc. Retired into her Orchard.


Thar. A pregnant badge of love, she is melancholy.


Lyc. It Is with the sight of her Spartane wooer. But howsoever it is with her,
you have practiced strangely upon your Brother.


Thar. Why so?


Lyc. You had almost lifted his wit off the hinges. That spark jealousy
falling into his dry melancholy brains, had well near set the whole house on
fire.


Thar. No matter, let it work; I did but pay him in's own coin; Sfoot he
plied me with such a volley of vnseason'd scoffs, as would have made Patience
it self turn Ruffine, attiring it self in wounds and blood: but is his
humor better qualified then?


Lyc. Yes, but with a medicine ten parts more dangerous then the sickness: how
know you strange his dotage ever was on his wife; taking special glory to
have her love and loialtie to him so renowm'd abroad. To whom she oftentimes
has vowed constancy after life, till her own death had brought forsooth, her
widdow-troth to bed. This he ioi'd in strangely, and was therein of infallible
belief, till your surmise began to shake it; which has loosed it so, as now
there is naught can settle it, but a trial, which he is resolved upon.


Thar. As how man? as how?


Lyc. He is resolved to follow your advise, to die, and make trial of her
stablenesse, and you must lend your hand to it.


Thar. What to cut's throat?


Lyc. To forge a rumor of his death, to uphold it by circumstance, maintain a
public face of mourning, and all things appertaining.


Thar. I, but the means man: what time? what probability.


Lyc. Nay, I think he has not lickt his Whelpe into full shape yet, but you
shall shortly hear ant.


Thar. And when shall this strange conception see light?


Lyc. Forthwith: there is nothing stays him, but some odd business of import,
which he must wind up; least perhaps his absence by occasion of his intended
trial be prolonged above his aims.


Thar. Thanks for this news in faith. This may perhaps prove happy to my
Nephew. Truth is I love my sister well and must acknowledge her more then
ordinary virtues. But she has so possessed my brothers heart with vows, and
disauowings, sealed with oaths of second nuptials; as in that confidence, he
has invested her in all his state, the ancient inheritance of our Family: and
left my Nephew and the rest to hang upon her pure devotion; so as he dead, and
she matching (as I am resolved she will) with some young Prodigal; what must
ensue, but her post-issue beggerd, and our house already sinking, buried quick
in ruin. But this trial may remove it, and since it is come to this; mark but
the issue Lycus, for all these solemn vows, if I do not make her prove in
the handling as weak as a wafer; say I lost my time in travail. This
resolution then has set his wits in joint again, he is quiet.


Lyc. Yes, and talks of you again in the fairest manner, listens after your
speed.


Thar. Nay he is passing kind, but I am glad of this trial for all that.


Lyc. Which he thinks to be a flight beyond your wing.


Thar. But he will change that thought ere long. My Bird you saw even now,
sings me good news, and makes hopeful signs to me.


Lyc. Somewhat can I say too, since your messengers departure, her Ladyship
has been something altered, more pensive then before, and took occasion to
question of you, what your addictions were? of what taste your humor was? of
what cut you wore your wit, and all this in a kind of disdainefull scorn.


Thar. Good Callenders Lycus. Well I Will pawn this jewel with thee, my next
encounter shall quite alter my brothers judgment. Come lets in, he shall
commend it for a discreet and honorable attempt. Men's judgments sway on that
side fortune leanes,
Thy wishes shall assist me:



Lyc. And my means. Exeunt.


Argus, Clinias, Sthenio, Ianthe. Arg. I Must confess I was ignorant, what
'twas to court a Lady till now.


Sthe. And I pray you what is it now?


Arg. To court her I perceive, is to woo her with letters from Court, for so
this Spartane Lords Court discipline teaches.


Sth. His Lordship has procured a new Packet from his Altitude.


Clin. If he bring no better ware then letters in's packet, I shall greatly
doubt of his good speed.


Ian. If his Lordship did but know how gracious his Aspect is to my Lady in
this solitary humor.


Clin. Well these retired walks of hers are not usual; and bode some
alteration in her thoughts. What may be the cause Sthenio.


Sthe. Nay twould trouble Argus with his hundred eyes to descrie the cause.


Ian. Venus keep her upright, that she fall not from the state of her honor;
my fear is that some of these Serpentine suitors will tempt her from her
constant vow of widdow-hood. If they do, good night to our good days.


Sthe. 'Twere a sin to suspect her; I have been witness to so many of her
fearful protestations to our late Lord against that course, to her infinite
oaths imprinted on his lips, and sealed in his heart with such imprecations to
her bed, if ever it should receive a second impression, to her open and often
detestations of that incestuous life (as she termed it) of widows marriages,
as being but a kind of lawful adultery; like usury permitted by the law,
not approved. That to wed a second, was no better then to cuckold the first:
That women should entertain wedlock as one body, as one life, beyond which
there were no desire, no thought, no repentance from it, no restitution to it.
So as if the conscience of her vows should not restrain her, yet the worlds
shame to break such a constant resolution, should repress any such motion in
her.


Arg. Well, for her vows, they are gone to heaven with her husband, they bind
not upon earth: And as for Women's resolutions, I must tell you, The Planets,
and (as Ptolomie says) the winds have a great stroke in them. Trust not my
learning if her late strangeness, and exorbitant solitude, be not hatching
some new Monster.


Ian. Well applied Argus; Make you husbands Monsters?


Arg. I spoke of no husbands, but you Wenches have the pregnant wits, to turn
Monsters into husbands, as you turn husbands into monsters.


Sthe. Well Ianthe, 'twere high time we made in, to part our Lady and her
Spartane wooer.


Ian. We shall appear to her like the two fortunate Stars in a tempest, to
save the shipwreck of her patience.


Sthe. I, and to him to, I believe; For by this time he has spent the last
dram of his news.


Arg. That is, of his wit.


Sth. Just good wittals.


Ian. If not, that my Lady be not. too deep in her new dumps, we shall hear
from his Lordship; what such a Lord said of his wife the first night he
embraced her: To what Gentleman such a Count was beholding for his five
children. What young Lady, such an old Count should marry; what Reuells: what
presentiments are toward; and who penned the Pegmas; and so forth: and yet for
all this, I know her harsh Suitor has tired her to the uttermost scruple of
her forbearances, and will do more, unless we two, like a pair of Sheres,
cut a-sunder the thread of his discourse.


Sthe. Well then, lets in; But my masters, wait you on your charge at your
perils, See that you guard her approach from any more intruders.


Ian. Excepting young Tharsalio.


Sthe. True, excepting him indeed, for a guard of men is not able to keep him
out ant please your Honor.


Arg. O Wenches, that is the property of true valor, to promise like Pigmey,
and perform like a Giant. If he come, I Will be sworn I Will do my Ladies
commandment upon him.


Ian. What? beat him out?


Sthe. If he should, Tharsalio would not take it ill at his hands, for he
does but his Ladies commandment.


Enter Tharsalio. Arg. WEll, by Hercules he comes not here.


Sthe. By Venus but he does: or else she has heard my Ladies prayers, and
sent some gracious spirit in his likeness to fright away that Spartane wooer,
that hants her.


Thar. There stand her Sentinells.


Arg. Slight the Ghost appears again.


Thar. Save ye my quondam fellows in Arms; save ye; my women.


Sthe. Your Women Sir?


Thar. 'Twill be so. What no courtesies? No preparation of grace? observe me I
advise you for your own sakes.


Ian. For your own sake, I advise you to pack hence, lest your impudent valor
cost you dearer then you think.


Clin. What senseless boldness is this Tharsalio?


Arg. Well said Clinias, talk to him.


Clin. I wonder that notwithstanding the shame of your last entertainment, and
threatenings of worse; you would yet presume to trouble this place again.


Thar. Come you are a widgine; Off with your hat Sir, acknowledge: forecast is
better then labor. Are you squint eyed? can you not see before you. A little
foresight I can tell you might sted you much as the Stars shine now.


Clin. It Is well sir, it is not for nothing your brother is ashamed on you. But
Sir, you must know, we are chardg'd to bar your entrance.


Thar. But Wifler, know you, that who so shall dare to execute that charge, I Will
be his Executioner.


Arg. By Jove, Clinias, me thinks, the Gentleman speaks very honorably.


Thar. Well I see this house needs reformation, here is a fellow stands behind
now, of a forwarder insight then ye all. What place have thou?


Arg. What place you please Sir.


Thar. Law you Sir. Here Is a fellow to make a Gentleman Usher Sir, I discharge
you of the place, and do here inuest thee into his room, Make much of thy
hair, thy wit will suit it rarely. And for the full possession of thine
office; Come, Usher me to thy Lady: and to keep thy hand supple, take this
from me.


Arg. No bribes Sir, ant please your Worship.


Thar. Go to, thou do well; but pocket it for all that; it is no impair to
thee: the greatest do it.


Arg. Sir, it is your love only that I respect, but since out of your love you
please to bestow it upon me, It were want of Courtship in me to refuse it; I Will
acquaint my Lady with your coming. Exit. Arg.


Thar. How say by this? have not I made a fit choice, that has so soon
attained the deepest mystery of his profession: Good sooth Wenches, a few
courtsies had not been cast away upon your new Lord.


Sthe. We Will believe that, when our Lady has a new Son of your getting.


Enter Argus, Eudora, Rebus, Hiar. Psor. Eud. What Is the matter? whose that, you
say, is come?


Arg. The bold Gentleman, ant please your Honor.


Eud. Why thou flering Ass thou.


Arg. Ant please your Honor.


Eud. Did not I forbid his approach by all the charge and duty of thy service?


Thar. Madam, this fellow only is intelligent; for he truly understood your
command according to the style of the Court of Venus; that is, by contraries:
when you forbid you bid.


Eud. By heaven I Will discharge my house of ye all.


Thar. You shall not need Madame, for I have already casheer'd your officious
Usher here, and chos'd this for his Successor.


Eud. O incredible boldness!


Thar. Madam, I come not to command your love with enforst letters, nor to woo
you with tedious stories of my Pedigree, as he who draws the thread of his
descent from Ledas Distaffe; when it is well known his Grandsire cried
Coniskins in Sparta.


Reb. Whom mean you Sir?


Thar. Sir, I name none, but him who first shall name himself.


Reb. The place Sir, I tell you still; and this Goddesses fair presence, or
else my reply should take a far other form upon it.


Thar. If it should Sir, I would make your Lordship an anser.


Arg. Anser's Latin for a Goose, ant please your honor.


Eud. Well noted Gander; and what of that?


Arg. Nothing, ant please your Honor, but that he said he would make his
Lordship an answer.


Eud. Thus every fool mocks my poor Suitor. Tell me thou most frontlesse of
all me, did thou (when thou had means to note me best) ever observe so
base a temper in me, as to give any glance at stooping to my Vassal?


Thar. Your drudge Madam, to do your drudgerie.


Eud. Or am I now so skant of worthy Suitors, that may advance mine honor;
advance my estate; strengthen my alliance (if I list to wed) that I must stoop
to make my foot my head.


Thar. No but your side, to keep you warm a bed. But Madame vouchsafe me your
patience to that points serious answer. Though I confess to get higher place
in your graces, I could wish my fortunes more honorable; my person more
gracious; my mind more adorned with Noble and Heroical virtues, yet Madame
(that you think not your blood disparadg'd by mixture with mine) daine to know
this: howsoever I once, only for your love, disguised my self in the service
of your late Lord and mine, yet my descent is as honorable as the proudest of
your Spartane attempters; who by unknown quills or conduits under ground,
draws his Pedigree from Lycurgus his great Toe, to the Viceroies little
finger, and from thence to his own elbow, where it will never leave itching.


Reb. It Is well Sir, presume still of the place.


Thar. Sfoot Madame, am I the first great personage that has stoopt to
disguises for love? what think you of our Countrie-man Hercules; that for love
put on Omphales Apron, and sat spinning amongst her Wenches, while his Mistress
wore his Lions skin and Lamb-skin'd him, if he did not his business.


Eud. Most fitly thou resembl'st thy self to that violent Atlas, that claimed
all other men's possessions as his own by his mere valor. For what less have
thou done? Come into my house, beat away these Honorable persons?


Thar. That I will Madam. Hence ye Sparta Velvet.


Psor. Hold, she did not mean so.


Thar. Away I say, or leave your lives I protest here.


Hiar. Well Sir, his Altitude shall know you.


Reb. I Will do your errand Sir. Exeunt.


Thar. Do good Cosen Altitude; and beg the reuersion of the next Lady: for
Dido has betrotht her love to me. By this fair hand Madam, a fair riddance of
this Calidonian Bore.


Eud. O most prodigious audaciousnesse!


Thar. True Madam; O fie upon am, they are intolerable. And I can not but
admire your singular virtue of patience, not common in your sex; and must
therefore carry with it some rare indowment of other Masculine and Heroical
virtues. To hear a rude Spartane court so ingenuous a Lady, with dull news
from Athens, or the Vicerois court; how many dogs were spoiled at the last
Bull-baiting; what Ladies dubbed their husbands Knights, and so forth.


Eud. But have thou no shame? No sense of what disdain I showed thee in my last
entertainment? chacing thee from my presence, and charging thy duty, not to
attempt the like intrusion for thy life; and dare thou yet approach me in
this unmannerly manner? No question this desperate boldness can not choose but
go accompanied with other infinite rudenesses.


Thar. Good Madam, give not the Child an unfit name, term it not boldness,
which the Sages call true confidence, founded on the most infallible Rock of a
woman's constancy.


Eud. If shame can not restrain thee, tell me yet if any brainlesse fool
would have tempted the danger attending thy approach.


Thar. No Madam, that proves I am no Fool: Then had I been here a Fool, and a
base low-sprited Spartan, if for a Ladies froune, or a Lords threats, or for a
Guard of Grooms, I should have shrunk in the wetting, and suffered such a
delicious flower to perish in the stalk, or to be sauadgely plucked by a
profane finger. No Madam: First let me be made a Subject for disgrace; let
your remorselesse Guard seize on my despised body, bind me hand and foot, and
hurl me into your Ladyships bed.


Eud. O Gods: I protest thou do more and more make me admire thee.


Thar. Madam, ignorance is the mother of admiration: know me better, and you will
admire me less.


Eud. What would thou have me know? what seeks thy coming? why do thou
hant me thus?


Thar. Only Madam, that the Aetna of my sighs, and Nilus of my tears, poured
forth in your presence, might witness to your Honor the hot and moist
affection of my heart, and work me some measure of favor, from your sweet
tongue, or your sweeter lips, or what else your good Ladyship shall esteem
more conducible, to your divine contentment.


Eud. Pen and Inck-horne I thank thee. This you learned when you were a
Seruing-man.


Thar. Madam, I am still the same creature; and I will so tie my whole fortunes
to that style, as were it my happiness (as I know it will be) to mount into my
Lords succession, yet vow I never to assume other Title, or State, then your
servants: Not approaching your board, but bidden: Not pressing to your bed, but
your pleasure shall be first known if you will command me any service.


Eud. Thy vows are as vain as a Ruffins oaths; as common as the air; and as
cheap as the dust. How many of the light huswiues, thy Muses, has thy love
promised this service besides, I pray thee?


Thar. Compare shadows to bodies, Madam; Pictures to the life; and such are
they to you, in my valuation.


Eud. I see words will never free me of thy boldness, and will therefore now
use blows; and those of the mortallest enforcement. Let it suffice Sir, that
all this time, and to this place, you enjoy your safety; keep back: No one
foot follow me further; for I protest to thee, the next threshold past, lets
pass a prepared Ambush to thy latest breath. Exit. Eud.


Thar. This for your Ambush, He draws. Dare my love with death?


Clin. Slight; follow ant please your Honor.


Arg. Not I by this light.


Clin. I hope Gentle-women you will.


Sthe. Not we Sir, we are no parters of fraies.


Clin. Faith nor I Will be any breaker of customs. Exeunt.


Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus Tertij.
Scoena Prima.
Enter Lysander and Lycus booted. Lyc. WOuld any heart of Adamant, for
satisfaction of an ungrounded humor, rack a poor Ladies innocence as you
intend to do. It was a strange curiosity in that Emperor, that ripped his
Mothers womb to see the place he lay in.


Lys. Come do not lode me with volumes of persuasion; I am resolved, if she be
gold she may abide the taste, lets away, I wonder where this wild brother is.


Enter Cynthia, Hylus, and Ero. Cynth. SIr.


Lysand. I pray thee wife show but thy self a woman; and be silent: question
no more the reason of my journey, which our great Viceroies charge urged in
this letter does enforce me to.


Cynth. Let me but see that letter, there is something in this presaging blood
of mine, tells me this sudden journey can portend no good, resolve me sweet,
have not I given you cause of discontent, by some misprision, or want of fit
observance, let me know that I may wreake my self upon my self.

(...) of art to cover your buske points; which a blunt and resolute encounter,
taken under a fortunate aspect, easily disarmes you off; and then alas what are
you? poor naked sinners, God wot: weak paper walls thrust down with a
finger; this is the way on it, boil their appetites to a full height of lust;
and then take them down in the nicke.


Cynth. Is there probability in this; that a Lady so great, so virtuous,
standing on so high terms of honor, should so soon stoop?


Thar. You would not wonder sister, if you knew the lure she stoo'pt at:
greatness? think you that can curb affection; no, it whets it more; they have
the full stream of blood, to bear them: the sweet gale of their sublimed
spirits to drive them: the calm of ease to prepare them: the sunshine of
fortune to allure them: Greatness to waft them safe through all Rocks of
infamy: when youth, wit, and person come aboard once, tell me sister, can you
choose but hoise sail, and put forward to the maine?


Lysand. But let me wonder at this frailty yet; would she in so short time
wear out his memory, so soon wipe from her eyes, nay, from her heart, whom I
my self, and this whole I Will besides, still remember with grief, the
impression of his loss taking worthily such root in us; how think you Wife?


Cynth. I am ashamed ant, and abhor to think,
So great and vowed a pattern of our sex,
Should take into her thoughts, nay to her bed,
(O stain to woman-hood) a second love.

Lyc. In so short time.


Cynth. In any time.


Lysand. No wife.


Cynth. By Juno no; sooner a lothsom Tode.


Thar. High words believe me, and I think she will keep them; next turn is
yours Nephew; you shall now marry my noblest Ladie-Daughter; the first
marriage in Paphos; next my nuptials shall be yours; these are strange
occurrents brother, but pretty and patheticall: if you see me in my chair of
Honor; and my Countess in mine arms; you will then believe, I hope, I am
Lord of the Palace, then shall you try my great Ladies entertainment; see
your hands freed of me, and mine taking you to advancement.


Lysand. Well, all this rids not my business; wife you shall be there to
partake the unexpected honor of our House. Lycus, and I will make it our
recreation by the way, to think of your Reuells and Nuptial sports; Brother
my stay has been for you; Wife pray thee be gone, and soon prepare for the
solemnity, a Month returns me.


Cynth. Heavens guide your journey.


Lysand. Fare-will.


Thar. Farewell Nephew; prosper^^ virilitie, but do you hear; keep your
hand from your voice, I have a part for you in our Hymencall show.


Hyl. You speak too late for my voice, but I Will discharge the part. Exit. Cyn.
Hyl.


Lysand. Occurrents call ye them; soul shame confound them all; that
impregnable Fort of chastity and loyalty, that amazement of the world; O ye
Deities could nothing restrain her? I took her spirit to be too haughty for
such a depression.


Thar. But who commonly more short heeld; then they that are high 'ith in-step.


Lysand. Me thinks yet shame should have controlled so sudden an appetite.


Thar. Tush, shame does extinguish lust as oil does fire,
The blood once hot, shame does inflame the more,
What they before, by art dissembled most
They act more freely; shame once found is lost;
And to say truth Brother; what shame is due to it? or what congruence does it
carry, that a young Lady, Gallant, Vigorous, full of Spirit, and Complexion;
her appetite new whetted with Nuptial delights; to be confind to the
speculation of a deaths head, or for the loss of a husband, the world
affording flesh enough, make the noone-tide of her years, the sunne-set of her
pleasures.


Lyc. And yet there have been such women.


Thar. Of the first stamp perhaps, when the metal was purer then in these
degenerate days; of later years, much of that coin has been counterfeit,
and besides so cracked and worn with use, that they are grown light, and
indeed fit for nothing, but to be turned over in play.


Lysand. Not all brother.


Thar. My matchless sister only excepted: for she, you know is made of an
other metal, then that she borrowed of her mother. But do you brother sadly
intend the pursuit of this trial?


Lysand Irreuocably.


Thar. Its a high project: if it be once raised, the earth is too weak to
beat so weighty an accident, it cannot be coniur'd down again, without an
earthquake, therefore believe she will be constant.


Lysand. No, I will not.


Thar. Then believe she will not be constant.


Lysand. Neither, I will believe nothing but what trial enforces; will you
hold your promise for the governing of this project with skill, and secrecy?


Thar. If it must needs be so. But hark you brother; have you no other
Capricions in your head to entrap my sister in her frailty, but to prove the
firmness of her widow vows after your supposed death.


Lysand. None in the world.


Thar. Then here is my hand, I Will be as close, as my Ladies shoe to her foot
that pinches and pleases her, and will bear on with the plot, till the vessel
split again.


Lysand. Forge any death, so you can force belief. Say I was poisoned, drowned.


Thar. Hanged.


Lysand. Any thing, so you assist it with likely circumstance, I need not
instruct you: that must be your imploiment Lycus.


Lyc. Well Sir.


Thar. But brother you must set in to; to countenance truth out, a hearse there
must be too; Its strange to think how much the eye preuailes in such
impressions; I have marckt a Widow, that just before was seen pleasant
enough, follow an empty hearse, and weep devoutly.


Lyc. All those things leave to me.


Lysan. But brother for the bestowing of this hearse in the monument of our
Family, and the marshalling of a Funeral.


Thar. Leave that to my care, and if I do not do the mourner, as lively as
your Heir, and weep as lustily as your Widow, say there is no virtue in
Onions; that being done, I Will come to visit the distressed widow; apply old ends
of comfort to her grief, but the burden of my song shall be to tell her words
are but dead comforts; and therefore counsel her to take a living comfort;
that might Ferrit out the thought of her dead husband, and will come prepared
with choice of suitors; either my Spartane Lord for grace at the Viceroies
Court, or some great Lawyer that may soder up her cracked estate, and so forth.
But what would you say brother, if you should find her married at your
arrival.


Lysand. By this hand split her Wezand.


Thar. Well, forget not your wager, a stately chariot with four brave Horses
of the Thracian breed, with all appurtenances. I Will prepare the like for you,
if you prove Victor; but well remembered, where will you lurk the whiles?


Lysand. Mewd up close, some short days journey hence, Lycus shall know the
place, write still how all things pass, brother adieu; all joy attend you.


Thar. Will you not stay our nuptial now so near.


Lysand. I should be like a man that hears a tale And heedes it not; one
absent from himself, my wife shall attend the Countess, and my Son.


Thar. Whom you shall here at your return call me father, adieu: Jove be your
speed.

My Nuptials done, your Funerals succeed. Exeunt.


Enter Argus barehead Arg. A Hall, a hall: who is without there? Enter two or
three with cushions. Come on, you are proper Grooms, are ye not? Slight I
think you are all Bridegroomes, ye take your pleasures so. A company of
dormice. Their Honors are upon coming, and the room not ready. Rushes and
seats instantly.


Thar. Now, alas fellow Argus, how thou art comberd with an office?


Arg. Perfume sirrah, the roome's dampish.


Thar. Nay you may leave that office to the Ladies, they will perfume it
sufficiently.


Arg. Cry mercy Sir, here is a whole Chorus of Syluans at hand, cornetting, and
tripping ath' toe, as the ground they troad on were too hot for their feet.
The device is rare; and there is your young Nephew too, he hangs in the clouds
Deified with Hymen's shape.


Thar. Is he perfect in's part? has not his tongue learned of the Syluans to
trip ath' Toe?


Arg. Sir, believe it, he does it pretiously for accent and action, as if he
felt the part he played: he rauishes all the young Wenches in the Palace: Pray
Venus my young Lady Laodice have not some little prick of Cupid in her, she is
so diligent at's rehearsalls.


Thar. No force, so my next vows be heard, that if Cupid have pricked her,
Hymen my cure her.


Arg. You mean your Nephew Sir that presents Hymen.


Thar. Why so, I can speak nothing but thou art with in me: fie of this wit of
thine, 'twill be thy destruction. But howsoever you please to understand, Hymen
send the boy no worse fortune: And where is my Ladies honor?


Arg. At hand Sir, with your vnparagond sister, please you take your chair of
Honor Sir?


Thar. Most serviceable Argus, the Gods reward they service; for I will not.


Enter Eudora, leading Cynthia, Laodice, Sthenio, Ianthe, Ero, with others
following. Eud. COme sister, now we must exchange that name
For stranger Titles, let us dispose our selves
To entertain these Syluane Reuellers.
That come to grace our loved Nuptials,
I fear me we must all turn Nymphs to night,
To side those sprightly wood-Gods in their dances;
Can you do it nimbly sister? slight what aile you, are you not well?

Cynth. Yes Madam.

Eud. But your looks, me thinks, are cloudie; suiting all the Sunshine of
this clear honor to your husbands house.

Is there ought here that sorts not with your liking?


Thar. Blame her not Mistress, if her looks show care.
Excuse the Merchants sadness that has made
A doubtful venture of his whole estate;
His liuelyhood, his hopes, in one poor bottom,
To all encounters of the Sea and storms.
Had you a husband that you loved as well,
Would you not take his absent plight as ill?
Cavil at every fancy? Not an object
That could present it self, but it would forge
Some vain objection, that did doubt his safety;
True love is ever full of jealousy.

Eud. Jealous? of what? of every little journey?
Mere fancy then is wanton; and does cast
At those slight dangers there, too doting glances;
Misgiuing minds ever provoke mischances:
Shines not the Sun in his way bright as here?
Is not the air as good? what hazard doubt you?

Arg. His horse may stumble if it please your Honor;
The rain may wet, the wind may blow on him;
Many shrewd hazards watch poor trauailers.

Eud. True, and the shrewdest thou have reckend us.
Good sister, these cares fit young married wives.

Cynth. Wives should be still young in their husbands loves.
Time bears no Sithe should bear down them before him.
Our lives he may cut short, but not our loves.

Thar. Sister be wise, and ship not in one Bark,
All your ability: if he miscarrie,
Your well tried wisdom should look ont for new.

Cynth. I wish them happy winds that run that course,
From me it is far; One Temple sealed our troth.
One Tomb, one hour shall end, and shroud us both.

Thar. Well, you are a Phoenix, there be that your cheer
Love, with your husband be, your wisdom here.
Hark, our sports challenge it; Sit dearest Mistress.

Eud. Take your place worthiest servant.

Thar. Serve me heaven. Music.
As I my heavenly Mistress, Sit rare sister.

Music: Hymen descends; and six Syluanes enter beneath, with Torches.

Arg. A hall, a hall: let no more Citizens in there.

Laod. O, Not my Cosen see; but Hymen's self.

Sthe. He does become it most enflamingly.

Him. Hail honored Bridegroom, and his Princely bride
With the most famed for virtue, Cynthia;
And this young Lady, bright Laodice,
One rich hope of this noblest Family.

Sthe. Hark how he courts: he is enamored too.

Laod. O grant it Venus, and be ever honored.

Him. In grace and love of you, I Hymen searched
The groves and thickets that embrace this Palace
With this clear-stam'd, and good aboding Torch
For summons of these fresh and flowrie Syluans,
To this fair presence; with their winding Haies,
Active and Antique dances to delight
Your frolic eyes, and help to celebrate
These noblest nuptials; which great Destiny,
Ordained past custom and all vulgar object
To be the readuancement of a house,
Noble and Princely, and restore this Palace
To that name, that six hunderd Summers since
Was in possession of this Bridegroomes Ancetors,
The ancient and most vertue-fam'd Lysandri.
Syluans! the Courtships you make to your Dryads,
Use to this great Bride, and these other Dames,
And heighten with your sports, my nuptial flames.

Laod. O would himself descend, and me command.

Sthe. Dance; and his heart catch in an others hand.

Syluans, take out the Bride and the rest: They dance, after which, and all set
in their places. Hymen. Him. Now, what the Power and my Torches influence
Has in the blessings of your Nuptial joys
(Great Bride and Bridegroom) you shall amply part
Betwixt your free loves, and forgo it never.

Omn. Thanks to great Hymen, and fair Syluanes ever.

Exeunt. Finis Actus Teriij.
Actus Quarti.
Scoena Prima.
Tharsalio, Lycus, with his Arm in a skarfe, a nightcap on's head. Lyc. I Hope
Sir by this time.


Thar. Put on man, by our selves.


Lyc. The edge of your confidence is well taken off; would you not be content
to withdraw your wager?


Thar. Faith fellow Lycus, if my wager were weakly built, this unexpected
accident might stagger it* For the truth is, this strain is extraordinary, to
follow her husbands body into the Tomb, and there for his company to bury
her self quick: it is new and stirring, but for all this, I Will not despair of
my wager.


Lyc. Why Sir, can you think such a passion dissembled?


Thar. All Is one for that, What I think I think; In the mean time forget not
to write to my Brother, how the plot has succeeded, that the news of his
death has taken; a funeral solemnity performed, his supposed Corse bestowed
in the monument of our Family, thou and I horrible mourners: But above all
that his intolerable virtuous Widow, for his love; (and for her love) Ero her
handmaid, are descended with his Corse into the vault; There wipe their eyes
time out of mind, drink nothing but their own tears, and by this time are
almost dead with famine. There Is a point will sting it (for you say it is true)
where left you him?


Lyc. At Dipolis Sir, some twenty miles hence.


Thar. He keeps close.


Lyc. I sir, by all means; skulks unknown under the name of a strange Knight.


Thar. That may carry him without discrying, for there is a number of strange
Knights abroad. You left him well.


Lyc. Well Sir, but for this jealous humor that hants him.


Thar. Well, this news will absolutely purge that humor. Write all, forget not
to describe her passion at thy discovery of his slaughter: did she perform
it well for her husbands wager?


Lyc. Perform it, call you it? you may jest; men hunt Hares to death for their
sports, but the poor beasts die in earnest: you wager of her passions for your
pleasure, but she takes little pleasure in those earnest passions. I never saw
such an ecstasy of sorrow, since I knew the name of sorrow. Her hands flew up
to her head like Furies, hid all her beauties in her discheuel'd hair, and
wept as she would turn fountain. I would you and her husband had been behind
the Arras but to have heard her. I assure you Sir, I was so transported with
the spectacle, that in despite of my discretion, I was forced to turn woman,
and bear a part with her. Humanity broke loose from my heart, and streamed
through mine eyes.


Thar. In prose, thou weptst. So have I seen many a moist Auditor do at a
play; when the story was but a mere fiction: And did act the Nuntius well,
would I had heard it: could thou dress thy looks in a mournful habit?


Lyc. Not without preparation Sir; no more then my speech, it was a plain acting
of an interlude to me, to pronounce the part.


Thar. As how for heavens sake?


Lyc. Phoebus addressed his chariot toward the West
To change his wearied Coursers, and so forth.

Thar. Nay on, and thou love me.

Lyc. Lysander and my self beguild the way
With enterchang'd discourse, but our chief Theme,
Was of your dearest self, his honored wife;
Your love, your virtue; wondrous constancy.

Thar. Then was her Cu to whimper; on.

Lyc. When suddenly appeared as far as sight
A troop of horse, armed as we might descerne,
With Iauelines, Spears, and such accoutrements.
He doubted naught (As Innocence ever
Is free from doubting ill.)

Thar. There dropped a tear.

Lyc. My mind misgaue me.
They might be mountaners. At their approach
They used no other language but their weapons,
To tell us what they were; Lysander drew,
And bore himself Achilles like in fight,
And as a Mower sweepes off t'heads of Bents,
So did Lysanders sword shave off the points
Of their assaulting lances.
His horse at last, sore hurt, fell under him;
I seeing I could not rescue, used my spurs
To fly away.

Thar. What from thy friend?

Lyc. I in a good quarrel, why not?

Thar. Good; I am answered.

Lyc. A lance pursued me, brought me back again;
And with these wounds left me t'accompanie
Dying Lysander: Then they rifl'd us,
And left us.
They gone; my breath not yet gone, began to strive
And revive sense: I with my feeble joints
Crawled to Lysander, stirred him, and withal
He gaspt; cried Cynthia! and breathed no more.

Thar. O then she howled out right.

Lyc. Passengers came and in a Chariot brought us
Straight to a Neighbor Town; where I forthwith
Coffind my friend in lead; and so conuaid him
To this sad place.

Thar. 'Twas well; and could not show but strangely.

Lyc. Well Sir, This tale pronounced with terror, suited with action clothed
with such likely circumstance; My wounds in show, her husbands hearse in sight,
think what effect it wrought: And if you doubt, let the sad consequence of her
retreat to his Tomb, be your woeful instructor.


Thar. For all this, I Will not despair of my wager: These
Grieves that sound so loud, prove always light,
True sorrow evermore keeps out of sight.
This strain of mourning with Sepulcher, like an ouer-doing Actor, affects
grossly, and is indeed so far forced from the life, that it bewraies it self
to be altogether artificial.
To set open a shop of mourning! It Is palpable.
Truth, the substance, hunts not after the shadow of popular
Fame. Her officious ostentation of sorrow condemns her sincerity. When did
ever woman mourn so vnmeasurably, but she did dissemble?

Lyc. O Gods! a passion thus borne; thus apparelled with tears, sighs,
swownings, and all the badges of true sorrow, to be dissembled! by Venus I am
sorry I ever set foot in it. Could she, if she dissembled, thus dally with
hunger, be deaf to the barking of her appetite, not having these four days
relieved nature with one dram of sustenance.


Thar. For this does she look to be Deified, to have Hymns made of her, nay
to her: The Tomb where she is to be no more reputed the ancient monument of our
Family the Lysandri; but the new erected Altar of Cynthia: To which all the
Paphian widows shall after their husbands Funerals, offer their wet
muckinders, for monuments of the danger they have past, as Seamen do their
wet garments at Neptunes Temple after a ship wrack.


Lyc. Well, I Will apprehend you, at your pleasure: I for my part will say; that
if her faith be as constant as her love is hearty, and unaffected, her
virtues may justly challenge a Deity to enshrine them.


Thar. I, there is an other point too. But one of those virtues is enough at
once. All natures are not capable of all gifts. If the brain of the West, were
in the heads of the learned; then might Parish-Clerkes be common counsel men,
and Poets Aldermens deputies. My sister may turn Niobe for love; but till
Niobe be turned to a Marble, I Will not despair but she may prove a woman. Let
the trial run on, if she do not out-runne it, I Will say Poets are no
Prophets, Prognosticators are but Mountibankes, and none tell true but
wood-mongers. Exit.


Lyc. A sweet Gentleman you are. I marvel what man? what woman? what name?
what action does his tongue glide over, but it leaves a slime upon it. Well, I Will
presently to Dipolis, where Lysander stays; and will not say but she may
prove frail: But this I Will say, If she should chance to break, Her tears are
true* though women's truths are weak. Exit.


Enter Lysander like a Soldier disguisde at all parts, a half Pike, gorget,
etc. be discouers the Tomb, looks in and wonders, etc. O Miracle of nature!
women's glory;
Men's shame; and envy of the Deities!
Yet must these matchless creatures be suspected;
Accused; condemned!
Now by the immortal Gods,
They rather merit Altars, Sacrifice,
Then love and courtship.
Yet see the Queen of these lies here interred;
Tearing her hair; and drowned in her tears.
Which Jove should turn to Crystal; and a Mirror
Make of them; wherein men may see and wonder
At women's virtues. Shall she famish then?
Will men (without disswasions) suffer thus
So bright an Ornament to earth, tomb'd quick.
In Earths dark bosom: Ho!
Who Is in the Tomb there?
Ero. Who calls? whence are you?

Lys. I am a Soldier of the watch and must enter.

Ero. Amongst the dead?

Lys. Do the dead speak? open or I Will force it open.

Ero. What violence is this? what seek you here
Where naught but death and her attendants dwell.

Lys. What wretched souls are you that thus by night lurk here amongst the
dead?

Ero. Good Soldier do not stir her, She Is weak, and quickly seized with
swowning and passions, and with much trouble shall we both recall her fainting
spirits.

Five days thus has she wasted; and not once seasoned her Palate with the
taste of meat; her powers of life are spent; and what remains of her famisht
spirit, serves not to breath but sigh.

She has exiled her eyes from steep, or sight, and given them wholly up to
ceaselesse tears over that ruthful hearse of her dear Spouse, slain by
Bantditos, Nobly borne Lysander.


Lysand. And hopes she with these heavy notes and cries to call him from the
dead? in these five days has she but made him stir a finger or fetch one
gasp of that forsaken life she mournes?

Come, honored Mistress; I admire your virtues;
But must reprove this vain excess of moan;
Rowse your self Lady, and look up from death,
Well said, it is well; stay by my hand and rise.
This Face has been maintained with better huswiferie.

Cyn. What are you?

Lys. Lady, I am Sentinel,
Set in this hallowed place, to watch and guard
On forfait of my life, these monuments
From Rape, and spoiled of sacrilegious hands,
And save the bodies, that without you see
Of crucified offenders; that no friends
May bear them hence, to honored burial.

Cyn. Thou seem an honest Soldier; pray thee then
Be as thou seem; betake thee to thy charge
And leave this place; add not affliction
To the afflicted.

Lys. You misname the children.
For what you term affliction now, in you
Is but selfe-humour; voluntary Penance
Imposed upon your self: and you lament
As did the Satyr once, that ran affrighted
From that horns sound that he himself had winded.
Which humor to abate, my counsel tending your termed affliction,
What I for Physic give, you take for poison.
I tell you honored Mistress, these ingredients
Are wholesome, though perhaps they seem untoothsome.

Ero. This Soldier sure, is some decai'd pothecarie.

Lys. Dear Ghost be wise, and pity your fair self
Thus, by your self unnaturally afflicted:
Chide back, heartbreaking groans, clear up those lamps,
Restore them to their first creation:
Windows for light; not sluices made for tears.
Beat not the senseless air with needless cries,
Banefull to life, and bootlesse to the dead.
This is the Inn, where all Deucalions race
Sooner or later, must take up their lodging;
No privilege can free us from this prison;
No tears, no prayers, can redeem from hence
A captived soul; Make use of what you see:
Let this affrighting spectacle of death
Teach you to nourish life.

Ero. Good hear him: this is a rare Soldier.

Lysan. Say that with abstinence you should unloose the knot of life: Suppose
that in this Tomb for your dear Spouse, you should entomb your self a living
Corse; Say that before your hour without due Summons from the Fates, you send
your hasty soul to hell: can your dear Spouse take notice of your faith and
constancy? Shall your dear Spouse revive to give you thanks?


Cynth. Idle discourser.

Lysan. No, your moanes are idle.
Go to I say, be counsail'd; raise your self:
Enjoy the fruits of life, there is viands for you,
Now, live for a better husband.
No? will you none?

Ero. For love of courtesy, good Mistress, eat,
Do not reject so kind and sweet an offer,
Who knows but this may be some Mercury
Disguis'de, and sent from Juno to relieve us?
Did ever any lend unwilling ears
To those that came with messages of life?

Cynth. I pray thee leave thy Rhetorique.

Ero. By my soul; to speak plain truth, I could rather wish t'employ my
teeth then my tongue, so your example would be my warrant.


Cynth. Thou have my warrant.

Lysand. Well then, eat my wench,
Let obstinacy starve.
Fall to.

Ero. Persuade my Mistress first.

Lysand. Slight tell me Lady,
Are you resolved to die? If that be so,
Choose not (for shame) a base, and beggars death:
Die not for hunger, like a Spartane Lady;
Fall valiantly upon a sword, or drink
Noble death, expel your grief with poison.
There it is, seize it. -- Tush you dare not die.
Come Wench thou have not lost a husband;
Thou shall eat, thou art now within
The place where I command.

Ero. I protest sir.

Lys. Well said; eat, and protest, or I Will protest
And do thou eat; thou eat'st against thy will,
That Is it thou would say.

Ero. It is.

Lys. And under such a protestation
Thou lost' thy Maidenhead.
For your own sake good Lady forget this husband,
Come you are now become a happy Widow,
A blessedness that many would be glad of.
That and your husbands Inventory together,
Will raise you up husbands enough.
What think you of me?

Cynth. Trifler, pursue this wanton Theme no further;
Lest (which I would be loath) your speech provoke
Uncivil language from me; I must tell you,
One joint of him I lost, was much more worth
Then the rackt value of thy entire body.

Ero. O know what joint she means.

Lys. Well, I have done.
And well done frailty; proface, how like thou it.

Ero. Very toothsome Ingrediens surely sir,
Want but some lycor to incorporate them.

Lys. There it is, carouse.

Ero. I humbly thank you Sir.

Lys. Hold pledge me now.

Ero. It Is the poison Sir,
That preserues life, I take it. (...) bibit Ancill.

Lys. Do so, take it.

Ero. Sighing has made me something short-winded.
I Will pledge y'at twice.

Lys. It Is well done; do me right.

Ero. I pray sir, have you been a Pothecarie?

Lys. Marry have I wench; A woman's Pothecarie.

Ero. Have you good Ingredients?
I like your Bottle well. Good Mistress taste it.
Try but the operation, twill fetch up
The Roses in your cheeks again.
Doctor Verolles bottles are not like it;
There Is no Guaicum here, I can assure you.

Lys. This will do well anon.

Ero. Now fie upon it.
O I have lost my tongue in this same lymbo.
The spring ants, spoiled me thinks; it goes not off
With the old twange.

Lys. Well said wench, oil it well; twill make it slide well.

Ero. Aristotle says sir, in his Posterionds.

Lys. This wench is learned; And what sales he?

Ero. That when a man dies, the last thing that moves is his heart, in a woman
her tongue.

Lys. Right; and adds further, that you women are a kind of spinners; if their
legs be plucked off, yet still they will wag them; so will you your tongues.
With what an easy change does this same weakness
Of women, slip from one extreme to another?
All these attractions take no hold of her;
No not to take refection; 'T must not be thus.
Well said wench; Tickle that Helicon.
But shall we quit the field with this disgrace
Given to our Oratorie? Both not gain
So much ground of her as to make her eat?

Ero. Faith the truth is sir; you are no fit Organe
For this business;
It Is quite out of your Element:
Let us alone, she will eat I have no fear;
A woman's tongue best fits a woman's ear.
Jove never did employ Mercury,
But Iris for his Messenger to Juno.

Lys. Come, let me kiss thee wench; wilt undertake
To make thy Mistress eat?

Ero It shall go hard Sir
But I will make her turn flesh and blood,
And learn to live as other mortals do.

Lys. Well said: the morning hasts; next night expect me.

Ero. With more provision good Sir.


Lys. Very good. Exiturus.

Ero. And bring more wine. She shuts up the Tomb.

Lys. What else; shall have enough:
O Cynthia, heir of her bright purity,
Whose name thou do inherit; Thou disdainst
(Seuer'd from all concretion) to feed
Upon the base food of gross Elements.
Thou all art soul; All immortality.
Thou fasts for Nectar and Ambrosia,
Which till thou find'st, and eat'st above the stars,
To all food here thou bidd'st celestial wars. Exit.

Cynthia, Ero, the Tomb opening. Ero. So; lets air our dampish spirits, almost
stifled in this gross muddie Element.


Cyn. How sweet a breath the calmnesse of the night inspires the air withal?


Ero. Well said; Now you are your self: did not I tell you how sweet an
operation the Soldiers bottle had? And if there be such virtue in the bottle;
what is there in the Soldier? know, and acknowledge his worth when he comes
in any case Mistress.


Cyn. So Maid,


Ero. Gods my patience? did you look forsooth that Juno should have sent you
meat from her own Trencher, in reward of your widows tears? you might sit
and sigh first till your heart strings broke, I Will able't.


Cyn. I fear me thy lips have gone so often to the bottle, that thy
tongue-strings are come broken home.


Ero. Faith the truth is, my tongue has been so long tied up, that it is
covered with rust, and I rub it against my pallat as we do suspected coins,
to try whether it be current or no. But now Mistress for an vpshot of this
bottle; let us have one carouse to the good speed of my old Master, and the
good speed of my new.


Cyn. So Damzell.


Ero. You must pledge it, here is to it. Do me right I pray.


Cyn. You say I must.


Ero. Must? what else?


Cyn. How excellent ill this humor suites our habit?


Ero. Go to Mistress, do not think but you and I shall have good sport with
this jest, when we are in private at home. I would to Venus we had some honest
shift or other to get off withal; for I Will no more ant; I Will not turn
Salt-peeter in this vault for never a man's company living; much less for a
woman's. Sure I am the wonder's over, and 'twas only for that, that I endured
this; and so a my conscience did you. Never deny it.


Cyn. Nay pray thee take it to thee.


Enter Lysander. Cyn. Hark I hear some footing near us.


Ero. Gods me it is the Soldier Mistress, by Venus if you fall to your late
black Santus again, I Will discover you.


Lys. What Is here? The maid has certainly prevailed with her; me thinks
those clouds that last night covered her looks are now dispersed: I Will try
this further. Save you Lady.


Ero. Honorable Soldier? you are welcome; please you step in sir?


Lys. With all my heart sweet heart; by your patience Lady; why this bears
some shape of life yet. Damzell, thou have performd a service of high reckoning,
which cannot perish unrewarded.


Ero. Faith Sir, you are in the way to do it once, if you have the heart to
hold on.


Cyn. Your bottle has poisond this wench sir.


Lys. A wholesome poison it is Lady, if I may be judge; of which sort here is
one better bottle more. Wine is ordaind to raise such hearts as sink,
Whom woeful stars distemper; let him drink.
I am most glad I have been some mean to this part of your recovery, and
will drink to the rest of it.


Ero. Go to Mistress, pray simper no more; pledge the man of War here.


Cyn. Come you are too rude.


Ero. Good.


Lys. Good sooth Lady you are honored in her service; I would have you live,
and she would have you live freely; without which life is but death. To live
freely is to feast our appetites freely; without which humanes are stones; to
the satisfaction whereof I drink Lady.


Cyn. I Will pledge you Sir.


Ero. Said like a Mistress; and the Mistress of your self; pledge him in love
too: I see he loves you; She Is silent, she consents sir.


Lys. O happy stars. And now pardon Lady; me thinks these are all of a piece.


Ero. Nay if you kiss all of a piece we shall n'ere have done: Well it was well
offered, and as well taken.


Cyn. If the world should see this.


Lys. The world! should one so rare as your self, respect the vulgar world?


Cyn. The praise I have had, I would continue.


Lys. What of the vulgar? Who hates not the vulgar, deserves not love of the
virtuous. And to affect praise of that we despise, how ridiculous it is?


Ero. Comfortable doctrine Mistress, edify, edify.
Me thinks even thus it was when Dido
And Aeneas met in the Cave; And hark
Me thinks I hear some of the hunters. She shuts the tomb.

Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quinti.
Scoena Prima:
Enter Tharsalio, Lycus. Lyc. It Is such an obstinacy in you Sir,
As never was conceipted, to run on
With an opinion against all the world,
And what your eyes may witness; to adventure
The famishment for grief of such a woman
As all men's merits met in any one,
Could not deserve.

Thar. I must confess it Lycus,
We Will therefore now prevent it if we may,
And that our curious trial has not dwelt
Too long on this unnecessary hant:
Grief, and all want of food; not having wrought:
Too mortally on her divine disposure.

Lyc. I fear they have, and she is past our cure.

Thar. I must confess with fear and shame as much.

Lyc. And that she will not trust in any thing
What you persuade her to.

Thar. Then thou shall have
And call my brother from his secret shroude,
Where he appointed thee to come and tell him.
How all things have succeeded.

Lyc. This is well.
If (as I say) the ill be not so grown,
That-all help is denied her. But I fear
The matchless Deem is famisht. Thar. looks into the tomb.

Thar. Slight, whose here?
A Soldier with my sister? wipe, wipe, see
Kissing by Jove; she, as I lay it is she.

Lyc. What? is she well Sir?

Thar. O no, she is famisht;
She Is past our comfort, she lies drawing on.

Lyc. The Gods forbid.

Thar. Look thou, she is drawing on.
How say thou?

Lyc. Drawing on? Illustrious witchcrafts.

Thar. Lies she not drawing on?

Lyc. She draws on fairly.
Our sister Sir? This she? can this be she?

Thar. She, she, she, and none but she. He dances and sings.
She only Queen of love, and chastity,
O chastity; This women be.

Lyc. Slight it is prodigious.

Thar. Horse, horse, horse,
Four Chariot Horses of the Thracian breed,
Come, bring me brother. O the happiest evening,
That ever drew her veil before the Sun.
Who is it can tell?

Lyc. The Soldier Sir that watches
The bodies crucified in this hallowed place.
Of which to lose one, it is death to him,
And yet the lustful knave is at his Venerie,
While one might steal one.

Thar. What a slave was I
That held not out my winds strength constantly,
That she would prove thus? O incredible?
A poor eight-pennie Soldier? She that lately
Was at such height of interiection,
Stoop now to such a base conjunction?
By heaven I wonder now I see it in act,
My brain could ever dream of such a thought.
And yet, it is true: Rare, pereles, is it not Lycus?

Lyc. I know not what it is; Nor what to say.

Thar. O had I held out (villain that I was,)
My blessed confidence but one minute longer,
I should have been eternis'd. Gods my fortune,
What an unspeakable sweet sight it is?
O eyes I Will sacrifice to your dear sense.
And consecrate a Phane to Confidence.

Lyc. But this you must at no hand tell your brother.
Twill make him mad: For he that was before
So scurg'd but only with bare jealousy.
What would he be, if he should come to know it?

Thar. He would be less mad: for your only way
To clear his jealousy, is to let him know it.
When knowledge comes suspicion vanishes.
The Sunne-beames breaking forth swallow the mists.
But as for you Sir Gallant; howsoever
Your banquet seems sweet in your lycorous pallat,
It shall be sure to turn gall in your maw.
Thy hand a little Lycus here without.

Lyc. To what?

Thar. No booty serve you sir Soldado
But my poor sister? Come, lend me thy shoulder,
I Will climb the cross; it will be such a cooler
To my Venerean Gentleman's hot liver,
When he shall find one of his crucified bodies
Stolen down, and he to be forthwith made fast
In place thereof, for the sign
Of the lost Sentinel. Come glorify
Firm Confidence in great Inconstancy.
And this believe (for all proved knowledge swears)
He that believes in error, never errs. Exeunt.

The Tomb opens, Lysander, Cynthia, Ero. Lys. It Is late; I must away.

Cyn. Not yet sweet love.

Lys. Tempt not my stay, it is dangerous. The law is strict, and not to be
dispenst with. If any Sentinel be too late in's watch, or that by his neglect
one of the crucified bodies should be stolen from the cross, his life buys
it.


Cyn. A little stay will not endanger them.
The days proclaimer has not yet given warning.
The Cock yet has not beat his third alarm.

Lys. What? shall we ever dwell here amongst the Antipodes?
Shall I not enjoy the honor of my fortune in public? sit in
Lysanders chair? Reign in his wealth?

Cyn. Thou shall, thou shall; though my love to thee
Has proved thus sudden and for have lept over
The complement of wooing, Yet only for the worlds opinion.

Lys. Mark that again.

Cyn. I must maintain a form in parting hence.

Lys. Out upon it, Opinion the blind Goddess of Fools, Foe to the virtuous;
and only friend to undeserving persons, contemn it. Thou know thou have
done virtuously; thou have strangly sorrow'd for thy husband, followed him to
death; further thou could not, thou have buried thy self quick. (O that
'twere true) spent more tears over his carcass, then would serve a whole City
of saddest widows in a plague time; besides sighings, and swownings, not to
be credited.


Cyn. True; but those complements might have their time for fashion sake.


Lys. Right, Opinion and Fashion. Sfoot what call you time? to have wept these
four whole days.


Ero. Nay berladie almost five.


Lys. Look you there; nere upon five whole days.


Cyn. Well go and see; Return, we will go home.


Lys. Hell be thy home, Huge Monsters damn ye, and your whole creation, O ye
Gods; in the height of her mourning in a Tomb, within sight of so many deaths!
her husbands believed body in her eye. He dead, a few days before; this
mirror of Nuptial chastity; this Votresse of widdow-constancie: to change
her faith; exchange kisses, embraces, with a stranger; and but my shame
with-stood, to give the utmost earnest of her love, to an eight-pennie
Sentinel: in effect, to prostitute her self upon her husbands Coffin! Lust,
impiety, hell, womanhood it self, add if you can one step to this.


Enter Captain with two or three Soldiers. Cap. ONe of the crucified bodies
taken down!


Lys. Enough. (slincks away.)


Cap. And the Sentinel not to be heard off?


1. No sir.


Cap. Make out; have, search about for him; does none of you know him? nor his
name?


2. He Is but a stranger here of some four days standing; and we never set
eye on him, but at setting the watch.


Cap. For whom serves he? you look well to your watch masters.


1. For Seigneur Stratio, and whence he is, it is ignorant to us; we are not
correspondent for any, but our own places.


Cap. You Are eloquent. Abroad I say, let me have him. Exeunt. This negligence
will by the Governor be wholly cast on me, he hereby will suggest to the
Viceroy, that the City guards are very caresly attended. He loves me not I
know; because of late I knew him but of mean condition; but now by fortunes
iniudicious hand, guided by bribing Courtiers, he is raised to this high seat
of honor. Nor blushes he, to see him self advanced over the heads of ten
times higher worths; but takes it all forsooth, to his merits; and looks (as
all vpstarts do) for most huge observance. Well, my mind must stoop to his
high place, and learn within it self to sever him from that, and to adore
Authority the Goddess, how ever borne by an unworthy beast; and let the
Beasts dull apprehension take the honor done to Isis, done to himself. I must
sit fast, and be sure to give no hold to these fault-hunting enemies. Exit.


Tomb opens, and Lysander within lies along, Cynthia and Ero. Lys. Pray thee
disturb me not; put out the lights.


Ero. Faith I Will take a nap again.


Cyn. Thou shall not rest before I be resolved
What happy wind has driven thee back to harbor?
Was it my love?

Lys. No.

Cyn. Yet say so (sweet) that with the thought thereof I may enjoy all that I
wish in earth.


Lys. I am sought for. A crucified body is stolen while I loiter'd here; and I
must die for it,


Cyn. Die? All the Gods forbid; O this affright torments me ten parts more then
the sad loss of my dear husband.


Lys. (Damnation) I believe thee.


Cyn. Yet hear a woman's wit.
Take counsel of Necessity and it.
I have a body here which once I loved
And honored above all; but that time's past.

Lys. It is, revenge it heaven.

Cyn. That shall supply at so extrem a need the vacant Gibbet.

Lys. Canero. What? thy husbands body?

Cyn. What hurt is it, being dead it save the living?

Lys. O heart hold in, check thy rebellious motion.

Cyn. Vex not thy self dear love, nor use delay.
Tempt not this danger, set thy hands to work.

Lys. I can not do it; my heart will not permit
My hands to execute a second murder.
The truth is I am he that slew thy husband.

Cyn. The Gods forbid.

Lys. It was this hand that bathed my reeking sword
In his life blood, while he cried out for mercy,
But I remorslesse, panch't him, cut his throat,
He with his last breath crying, Cynthia.

Cyn. O thou have told me news that cleaues my heart;
Would I had never seen thee, or heard sooner
This bloody story; yet see, note my truth
Yet I must love thee.

Lys. Out upon the Monster.
Go, tell the Governor; Let me be brought
To die for that most famous villainy;
Not for this miching base transgression
Of tenant negligence.

Cyn. I can not do it.
Love must salve any murder: I Will be judge
Of thee dear love, and these shall be thy pains
In steed of iron, to suffer these soft chains.

Lys. O I am infinitely obliged.

Cyn. Arise I say, thou sauer of my life.
Do not with vaine-affrighting conscience
Betray a life, that is not thine but mine:
Rise and preserve it.

Lys. Ha? thy husbands body?
Hanged up you say, in steed of that that is stolen;
Yet I his murderer, is that your meaning?

Cyn. It is my Love.

Lys. Thy love amazes me,
The point is yet how we shall get it thither,
Ha? Tie a halter about's neck, and dragge him to the Gallows: shall I my
love?

Cyn. So you may do indeed,
Or if your own strength will not serve, we will aid
Our hands to yours, and bear him to the place.
For heavens love come, the night goes off apace.

Lys. All the infernal plagues dwell in thy soul;
I Will fetch a crow of iron to break the coffin.

Cyn. Do love, be speedy.

Lys. As I wish thy damnation. Shut the Tomb.
O I could tear my self into Atoms; off with this Antic, the shirt that
Hercules wore for his wife, was not more banefull. Is It possible there should
be such a latitude in the Sphere of this sex, to entertain such an extention
of mischief, and not turn Devil. What is a woman? what are the worst when
the best are so past naming? As men like this let them try their wives again.
Put women to the test; discover them; paint them, paint them ten parts more
then they do themselves, rather then look on them as they are; Their wits are
but painted that dislike their painting. Thou foolish thirster after idle
secrets, And ill's abroad; look home, and store and choke thee; There sticks
an Achelons horn of all, Copy enough.

As much as Alizon of streams receives,
Or lofty Ilea shows of shadie leaves. Enter Tharsalio.
Who Is that?

Thar. I wonder Lycus fails me. Nor can I hear what is become of him. He would
not certain ride to Dipolis to call my brother back, without my knowledge.


Lys. My brothers voice; what makes he here abouts so untimely? I Will slip him.
Exiturus.


Thar. Who goes there?


Lys. A friend.


Thar. Dear friend, lets know you. A friend least looked for but most welcome,
and with many a long look expected here. What sir vnbooted? have you been
long arrived?


Lys. Not long, some two hours before night.


Thar. Well brother, y'haue the most rare, admirable, unmatchable wife, that
ever suffered for the sin of a husband. I cannot blame your confidence
indeed now: it is built on such infallible ground; Lycus I think be gone to
call you to the rescue of her life; why she! O incomprehensible!


Lysan. I have heard all related since my arrival, we will meet to morrow.


Thar. What have brother? But was it related with what intolerable pains, I
and my Mistress, her other friends, Matrones and Magistrates, labored her
diuersion from that course?


Lys. Yes, yes.


Thar. What streams of tears she powered out; what tresses of her hair she
tore! and offered on your supposed hearse!


Lys. I have heard all.


Thar. But above all; how since that time, her eyes never harbored winck of
slumber, these six days; no nor tasted the least dram of any sustenance.


Lys. How is that assurd?


Thar. Not a scruple.


Lys. Are you sure there came no Soldier to her nor brought her victuals?


Thar. Soldier? what Soldier?


Lys. Why some Soldier of the watch, that attends the executed bodies: well
brother I am in have; to morrow shall supply this nights defect of conference;
Adieu. Exit. Lys.


Thar. A Soldier? of the watch? bring her victuals? Go to brother I have you
in the wind; he is vnharnest of all his travailing accoutrements. I came
directly from's house, no word of him there; he knows the whole relation;
he is passionate: All collections speak he was the Soldier. What should be
the riddle of this? that he is stolen hither into a Soldiers disguise? he
should have staid at Dipolis to receive news from us. Whether he suspected our
relation; or had not patience to expect it, or whether that furious, frantique
capricious Devil jealousy has tossed him hither on his horns, I can not
conjecture. But the case is clear, he is the Soldier. Sister, look to your
fame, your chastetie's vncouer'd. Are they here still? here believe it both
most woefully weeping over the bottle. He knocks.


Ero. Who Is there.


Thar. Tharsalio, open.


Ero. Alas Sir, it is no boot to vex your sister, and your self, she is
desperate, and will not hear persuasion, she is very weak.


Thar. Here Is a true-bred chambermaid. Alas, I am sorry for it; I have brought
her meat and Candian wine to strengthen her.


Ero. O the very naming an't, will drive her into a swowne; good Sir forbear.


Thar. Yet open sweet, that I may bless mine eyes with sight of her fair
shrine; and of thy sweetest self (her famous Pandresse) open I say. Sister?
you hear me well, paint not your Tomb without; we know too well what rotten
carcases are lodged within; open I say. Ero opens, and he sees her head laid
on the coffin, etc. Sister I have brought you tidings to wake you out of this
sleeping mummerie.


Ero. Alas she is faint, and speech is painful to her.


Thar. Well said frubber, was there no Soldier here lately?


Ero. A Soldier? when?


Thar. This night, last night, the other night; and I know not how many nights and
days.


Cyn. Whose there?


Ero. Your brother Mistress, that asks if there were not a soldier here.


Cyn. Here was no soldier.


Ero. Yes Mistress I think here was such a one though you took no heed of him.


Thar. Go to sister; did not you join kisses, embraces, and plight indeed
with him, the utmost pledge of Nuptial love with him. Deni't, deni't; but
first hear me a short story. The Soldier was your disguised husband, dispute
it not. That you see yonder, is but a shadow, an empty chest containing
nothing but air. Stand not to gaze at it, it is true. This was a project of his
own contriuing to put your loialtie and constant vows to the test; you are
warnd, be armed. Exit.


Ero. O fie a these perils.


Cyn. O Ero! we are undone.


Ero. Nay, you would nere be warned; I ever wished you to withstand the push of that
Soldiers pike, and not enter him too deep into your bosom, but to keep sacred
your widows vows made to Lysander.


Cyn. Thou did, thou did.


Ero. Now you may see the event. Well our safety lies in our speed: heel do
us mischief, if we prevent not his coming. Lets to your Mothers: and there
call out your mightiest friends to guard you from his fury. Let them begin the
quarrel with him for practicing this villainy on your sex to intrappe your
frailties.


Cyn. Nay I resolve to sit out one brunt more; to try to what aim heel
enforce his project: were he some other man, unknown to me, his violence might
awe me; but knowing him as I do, I fear him not. Do thou but second me, thy
strength and mine shall master his best force, if he should prove outrageous.
Despair they say makes cowardes turn courageous. Shut up the Tomb. Shut the
Tomb.


Enter one of the Soldiers sent out before to seek the Sentinel. 1. All
pains are lost in hunting out this Soldier; his fear (adding wings to his
heels) out-goes us as far as the fresh Hare the tired hounds. Who goes
there? Ent. 2. soldier another way


2. A friend.


1. O, your success and mine touching this Sentinel, tells, I suppose, one
tale; he is far enough I undertake by this time.


2. I blame him not: the law's severe (though just and can not be dispensed.)


1. Why should the laws of Paphos, with more rigor, then other City laws
pursue offenders? that not appeased with their lives forfait, exact a justice
of them after death? And if a Soldier in his watch forsooth lose one of the
dead bodies, he must die for it: It seems the State needed no soldiers when
that was made a law.


2. So we may chide the fire for burning us; or say the Bee's not good because
she stings; It Is not the body the law respects, but the soldiers neglect; when
the watch (the guard and safety of the City) is left abandoned to all
hazards. But let him go; and tell me if your news sort with mine, for Lycus;
apprehended they say, about Lysanders murder.


1. It Is true; he is at the Captains lodge under guard, and it is my charge in
the morning to unclose the leaden coffin, and discover the body; The Captain
will assay an old conclusion often approved; that at the murderers sight the
blood reuiues again, and boiles a fresh; and every wound has a condemning
voice to cry out guilty against the murderer.


2. O world, if this be true; his dearest friend, his bed companion, whom of
all his friends he culled out for his bosom!


1. Tush man, in this topsie turuy world, friendship and bosom kindness, are but
made couers for mischief, means to compass il. Near-allied trust, is but a
bridge for treson. The presumptions cry loud against him; his answers found
disiointed; crosselegd tripping up one another. He names a Town whether he
brought Lysander murdered by Mountainers, that's false, some of the dwellers
have been here, and all disclaim it. Besides, the wounds he bears in show, are
such as shrews closely give their husbands, that never bleed, and find to be
counterfeit.


2. O that jade falsehood is never sound of all; but halts of one leg still.
Truth pace is all upright; sound every where.
And like a die, sets ever on a square.
And how is Lycus his bearing in this condition?

1. Faith (as the manner of such desperate offenders is till it come to the
point) careless, and confident, laughing at all that seem to pity him. But
leave it to the event. Night fellow Soldier, you will not meet me in the morning
at the Tomb, and lend me your hand to the vnrigging of Lysanders hearse.


2. I care not if I do, to view heavens power in this vnbottomd seller. Blood,
though it sleep a time, yet never dies.
The Gods on murderers fix reuengefull eyes. Exeunt Lysander solus with a
crow of iron, and a halter which he lays down and puts on his disguise again.
COme my borrowed disguise, let me once more
Be reconcild to thee, my trustiest friend;
Thou that in truest shape have let me see
That which my truer self has hid from me,
Help me to take revenge on a disguise,
Ten times more false and counterfeit then thou.
Thou, false in show, have been most true to me;
The seeming true; has proved more false then her.
Assist me to behold this act of lust,
Note with a Scene of strange impiety.
Her husbands murtherd corse! O more then horror!
I Will not beleeue't vntri'd; If she but lift
A hand to act it; by the fates her brains fly out,
Since she has madded me; let her beware my horns.
For though by goring her, no hope be shown
To cure my self, yet I Will not bleed alone. He knocks.

Ero. Who knocks? Lys The soldier; open. she ope^s and he enters
See sweet, here are the engines that must do it,
Which with much fear of my discovery
I have at last procured.
Shall we about this work? I fear the morn
Will ouer-take's; my stay has been prolonged
With hunting obscure nookes for these emploiments,
The night prepares away; Come, art resolved.

Cyn. I, you shall find me constant.

Lys. I, so I have, most prodigiously constant,
Here Is a rare halter to hug him with.

Ero. Better you and I join our hands and bear him thither, you take his
head.

Cyn. I, for that was always heavier then is whole body besides

Lys. You can tell best that loded it.

Ero. I Will be at the feet; I am able to bear against you I warrant you.

Lys. Have thou prepared weak nature to digest
A sight so much distasteful; hastser'd thy heart
I bleed not at the bloody spectacle?
Have armed thy fearful eyes against th'affront
Of such a direful object?
Thy murdered husband ghastly staring on thee;
His wounds gaping to affright thee; his body soild with
Gore? fore heaven my heart shruggs at it.

Cyn. So does not mine,
Love's resolute; and stands not to consult
With petty terror; but in full carrier
Runs blindfold through an Army of misdoubts,
And interposing fears; perhaps I Will weep
Or so, make a forced face and laugh again.

Lys. O most valiant love!
I was thinking with my self as I came; how if this
Brake to light; his body known;
(As many notes might make it) would it not fix
Upon thy fame, an unremoved Brand
Of shame, and hate; they that in former times
Adored thy virtue; would they not abhor
Thy lothest memory?

Cyn. All this I know.
But yet my love to thee
Swallows all this; or whatsoever doubts
Can come against it.
Shame's but a feather ballanc't with thy love.

Lys. Neither fear nor shame? you are steel toth'
Proof (but I shall iron you): Come then lets to work.
Alas poor Corpse how many martyrdomes
Must thou endure? mangled by me a villain,
And now exposed to foul shame of the Gibbet?
Fore, piety, there is somewhat in me strives
Against the deed, my very arm relents
To strike a stroke so inhumane,
To wound a hallowed hearse? suppose twere mine,
Would not my Ghost start up and fly upon thee?

Cyn. No, I Would mall it down again with this. She snatches up the crow.

Lys. How now? He catches at her throat.

Cyn. Nay, then I Will assay my strength; a Soldier and a raid of a dead man? A
soft-r'ode milk-sop? come I Will doot my self.

Lys. And I look on? give me the iron.

Cyn. No, I Will not lose the glory ant. This hand, etc.

Lys. Pray thee sweet, let it not be said the savage act was thine; deliver me
the engine.

Cyn. Content your self, it is in a fitter hand.

Lys. Will thou first? art not thou the most.

Cyn. Ill-destin'd wife of a transformed monster;
Who to assure him self of what he knew,
Has lost the shape of man.

Lys. Ha? crosse-capers?

Cyn. Poor Soldiers case; do not we know you Sir?
But I have given thee what thou came to seek.
Go Satyr, run affrighted with the noise
Of that harsh sounding horn thy self have blown,
Farewell; I leave thee there my Husbands Corpse,
Make much of that. Exit. cum Er.

Lys. What have I done? O let me lie and grieve, and speak no more.

Captain, Lycus with a guard of three or four Soldiers. Cap. BRing him away;
you must have patience Sir: If you can say ought to quit you of those
presumptions that lie heavy on you, you shall be heard. If not, it is not your
braues, nor your affecting looks can carry it. We must acquit our duties.


Lyc. You Are Captain a the watch Sir.


Cap. You take me right.


Lyc. So were you best do me; see your presumptions be strong; or be assured
that shall prove a dear presumption, to brand me with the murder of my
friend. But you have been suborned by some close villain to defame me.


Cap. Twill not be so put off friend Lycus, I could wish your soul as free
from taint of this foul fact; as mine from any such unworthy practice.


Lyc. Conduct me to the Governor him self; to confront before him your
shallow accusations.


Cap. First Sir, I Will bear you to Lysanders Tomb, to confront the murdered
body; and see what evidence the wounds will yield against you.


Lyc. You Are wise Captain. But if the body should chance not to speak; If the
wounds should be tongue-tied Captain; where is then your evidence Captain?
will you not be laughed at for an officious Captain?


Cap. You Are gallant Sir.


Lyc. Your Captainship commands my service no further.


Cap. Well Sir, perhaps I may, if this conclusion take not; we will try what
operation lies in torture, to pull confession from you.


Lyc. Say you so Captain? but hark you Captain, Might it not concur with
the quality of your office, ere this matter grow to the height of a more
threatening danger; to winck a little at a by slip, or so?


Cap. How Is that?


Lyc. To send a man abroad under guard of one of your silliest shack-rags; that
be may beat the knave, and run's way. I mean this on good terms Captain;
I Will be thankful.


Cap. I Will think ont hereafter. Mean time I have other emploiment for you.


Lyc. Your place is worthily replenisht Captain. My duty Sir; Hark
Captain, there is a mutiny in your Army; I Will go raise the Governor. Exiturus.


Cap. No have Sir; heel soon be here without your summons.


Soldiers thrust up Lysander from the Tomb. 1. Bring forth the Knight ath'
Tomb; have we meet with you Sir?


Lys. Pray thee soldier use thine office with better temper.


2. Come convey him to the Lord Governor, First before the Captain Sir. Have
the heavens naught else to do, but to stand still, and turn all their
malignant Aspects upon one man?


2. Captain here is the Sentinel we sought for; he is some new pressed
Soldier, for none of us know him.


Cap. Where found you him?


1. My truant was mich't Sir into a blind corner of the Tomb.


Cap. Well said, guard him safe, bur for the Corpse.


1. For the Corpse Sir? bare misprision, there is no body, nothing. A mere
blandation; a deceptio visus. Unless this soldier for hunger have eat up
Lysanders body.


Lyc. Why, I could have told you this before Captain; The body was borne away
peece-meale by devout Ladies of Venus order, for the man died one of Venus
Martys. And yet I heard since 'twas seen whole ath' other side the downs
upon a Colestafe betwixt two huntsmen, to feed their dogs withal. Which
was a miracle Captain.


Cap. Mischief in this act has a deep bottom; and requires more time to
sound it. But you Sir, it seems, are a Soldier of the newest stamp. Know you
what it is to forsake your stand? There Is one of the bodies in your charge stolen
away; how answer you that? See here comes the Governor.


Enter a Guard bare after the Governor: Tharsalio, Argus, Clinias, before
Eudora, Cynthia, Laodice, Sthenio, Ianthe, Ero, etc. Guard. STand aside there.


Cap. Room for a strange Governor. The perfect draught of a most brainelesse,
imperious vpstart. O desert! where were thou, when this wooden dagger was
gilded over with the Title of Governor?


Guard. Peace Masters; hear my Lord.


Thar. All wisdom be silent; Now speaks Authority.


Gouer. I am come in person to discharge Justice.


Thar. Of his office.


Gouer. The cause you shall know hereafter; and it is this. A villain, whose
very sight I abhor; where is he? Let me see him.


Cap. Is It Lycus you mean my Lord?


Gouer. Go to sirrah you are too malipert; I have heard of your Sentinells
escape; look to it.


Cap. My Lord, this is the Sentinel you speak of.


Gouer. How now Sir? what time a day is it?


Arg. I can not show you precisely, ant please your Honor.


Gouer. What? shall we have replications? Reioinders?


Thar. Such a creature, Fool is, when he bestrides the back of Authority.


Gouer. Sirrah, stand you forth. It is supposed thou have committed a most
inconvenient murder upon the body of Lysander.


Lyc. My good Lord, I have not.


Gouer. Peace varlet; do chop with me? I say it is imagined thou have
murdered Lysander. How it will be proved I know not. Thou shall therefore
presently be had to execution, as justice in such cases requires. Soldiers
take him away: bring forth the Sentinel.


Lyc. Your Lordship will first let my defense be heard.


Gouer. Sirrah; I Will no fending nor proving. For my part I am satisfied, it is
so: that's enough for thee. I had ever a Sympathy in my mind against him.

Let him be had away.


Thar. A most excellent apprehension. He Is able ye see to judge of a cause at
first sight, and hear but two parties. Here Is a second Solon.


Eud. Hear him my Lord; presumptions oftentimes,
(Though likely grounded) reach not to the truth.
And Truth is often abused by likelihood.
Let him be heard my Lord.

Gouer. Madam, content your self. I will do justice; I will not hear him.
Your late Lord, was my Honorable Predecessor: But your Ladyship must pardon
me. In matters of justice I am blind.


Thar. That's true.


Gouer. I know no persons. If a Court favorite write to me in a case of
justice: I will pocket his letter, and proceed. If a Suitor in a case of
justice thrusts a bribe into my hand, I will pocket his bribe, and proceed.
Therefore Madam, set your heart at rest: I am seated in the Throne of justice;
and I will do justice; I will not hear him.


Eud. Not hear him my Lord?


Gouer. No my Lady: and moreover put you in mind, in whose presence you stand;
if you Parrat to me long; go to.


Thar. Nay the Vice must snap his Authority at all he meets, how shall else
be known what part he plays?


Gouer. Your husband was a Noble Gentleman, but Alas he came short, he was no
Statesman. He has left a foul City behind him.


Thar. I, and I can tell you twill trouble his Lordship and all his Honorable
assistants of Seauingers to sweep it clean.


Gouer. It Is full of vices, and great ones too.


Thar. And thou none of the meanest.


Gouer. But I Will turn all topsie turuie; and set up a new discipline amongst
you. I Will cut of all perished members.


Thar. That's the Surgeons office.


Gouer. Cast out these rotten stinking carcases for infecting the whole City.


Arg. Rotten they may be, but their wenches use to pepper them; and their
Surgeons to perboile them; and that preserues them from stinking, ant please
your Honor.


Gouer. Peace Sirrah, peace; and yet it is well said too. A good pregnant fellow
in faith. But to proceed. I will spew drunkenness out ath' City.


Thar. In to the Country.


Gouer. Shifters shall cheat and sterue; And no man shall do good but where
there is no need. Braggarts shall live at the head; and the tumult that hant
Tauernes. Asses shall bear good qualities, and wise men shall use them. I will
whip lechefie out ath' City, there shall be no more Cuckolds. They that
heretofore were errand Cornutos, shall now be honest shopkeepers, and justice
shall take place. I will hunt jealousy out of my Dominion.


Thar. Do hear Brother?


Gouer. It shall be the only note of love to the husband, to love the wife: And
none shall be more kindly welcome to him then he that cuckolds him.


Thar. Believe it a wholesome reformation.


Gouer. I Will have no more Beggars. Fools shall have wealth, and the learned
shall live by their wits. I Will have no more Banckrouts. They that owe money
shall pay it at their best leisure: And the rest shall make a virtue of
imprisonment; and their wives shall help to pay their debts. I Will have all young
widows spaded for marrying again. For the old and withered, they shall be
confiscate to unthrifty Gallants, and decai'd Knights. If they be poor they
shall be burnt to make soap ashes, or given to Surgeons Hall, to be stamped to
salve for the French mesells. To conclude, I will Cart pride out ath' Town.


Arg. Ant please your Honor Pride ant be nere so beggarly will look for a
Coch.


Gouer. Well said a mine Honor. A good significant fellow in faith: What is he?
he talks much; does he follow your Ladyship?


Arg. No ant please your Honor, I go before her.


Gouer, A good undertaking presence; A well-promising fore head, your Gentleman
Usher Madam?


Eud. Yours if you please my Lord.


Gouer. Borne in the City?


Arg. I ant please your Honor, but begot in the Court.


Gouer. Tressellegg'd?


Arg. I, ant please your Honor.


Gouer. The better, it bears a breadth; makes room a both sides. Might I not
see his pace? Argus stalks.


Arg. Yes ant please your Honor.


Gouer. It Is well, it is very well. Give me thy hand: Madame I will accept this
property at your hand, and will wear it thredbare for your sake. Fall in
there, sirrah. And for the matter of Lycus Madam, I must tell you, you are
shallow: there is a State point in it? hark you: The Viceroy has given him, and
we must uphold correspondence. He must walk; say one man goes wrongfully out
ath' world, there are hundreds to one come wrongfully into the world.


Eud. Your Lordship will give me but a word in private.


Thar. Come brother; we know you well: what means this habit? why staid you
not at Dipolis as you resolved, to take advertisement for us of your wives
bearing?


Lys. O brother, this jealous frenzy has borne me headlong to ruin.


Thar. Go to, be comforted; uncase your self; and discharge your friend.


Gouer. Is that Lysander say you? And is all his story true? Berladie Madam
this jealousy will cost him dear: he undertook the person of a Soldier; and
as a Soldier must have justice. Madam, his Altitude in this case can not
dispense. Lycus, this Soldier has acquitted you.


Thar. And that acquitall I Will for him requite; the body lost, is by this time
restored to his place.


Soul. It is my Lord.


Thar. These are State points, in which your Lordships time has not yet trained
your Lordship; please your Lordships graces Nuptial we have now in hand.

Hylus and (...) stand together. Twixt this young Lady and this Gentleman.
Your Lordship there shall care the ample story.
And how the Ass wrapped in a Lions skin
Fearfully rord, but his large ears appeard
And made him laughed at, that before was feared.

Gouer. I Will go with you. For my part, I am at a non plus.

Eudora whispers with Cynthia! Thar. Come brother; Thank the Countess: she
has suet to make your peace. Sister give me your hand.
(...) Brother let your lips compound the strife,
And think you have the only constant Wife.

Exeunt. FINIS.

