A pleasant Comedy entitled: An Humerous days Mirth.

As it has been sundry times publicly acted by the right honorable the
Earl of Nottingham Lord high Admiral his servants.

By G. C.



AT LONDON Printed by Ualentine Syms: 1599.

A pleasant Comedy entitled An humorous days mirth.
Enter the count Laberuele in his shirt and night gown, with two jewels in
his hand. Laberuele. YEt has the morning sprinkled throwt the clouds, But
half her tincture and the soil of night sticks (...) upon the bosom of the
air: yet sleep does rest my love for Natures debt, and through her window,
and this dun twee-light, her maid, nor any waking I can see. This is the holy
Green my wifes close walk, to which not any but her self alone has any key,
only that I have clapped her key in wax, and made this counterfeite, to the
which I steal aceesse, to work this rare and politic device: Fair is my wife
and young and delicate, although too re^gious in the purest sort, but pure
religion being but mental stuff and sense indeed, al for it self, is to be
doubted, that when an object comes fit to her humor she will intercept
religious letters sent unto her mind, and yield unto the motion of her blood,
here have I brought then two rich agots for her, graven with two poses of mine
own devising, for Poets I Will not trust, nor friends, nor any: she longs to have
a child, which yet alas I cannot get, Yet long as much as she, and not to make
her desperate, thus I write in this f^re jewel though it simple be, yet it is
mine own that means well in naught, it is spare, not of children, love with
the longest, when man is at the weakest, god isatstro^gest, I hope it is plain,
and knowing in this other that I write, God will reward her a thousand fold,
that takes what age can and not what age would, I hope it is pretty and
pathetical: Well, even here lie both together til my love arise and let her
think you fall out of the skies, I will to bed again.

Exit.
Enter Lemot and Colenet. Lemot. How like thou this morning Colenet? What,
shall we have a fair day?


Colenet. The sky hangs full of humor, and I think we shall have rain.


Lem. Why rain is fair wether when the ground is dry and barren, especially
when it raines humor, for then do men like hot sparrowes and pigeons open all
their wings ready to receive them.


Col. Why then we may chance to have a fair day, for we shall spend it with
so humorous acquaintance, as raines nothing but humor al their life time.


Le. True Colenet, over which will I sit like an old King in an old fashion
play, having his wife, his counsel, his children, and his fool about him, to
whom he will sit and point very learnedly as follows; my counsel grave, and
you my noble peers, my tender wife, and you my children dear, and thou my
fool.


Co. Not meaning me sir I hope.


Le. No sir, but thus will I sit, as it were, and point ou^ all my humorous
companions.


Co. You shall do marvelous well sir.


Le. I thank you for your good encouragement, but Colinet thou shall see
Catalian bring me hither an od gentleman presently to be acquainted withal,
who in his manner of taking acquaintance will make us excellent sport.


Co. Why Lemot I think thou sendst about of purpose for young gallants to be
acquainted withal, to make thy self merry in the manner of taking acquaintance.


Le. By heaven I do Colenet, for there is no better sport then to obscrue the
complement, for that's their word, complement, do you mark sir?


Co. Yea sir, but what humor has this gallant in his manner of taking
acquaintance?


Le. Marry thus sir, he will speak the very self same word, to a syllable
after him of whom he takes acquaintance, as if I should say,

I am marvelous glad of your acquaintance, He will reply,
I am marvelous glad of your acquaintance,
I have heard much good of your rare parts and fine carriage,
I have heard much good of your rare parts and fine carriage, so long as the
complements of a gentleman last, he is your complete ape.

Co. Why this is excellent.


Le. Nay sir here is the jest of it, when he is past this gratulation, he will
retire himself to a chimny, or a wall standing folding his arms thus: and go
you and speak to him so far as the room you are in will afford you, you shall
never get him from that most gentlemanlike set, or behauior.


Co. This makes his humor persit, I would he would come once.


Enter Catalian and (...). Le. See where he comes, now must I say, Lupus est in
fabula, for these latin ends are part of a gentleman and a good scholar.


Catalian. O good morrow Monseur (...), here is the gentleman you desired so
much to be acquainted withal.


Le. He is marvelous welcome, I shall be exceeding proud of your acquaintance.


Blan. I shall be exceeding proud of your acquaintance.


Le. I have heard much good of your rare parts and fine cariages.


Blan. I have heard much good of your rare parts and fine cariages.


Le. I shall be glad to be commanded by you.


Blan. I shall be glad to be commanded by you.


Le. I pray do not you say so.


Blan. I pray do not you say so.


Le. Well Gentlemen, this day let us consecrate to mirth, and Colenet you know
no man better, that you are mightily in love with love, by Martia daughter to
old Foyes.


Co. I confess it here are none but friends.


Le. Well then, go to her this morning in Countess Moris name, and so perhaps
you may get her company, though the old churl be so i^alous that he will
suffer no man to come at her, but the vain gull Labesha for his living sake,
and he as yet she will not be acquainted withal.


Co. Well this I Will ^o whatsoever come on it.


Le. Why nothing but good will come of it, nere doubt it man.


Cata. He has taken up his stand, talk a little further and see and you can
remove him.


Le. I will Cat. now Monsieur Blanuele mark I pray.


Blan. I do sir very well I warrant you.


Le. You know the old Count Laberuele, has a passing fair young Lady, that is
a passing foul Puritan.


Blan. I know her very well sir, she goes more like a milk maid then a
Countess, for all her youth and beauty.


Lemot. True sir, yet of her is the old Count so jealous that he will suffer no
man to come at her, yet I will find ^ means, that two of us will have access
to her tho, (...) fore his face, which shall so heat his ielous humor til he be
start mad: but Colenet go you first to lovely Martia, for it is too soon for the
old Lord and his fair young Lady to rise.


Co. Adue Monseur Blanuel.


Blan. A due good Monsieur Colinet.

Exit Col.
Le. Monseur Blanuel your kindness in this will bind me much to you.


Bla. Monseur (...) ot your kindness in this will bind me much to you.


Le. I pray you do not say so sir.


Blan. I pray you do not say so sir*


Le. Wilt please you to go in.


Blan. Wilt please you to go in.


Le. I will follow you.


Blan. I will follow you.


Le. It shall be yours.


Blan. It shall be yours.


Le. Kind Monsieur (...).


Blan. Kind Monsier (...).

Exit.
Enter Foyes, and Martia, and (...). Foyes. Come on fair daughter fall to your
work of mind, and make your body fit to embrace the body of this Gentleman's,
it is art: happy are they say I.


Be. I protest sir you speak the best that ever I heard.


Fo. I pray sir take acquaintance of my daughter.


Be. I do desire you of more acquaintance.


Fo. Why dostnot thou say yea, and I the same of you?


Mar. That every body says.


Fo. O you would be singular.


Mar. Single indeed.


Fo. Single indeed that's a pretty toy, Your betters dame bear double, and so
shall you.


Be. Fxceeding pretty, did you mark it forsooth?


Mar. What should I mark forsooth?


Be. Your bearing double, which equificate is and has fit illusion to a horse
that bears double, for your good ^ather means you shall endure your single
life no longer, not in worse sense then bearing double forsooth.


Mar. I cry you mercy, you know both belike.


Be. Knowledge forsooth is like a horse, and you that can bear double: it
nourishes both Be and Spider, the Be honnisuckle, the Spider poison, I am
that Be.


Mar. I thought so by your stinging wit.


Be. Lady I am a Be without a sting, no way hurting any, but good to all, and
before all, to your sweet self.


Fo. Asore God daughter, thou art not worthy to hear him speak: but who comes
here?

Enter C^linet.
Co. God save you sir.


Fo. You are welcome sir for ought that I know yet.


Co. I hope I shall be so still sir.


Fo. What is your business sir, and then I Will tell you?


Co. Ma ry thus sir, the Countess Morene entreats your fair daughter to bear
her company this fore-noone.


Fo. This forenoone sir, does my Lord or Lady send for her I pray?


Co. My Lady I assure you.


Fo. My Lady you assure me, very well sir, yet that house is full of gallant
Gentlemen, dangerous tho^es to prick^ young maids I can tell you.


Co. There are none but honest and honorable Gentlemen.


Fo. Al is one sir for that, I Will trust my daughter with any man, but no man
with my daughter, only your self Monser Besha, whom I will entreat to be her
guardian, and to bring her home again.


Co. I will wait upon her, and it please you.


Fo No sir, your weight upon her will not be so good: here Monser Besha I
deliver my daughter unto you a perfect maid, and so I pray you look well unto
her.


Co. Farewell Monser Foyes.


Besh. I warrant I Will look unto her well enough. Mistress will it please you to
preambulate.


Ma. With all my heart.

Exeunt.
Enter the puritan. Florila What have I done? put on too many clothes, the day
is hot, and I am hoter clad then might suffice health, my conscience tells me
that I have offended, and I Will put them off, that will ask time that might be
better spent, one sin will draw another quickly so, see how the d^ell tempts:
but what is here? jewels? how should these come here?


Enter Laberuele. Lab. Good morrow louelv wife, what have tho^ there?


Flo. Jewels my Lord which here I strangely found.


Lab. That's strange indeed, what, where none comes but when your self is
here? surely the heavens have rained thee jewels for thy holy life, and using
thy old husband (...) or else do Fairies haunt this holy green, as
evermore, mine auncesters have thought.


Flo. Fairies were but in times of ignorance, not since the true pure light
has been revealed, and that they come from heaven I scarce belecue: for
jewels are vain things, much gold is given for such fantastical and fruitless
jewels, and therefore heaven I know will not maintain the use of vanity, surely
I fear I have much sinned to stoop tak^ take them up, bowing my body to an
idle work, the strength that I have had to this very deed might have been
used to take a poor soul up in the hi^ way.


Lab. You are too curious wise, behold your jewels: what me thinks there is pos^es
written on the^. Despair not of children, Then he reads.
love with the longest, when man is at the weakest, god is at the strongest.
Wonderful rare and wittre, nay d^ine, why this is heavenly comfort for thee
wife, what is this other? God will reward her a thousand ^olde that takes what
age can, and not what age would. The best that ever I heard, no mortal brain
I think did ever utter such conceit for good plain matter, and for honest
rhyme.


Flo. Vain Poetry, I pray you burn them sir.


La. You are to blame wife, heaven has sent you them to deck your self
withal, like to your self, not to go thus like a milk-maid, why there is
difference in all estats by all religion.


Flo. There is no difference.


Lab. I prithee wife be of another mind, and wear these jewels and a (...)
hood.


Flo A velvet hood! O vain du^elish d^uise a toy made with a superfluous flap,
which being cut off, my head were still aswarme. Diogenes did cast away his
dish, because his hand would serve to help him drink, surely these heathens
shall rise up against us.


Lab. Sure wife I think thy keeping always close, making thee melancholy, is
the cause we have no children, and therefore if thou will, be merry, and keep
company a gods name.


Flo. Sure my lord, if I thought I should be rid of this same banishment of
barrennes, and use our marriage to the end it was made which was for
procreation, I should sin, if by my keeping house I should neglect the lawful
means to be a fruitful mother, and therefore if it plea^e you i will use resort


Lab. Gods my passion what have I done? who would have thought her purenesle
would yield so soon to courses of temptations? nay hark you wife, I am not
sure that going abroad will cause fruitfulness in you, that you know none
knows but God himself.


Flo. I know my lord it is true, but the lawful means must still be used.


Lab. Yea, the lawful means indeed must still, but now I remember that
lawful means is not abroad.


Flo. Well, well, I Will keep the house still.


Lab. Nay, hark you lady, I would not have you think, mary, I must tell you
this, if you should change the manner of your life, the world would think you
changed religion too.


Flo. It Is true, I will not go.


Lab. Nay, if you have a fancy.


Flo Yea a fancy, but that's no matter.


La. Indeed fancies are not for judicial and religious women.


Enter Catalian like a scholar. Cat. God save your lordship, and you most
religious lady.


Lab. Sir you may say God save us well indeed that thus are thrust upon in
private walks.


Cat, A slender thrust sir, where I touch^ you not.


Lab. Well sir what is your business?


Cat. Why sir, I have a message to my lady from Mon^ du Barto.


Lab. To your lady, well sir, speak your mind to your lady.


Flo. You are very welcome sir, and I pray how does he.


Cat. In health Madam, thanks be to God, commending his duty to your ladyship,
and has sent you a message which I would desire your honor to hear in
private.


Flo. My ladyship, and my honor, they be words which I must have you leave,
they be idle words, and you shall answer for them truly: my duty to you, or
I desire you, were a great deal better, then, my ladyship, or my honor.


Cat. I thank you for your christian admonition.


Flo. Nay thank God for me: Come I will hear your message with all my heart,
and you are very welcome sir.


Lab. With all my heart, and you are very welcome sir, and go and talk with a
young lusty fellow able to make a man's hair stand upright on his head, what
purity is there in this trow you? ha, what wench of the faculty could have
been more forward? Well sir, I will know your message, you sir, you sir, what
says the holy man sir, come tell true, for by heaven or hell I will have it
out.


Cat. Why you shall sir, if you be so desirous.


Lab. Nay sir, I am more then so desirous: come sir, study not for a new device
now.


Cat. Not I my lord, this is both new and old, I am a scholar, and being
spiritually inclined by your ladies most godly life, I am to profess the
ministry, and to become her chaplain, to which end monsier du Barte has
commended me.


Lab. Her chaplain in the devils name, fit to be vickar of hell.


Flo. My good head, what are you afraid of? he comes with a godly and
neighborly suit: what think you his words or his looks can tempt me? have you
so little faith? if every word he spoke were a serpent, as subtle as that which
tempted Eve, he cannot tempt me I warrant you.


La. Well answered for him lady by my faith: well hark you I Will keep your
chaplains place yonder for a while, and at Enter (...).
length put in one my self: what more yet? Gods my passion whom do I see, the
very (...) of desolation, the minio^ of our King, whom no man sees to ^nter
his house but he looks up, his wife, his children, and his maids, for where
he goes he carries his house upon his head like a snaile: now sir I hope
your business is to me.


Lem. No sir, I must crave a word with my lady.


La. These words are intolerable, and she shall hear no more


Lem. She must hear me speak.


Lab. Must she sir, have you brought the kings warrant for it?


Le. I have brought that which is above Kings.


Lab. Why every man for her sake is a puritan. The Diuill I think will shortly
turn Puritan, or the Puritan will turn Devil.


Flo. What have you brought sir?


Lem. Mary this Madam, you know we ought to prove one another constancy, and
I am come in all chaste and honorable sort to prove your constancy.


Flo. You are very welcome sir, and I will abide your proof: it is my duty
to abide your proof.


Lab. You le bide his proof, it is your duty to bide his proof, how the
devil will you bide his proof?


Flo My good head, no other wise then before your face in all honorable and
religious sort, I tell you I am constant to you, and he comes to try whether I
be so or no, which I must endure, begin your proof sir.


Le. Nay Madam, not in your husbands hearing, though in his ^ight for there is
no woman will show she is tempted from her constancy, though she be a little:
withdraw your self sweet lady.


L^. Well I will see though I do not hear, women may be courted without
offense, so they resist the courtier.


Lem. Dear and most beautiful lady, of all the sweet honest and honorable
means to prove the purity of a ladi^ constancy, kisses are the strongest, I
will therefore be bold to begin my proof with a kiss.


Fo No sir, no kissing.


L^. No kissing (...)* how shall I pro^ you the^ (...), not using the
mostsufficient proof? to flatter your self by affection of spirit, when it is
not perfitly tried, is sin.


Flo. You say well sir, that which is truth is truth.


Le. Then do you well Lady and yield to the truth.


Flo. By your leave sir, my husband sees, peradventure it may breed an offense
to him.


Lem. How can it breed an offense to your husband to see your constancy
perfectly tried.


Flo. You are an odd man I see, but first I pray tell me how kissing is the
best proof of ohast Ladies.


Lem. To give you a reason for that, you must give me leave to be obscure and
Philosophical.


Flo. I pray yon be, I love Philosophy well.


Lem. Then thus Madam: ^uery kiss is made ^s the voice is by imagination and
appetite, and as both those are presented to the ^re in the voice, so are they
to the silent spirits in our kisses.


Flo. To what spirit mean you?


Lem. To the spirits of our blood.


Flo. What if it do?


Lem: Why then my imagination, and mine appetite working upon your ears in my
voice, and upon your spirits in my kisses, pearcing therein the more deeply,
they give the stronger assault against your constancy.


Flo. Why then to say, prove my constancy, is as much as to say, kiss me.


Lem. most true rare Lady.


Flo. Then prove my constancy.


L^m. Believe me Madam, you gather exceeding wittily upon it.


Lab. O my forehead, my very heart aches at a blow, what do thou mean wife?
thou will loose thy fame, discredit thy religion, and dishonor me for ever.


Flo. Away sir, I will abide no more of your proof, nor endure any more of your
trial.


Lem. O she dares not, she dares no^ I am as glad I have tried your purity as
may be: you the most constant La^y in France? I know an hundred Ladies in this
town that will dance, ^uill all night amongst gallants, and in the morning go
to bed to her husband as clear a woman as if she were new christened, kiss
him, embrace him, and say, no, no husband, thou art the man, and he takes her
for the woman.


Flo. And all this can I do.


La. Take heed of it wife.


Flo. Fear not my good head, I warrant you for him.


Lem. Nay Madam, ^iumph not before the victory, how can you conquer that,
against which you never strive, or striu^ against that which never incounters
you To live idle in this walk, to enjoy this company, to wear this habit,
and have no more delights then those will affoorde you, is to make virtue an
idle huswife, and to hide herself slothful cobwebbes that still should be
adorned with actions of victory: no Madam, if you will vnworthilly prove your
constancy to your husband, you must put on rich apparel, fare daintily,
hear mufique, read Sonetes be continually courted, kiss, dance, feast,
revel all night amongst gallants, then if you come to bed to your husband with
a clear mind, and a clear body, then are your virtues (...); then have you
passed the full test of experiment, and you shall have an hundred gallants fight
thus far in blood for the defense of your reputation.


Lab. O vanity of vanities!


Flo. O husband this is perfect trial indeed.


La. And you will try all this now, will you not?


Flo Yea my good head, for it is written, we must pass to perfection through
al temptation, Abacu^ the fourth.


Lab. Abacucke, cucke me no cuckes, in a doors I say, th^ues, Puritanes,
murd^s, in a doors I say.

Exit.
Le. So now is he start mad in faith: but sir, as this is an old Lord jealous
of his young wife, so is ancient Countess Moren jealous of her young husband,
we will thither to have some sport in faith.

Exit.
Enter Besha hanging upon Martia sl^ue, and the Lord Moren comes to them. Mar.
I prithee Besha keep a little off; hang not upon her shoulders thus for shame.


Be. My Lord, Pardon a moy, I must not let her talk alone with any one, for her
father gave me charge.


Mar. O you are a goodly charger for a Goose.


Be. A Goose, you are a Gander to call me Goose, I am a christian Gentleman as
well as you.


Mar. Well sir get you hence, or by my troth I Will have thee taken out in a
blanket, tossed from forth our hearing.


Be. In a blanket? what do you make a puppie of me, by ^kies and stones I will
go and tell your Lady.

Exit.
Mor. Nay but Besha.


Mar. Nay he will tell my Lord.


Enter the Countess Moren and (...). Co. Why how now my Lord, what thought you
I was dead, that you are wooing of another thus, or are you laying plots to
wor^e my death?


Mor. Why neither sweet bird, what need you move these questions unto me,
whom you know loves you above all the women in the world?


Co. How he can flatter now he has made a fault.


Besh, He can do little, and he cannot cogge.


Mor. Out you ass.


Co. Well, come tell me what you did entreat.


Mor. Nothing by heaven sweet bird I swear, but (...) in^at her love.


Co. But to entreat her love.


Mor. Nay hear me out.


Co. Nay here you are out, you are out too much me thinks, and put me in.


Mor. And put you in?


Co. In a fair taking sir I mean.


Mor. O you may see what hasty taking is, you women evermore scramble for our
words, and never take them mannerly from our mouths.


Con. Come tell me what you did entreat.


Mor. I did entreat her love to Colinet.


Con. To Colinet? O he is your dear cosen, and your kind heart in faith is
never well but when you are doing good for every man: speak, do you love me?


Mor. In Faith sweet bird.


Con. Best of all others.


Mor. Best of all others?


Con. That's my good bird in faith.


Besh. O mistress, will you love me so?


Mor. No by my troth will I not.


Besh. No by my troth will I not: Why that's well said, I could never get her to
flatter me yet.


Enter Lemot, Bla^l, and Catalian, and Colinet. Le Good morrow my good Lord,
and these passing lovely Ladies.


Cat. So now we shall have all manner of flattering with Monsieur Lemot.


Le You are all manner of ways deceived Madam, for I am so far from
flattering you, that I do not a whit praise you.


Con. Why do you call us passing lovely then?


Lem. Because you are passing from your louelines.


Mar. Madam we shall not have one mot of Monsieur Lem^, but it shall be as it
were a mote to drown al our conceit in admiration.


Le. See what a mote her quick eye can spy in mine, before she looks in it.


^ar. So mote I thee, thine answer is as good as might be.


Le. Here Is a poor name run out of breath quickly.


Co. Why Monsieur Lemot, your name is run out of breath at every word you
speak.


Le. That's because my name signifies word.


Mar. Well hit, Monsieur verbum.


Le. What are you good at latin Lady?


Mar. No sir, but I know what verbum is.


Le. Why it is greenebum, ver is green, and you know what bum is, I am sure of
that.


Mar. No sir, it is a verb, and I can decline you.


Lem. That you can I Will be sworn.


Mar. What can I do?


Le. Decline me, or take me a hole lower, as the proverb is.


Mar. Nay sir, I mean plain Gramatical declination


Le. Well, let us hear your schollership, and decline me.


Mar. I will sir, mo^, motas.


Besha. O excellent! she has called him ass in latin.


Le. Well sir, forward.


Mar. Nay there is enough to try both our scholerships


Le. Moto, motas, nay faith forward to motani, or motandi.


Mar. Nay sir, I Will leave when I am well.


Co. Why Monsieur Lemot, your name being in word general, is in nini, or in
hammer, or in cock, or in buzzard.


Le. Or in wagtaile, or in woodcocke, or in dotteril, or in dizard.


Ma. Or in clotte, or in head, or in cow, or in baby.


Le. Or in maukin, or in trash, or in pape, or in Lady.


Co. Or in deed in every thing.


Le. Why then it is in Thing.


Ma. Then good Monsier Thing, there let it rest.


Le. Then above all things I must have a word with you.


Be. Hands off sir, she is not for your mowing.


Le. She is for your mocking.


Be. And she mock me, I Will tell her father.


Le. That's a good child, thou smellest of the mother, and she was a fool I
warrant you.


Be. Meddle with me, but do not meddle with my mother.


Le. That's a good child, come, I must needs have a word with you.


Be. You shall do none of your needs with her sir.


Cata. Why what will you do? Then he offers to draw.



Be. What will I do? you shall see what I Will do.


Blan. Go to you ass, offer to draw here, and we will draw thee out of the house
by the heels.


Be. What, three against one? now was ever proper hard fauord Gentleman so
abused?

Go to Mistress Martia, I see you well enough, are you not ashamed to stand
talking alone with such a one as he?


Le. How sir? with such a one as I sir?


Be. Yea sir, with such a one as you sir.


Le. Why, what am I?


Be. What are you sir? why I know you well enough.


Le. Sir tell me, what you know me for, or else by heaven I Will make thee better
thou had never known how to speak.


Be. Why sir, if you will needs know, I know you for an honorable gentleman and
the Kings minion, and were it not to you, there is nere a gentleman in Paris
should have had her out of my hands.


Ma. Nay, he is as tall a Gentleman of his hands as auy is in Paris.


Col. There Is a favor for you sir.


Le. But I can get no favor for you sir.


Blan. I pray my Lord entreat for your cossen Colinet.


Mo. Alas man, I dare not for my wife.


Cat. Why my Lord she thinks it is for nothing, but to speak for your cosen.


Mo. I pray you bird, give me leave to speak for my cosen.


Co. I am content for him.


Mo. Then one word with you more, courteous lady Martia.


Be. Not, and you were my father.


Mo. Gentlemen, for God sake thrust this ass out of the doors.


Lem. Nay, birladye he le run home and tell her father.


Ca. Well, go to her, I warrant he shall not trouble you (kind gentleman) how
we dote on thee: embrace him gentlemen.


Blan. O sweet Besha how we honor thee.


Co. Nay Gentlemen, look what a pearcing eye he has.


Be. An eye? I have an eye and it were a pole-cat.


Ca. Nay, look what a nose he has.


Be. My nose is nete crimson.


Blan. Nay, look what a handsome man he is, O Nature, Nature, thou never
made man of so pure a feature.


Be Truly truly Gentlemen, I do not deserve this kindness.


Ca. O Lord sir, you are too modest, come shall we walk?


Be. Whither? to the alehouse?


Le Hark you Madam, have you no more care of the right of your husband, then
to let him talk thus affectionately with another?


Coun. Why he speaks not for himself, but for his cosen Colinet. Enter Lemot.



Le. Gods my life? he tells you so, nay and these excuses may serve I have
done.


Con. By the mass now I observe him, he looks very suspitiously indeed, nere
trust me if his looks, and his iesture do not plainly show himself to
swear, by this light I do love thee.


Lem. Burlady Madam you guess shrewdly indeed, but hark you Madam, I pray
let not me be the author of discord between my good Lord and you.


Con. No no Monsieur Lemot, I were blind if I could not see this, i will slit her
nose by Jesus


Me. How now what is the matter?


Co. What Is the matter? if I could come at your Mistress, she should know what is
the matter.


Mo. My Mistress?


Co. Yea your Mistress, O here is fair dissimulation, O ye impudent gossip, do I
send for you to my house to make you my companion, and do you use me thus?
little do thou know what it is to love a man truly, for if thou did, thou
would be ashamed to wrong me so.


Mar. You wrong me Madam to say I wrong you.


Co. Go to, get you out of my house.


Mar. I am gone Madam.


Mor. Well, come in sweet bird and I Will persuade thee, there is no harm done.


C. Well, we shall hear your persuasions.


Le. Well God knows, and I can partly guess what he must do to persuade her:
well, take your fair charge, fair and manly L. Monsieur Labes^a.


Co. One word with you more fair lady.


Le. Not a word, no man on pain of death, not a word, he comes upon my rapiers
point, that comes within forty foot on her.


Be. Thanks good Lemot, and thanks gentlemen all, and her father shall thank
you.


C. Much good do it you sir: come Gentlemen, lets go wait upon the king, and
see the humor of the young lord Dowseger.


Lem. Excuse me to the King, and tell him I will meet him there: so this is but
the beginning of sport between this fine lord and his old lady: but this wench
Martia has happy stars reigned at the disposition of her beauty, for the
King him self does mightily dote on her. Now to my Puritan, and see if I can
make up my full proof of her.


E^ter the puritan in her best a^yre. Flo. Now am I up and ready, ready? why?
because my clothes once on, that call we ready: but readiness I hope has
reference to some fit action for our several state: for when I am attyred thus
Countesse-like, it is not to work, for that befittes me not, it is on some
pleasure, whose chief object is one man's content, and he my husband is, but
what need I thus b^ attyred, for that he would be pleased with meaner weed?
besides I take no pleasure thus to please him: I am content, because it is my
duty to keep to him, and not to seek no further: but if that pleasure be a
thing that makes the time seem short, if it do laughter cause, if it procure
the tongue but heartily to say, I thank you, I have no such thing, nor can the
godliest woman in the world, against her nature please her sense, or soul,
she may say, this I will, or this I will not. But what shall she reap hereby?
comfort in an other world, if she will stay till then.


Enter her husband behind her. Lab. Yea mary sir now I must look about, now if
her desolate proouer come again, shall I admit him to make farther trial? I Will
have a Dialogue between my self and manly reason: to that special end
reason, shall I endure a desolate man to come and court my wife, and prove her
constancy: reason, to court and prove her you may bear my lord, for perfect
things are not the worse for trial; gold will not turn to dross for deepest
trial: before God a comfortable saying; thanks gentle reason, I Will trouble you
no more. God save sweet wife, look up, thy tempter comes.


Flo. Let him my lord, I hope I am more blessed then to relent in thought of
lewd suggestion.


Lab. But if by frailty you should yield in thought, what will you do?


Flo. Then shall you keep me close, and never let me see man but your self,
if not, then boldly may I go abroad.


Lab. But how, shall I know whether you yield, or no?


Flo. Hear us your self, my lord.


Lab. Tut, that were gross, for no woman will yield in her husbands hearing.


Flo. Then to assure you if I yield or no, mark but these signs: as he is
proouing me, if I do yield, you shall perceive my face blush and look pale,
and put on heavy looks. If I resist I will triumph, and smile, and when I
hold but up my finger, stop his vain lips, or thrust him on the breast, then
is he overthrown both horse and foot.


Lab. Why, this does satisfy me mightily: see he is come.


Lem. Honor to my good lord, and his fair young lady.


Lab. Now Monsieur Satan, you are come to tempt and prove at full the spirit
of my wife.


Lem. I am my lord, but vainly I suppose.


Lab. You see she dares put on this brave attire fit with the fashion, which
you think serves much to lead a woman into light desires.


Lem. My lord I see it: and the sight thereof does half dismay me to make
further proof.


Lab. Nay prove her, prove her sir, and spare not: what does the witty minion
of our King think any dame in France will say him nay? but prove her, prove
her, see and spare not.


Lem. Well sir, though half discouraged in my coming, yet I Will go forward:
lady, by your leave.


Flo. Now sir, your cunning in a Ladyesproofe.


Lem. Madam, in proving you I find no proof against your piercing glauncings,
but swear I am shot through with your love.


Flo. I do believe you: who will swear he loves, to get the thing he loves
not? if he love, what needs more perfect trial?


Lem. Most true rare lady.


Flo. Then are we fitly met, I love you too.


Lem. Exceeding excellent.


Flo. Nay, I know you will applaude me in this course, but to let common
circumstaunces pass, let us be familiar.


Lem. Dear life, you ravish my conceit with joy.


Lab. I long to see the signs that she will make.


Flo. I told my husband I would make these signs: if I resisted, first hold up
my finger, as if I said, in faith sir you are gone, but it shall say, yfayth sir,
we are one.


Lab. Now she triumphs, and points to heaven I warrant you.


Flo. Then must I seem as if I would hear no moret and stop your vain
lips, go cruel lips, you have bewitched me, go.


Lab. Now she stops in his scorned words, and rates him for his pains.


Flo. And when I thrust you thus against the breast, then are you overthrown
both horse and foot.


Lab. Now is he overthrown both horse and foot.


Flo. Away vain man, have I not answered you?


Lem. Madam, I yield and swear, I never saw so constant, nor so virtuous a
lady.


Lab. Now speak I pray, and speak but truly, have you not got a wrong sow by
the ear?


Lem. My lord, my labor is not altogether lost, for now I find that which I
never thought.


Lab. A sirrah, is the edge of your steel wit rebated then against her Adamant?


L^m. It is my Lord, yet one word more fair lady.


Lab. Feign would he have it do, and it will not be: hark you wife, what sign
will you make me now if you relent not?


Flo. Lend him my handkerch^ to wipe his lips of their last disgrace.


L^b. Excellent good, go forward, see I pray.


Flo. An other sign in faith, love is required.


Lem. Let him have signs inowe, my heavenly love, then know there is a
private meeting this day at Verones ordinary, where if you will do me the
grace to come, and bring the beauteous Martia with you, I will provide a fair
and private room, where you shall be unseen of any man, only of me, and of
the King himself, whom I will cause to honor your repair with his high
presence, and there with Music and quick r^llings you may revive your
spirits so long time dulled.


Flo. I Will send for Martia then, and meet you there, and tell my husband, I will
lock my self in my choice walk till supper-time: we pray sir, wipe your lips
of the disgrace they took in their last labor.


Lem. Mary the devil was never so dispited.


Lab. Nay stay, see.


Lem. No, no, my L, you have the constantst wife that ever: well, I Will say no
more.

Exit.
Lab. Never was minion so disminioned, come constancy, come my girl, I Will
leave thee loose to twenty of them in faith. Th^n he sighs.



Flo. Come my good head, come.

Exit.
Enter the King and all the lords, with the Trumpets. King. Why sound these
Trumpets in the Diuelles name.


C. To show the King comes.


King. To show the King comes? Go hang the Trumpetters, they mock me boldly,
and every other thing that makes me known, not telling what I am, but what I
seem, a King of clouts, a scarcrow, full of cobwebs, spiders and ^arewigs, that
sets Iackdawes long tongue in my bosom, and upon my head, and such are all the
affections of love swarming in me, without command or reason.


Lem. How now my liege! what quackemyred in Philosophy, bound with loves
whipcorde, and quite robbed of reason: and I Will give you a receyte for this
presently.


King. Peace L^mot, they say the young lord Dow^ger is rarely learned, and
nothing lunatike as men suppose, but hates company, and worldly trash, the
judgment and the just contempt of them, have in reason arguments that break
affection (as the most sacred Poets write) and still the roughest wind: and his
rare humor come we now to hear.


Lem. Yea, but hark you my hege, I Will tell you a better humor then that, here
presently will be your fair love Martia, to see his humor, and from thence
fair countess Florula, and she will go unto Verones ordinary, where none but
you and I, and Count Moren, will be most m^ry.


King. Why Count Moren I hope dares not adventure into any woman's company, but
his wives.


Lem. Yes, as I will work, my liege, and then let me alone to keep him there
till his wife comes.


King. That will be royal sport: see where all comes: welcome fair lords and
ladies.


Enter Laberuele, Labesha, and all the rest. Lab. My liege you are welcome to
my poor house.


Lem. I pray, my liege know this Gentleman especially, he is a Gentleman borne
I can tell you.


King. With all my heart: what might I call your name?


Lab. Monsieur Labesha, si^iora defoulasa.


Ki. Defoulasa. an il sounding barendri^ of my word: but to the purpose, lord
Laberuele, we are come to see the humor of your rare son, which by some
means I pray let us partake.


La. Your highness shall too unworthily partake the sight which I with griese and
tears daily behold, seeing in him the end of my poor house.


King. You know not that (my lord) your wife is young, and he perhaps hereafter
may be moved to more society.


La. Would to God he would, that we might do to your crown of France, more
worthy and more acceptable service.


King. Thanks good my lord, see where he appeeres.


Enter Lauc^ with a picture, and a pair of large hose, and a codp^* and a
sword. K. Say Lauel, where is your friend the yo^g lord Dowsecer?


La. I look my liege he will be here anon, but then I must entreat your
Majesty and all the rest, to stand unseen, for he as yet will brook no
company.


King. We will stand close Lauele, but wherefore bring you this apparel, that
picture, and that sword?


Lau. To put him by the sight of them in mind of their brave ^ates that use
them, or that at the least of the true use they should be put unto.


King. Indeed the sense does still stir up the soul, and though these objects
do not work, yet it is very probable in time she may, atleast, we shall
discern his humor of the^.


Lem. See where he comes contemplating, stand close.

Enter Dowsecer. Qui^ Dei (...) videri magnum in rebus humanis quae aeterni
(...) to thy ^sque notas sic omnibus magna tutor, what can seem strange to him
on earthly things to whom the whole course of (...), and the round compass of
the world is known? a speech (...), but yet I marvel much how it should
spring from thee, (...) Cicero that sold for gl^ry the sweet piece of life, and
make a torment of rich natu^s (...) work* wearing thy selfby watchful candel
light, when all the (...) and Weauers were at rest, and yet was gallant ere the
day bird sung to have a troop of clyents at thy gates, a^med with religious
suplicati^, such as would make stern Minos laugh to read: look on our lawyers
bills, not one contains vntue or honest drifts; but he cares* he cares, he
cares; ^or aco^ now are in request, but the oaks poor fruit did nourish men,
men were li cokes of body, tough, and strong men were like Giants then, but
Pigmies now, yet full of villainies as their skin can hold.


Le. How like you this humor my liege?


King. This is no humor, this is but persit judgment.


Coun. Is this afrensie?


Mar. O were al men such, men were no men but gods: this earth a heaven.


Do. See see the shameless world, that dares present her mortal ^nemie with
these gro^e (...) of her (...) and steel, uncharitable stuff, good
spittle-sounders, enemies to whole skins, as if there were not ways enough to
die by natural and casual accidents, diseases, surfcits, brauc carowses, old
aquavitae, and too base wives, and thousands more hence with this art of
murder. But here is goodly gear, the soul of man, for it is his better part,
take away this, and take away their in^ites, and their spirits, scarce dare
they come in any public view, without this countenance giver, and some dares
not come, because they have it too, for they may sing, ^n written books they
find it, what is it then the fashion, or the cost, the cost does match, but yet
the fashion more, for let it be but mean, so in the fashion, and it is most
gentleman like, is it so? make a hand in the margent, and burn the book, a
large house and a codpe^ce makes a man a codpece, nay indeed but house must
down: well for your gentle forgers of men, and sor you come to rest me into
fashion, Il^ wear you thus, and sit upon the matter.


La. And he does despise our purposes.


Ca. Bear with him yet my Lord, he is not resolved.


La. I would not have my friend mock worthy men, for the vain pride of some
that are not so.


Dow. I do not here deride difference of states, no not in show, but wish that
such as want show might not be scorned with ignorant Turkish pride, being
pompous in apparel, and in mind: nor would I have with imitated shapes ^enne
make their native land, the land of apes, ^uing like strangers when they be at
home, and so perhaps bear strange hearts to their home, nor loo^e a snuff
like a piann^ts tail, for nothing but their tails and formal locks, when
like to cream boules all their virtues swim in their set faces, all their in
parts then fit to serve pesants or make curdes for dawes: but what a stock am
I thus to neglect this figure of man's comfort this rare piece?


La. Heavens grant that make him more humane, and sotiable.


King. Nay he is more humane then all we are.


La. I fear he will be too sharp to that sweet sex.


Dow. She is very fair, I think that she be painted; and if she be sir, she
might ask of me, how many is there of our sex that are not? it is a sharp
question: marry and* I think they have small* skill, if they were all of pain^
twere safer dealing with them, and indeed were their minds strong enough to
guide their bodies, their beuteous deeds should match with their heavenly
looks, twere necessary they should wear them, and would they vouchsafe it,
even I would joy in the^ society.


Ma. And who would not die with such a man?


Dow. But to admire them as our gallants do, O what an eye she has, O dainty
hand, rare foot and leg, and leave the mind respectles, this is a plague,
that in both men and women make such pollution of our earthly being: well I
will practice yet to court this piece.


La. O happy man, now have I hope in her.


King. Me ^inkes I could endure him days and nights.


Dow. W^ sir, now thus must I do sir, ere it come to women* now (...) a plague
upon it, it is so ridiculous I can no further: what poor a^e was it that set
this in my way? now if my father should be the man: Gods precious coals it is he.


Lab. Good son go forward in this gentle humor, observe this picture, it
presents a maid of noble birth and excellent of parts, whom for our house and
honor sake, I wish thou would confess to marry.


Dow. To marry father? why we shall have children.


La. Why that is the end of marriage, and the joy of men.


Do. O how youare decen^d, you have but me, and what a trouble am I to your
joy? but father, if you long to have some fruit of me, see father I will
creep into this stuborne earth and mix my flesh with it, and they shall
breed grass, to fat oxen, asses and such like, and when they in the grass
the spring conuerts into beasts nourishment, then comes the fruit of this my
body forth; then may you well say, seeing my race is so profitably increased,
that good fat ox, and that same large eard ass are my son sons, that
caulfe with a white face is his fair daughter, with which, when your fields
are richly filled, then will my race content you, but for the joys of
children, tush it is gone, children will not deserve, nor parents take it: wealth
is the only father and the child, and but in wealth no man has any joy.


La. Some course dear son take for thy honor sake.


Dow. Then father here is a most excellent course.


La. This is some comfort yet.


Dow. If you will strait be gone and leave me here, I Will stand as quietlye as
any lamb, and trouble none of you


La. An hapless man.


Le. How like you this humor yet my liege?


King. As of a holy fury, not a frenzy.


Mor. See see my liege, he has seen us sure.


King. Nay look how he viewes Martia and makes him fine.


Lem. Yea my liege, and she as I hope well observed, has uttered many kind
conceits of hers.


King. Well I Will be gone, and when she comes to Verones ordinary, I Will have her
taken to my custody.


Lem, I Will stay my liege, and see the event of this.


King. Do so Lemot.

Exit the king.
Dow. What have I seen? how am I burnt to dust with a new Sun, and made a
novel Phoenix, is she a woman that objects this sight, able to work the chaos
of the world into gestion? O divine aspect, the excellent disposer of the mind
shines in thy beauty, and thou have not changed my soul to sense but sense
unto my soul, and I desire thy pure society, but even as angels do, to angels
fly.

Exit.
Mar. Fly soul and follow him.


Lab. I marvel much at my sons sudden strange behavior.


Lem. Bear with him yet my Lord, it is but his humor: come, what shall we go to
Verones ordinary?


Lab. Yea for Gods sake, for I am passing hungry.


Mor. Yea, come Monsieur Lemot, will you walk?


Count. What, will you go?


Mor. Yea sweet bird, I have promised so.


Count. Go to, you shall not go and leave me alone.


Mor. For one meal gentle bird: Veron inuites us to buy some jewels he has
brought of late from Italy: I Will buy the best, and bring it thee, so thou will
let me go.


Count. Well said flattering Fabian, but tell me then what ladies will be there?


Mor. Ladies? why none.


Lem. No ladies use to come to ordinaries. Madam.


Count. Go to bird, tell me now the very truth.


Mor. None of mine honor bird, you never heard that ladies came to ordinaries.


Count O that's because I should not go with you.


Mar. Why it is not fit you should.


Cou. Well hark you bird, of my word you she not g^, unless you will swear
to me, you will neither court nor kiss a dame in any sort, till you come home
again.


Mar. Why I swear I will not.


Count. Go to, by this kiss.


Mar. Yea, by this kiss.


Foies. M^rtia, learn by this when you are a wife.


Lab. I like the kissing well.


Flo. My lord I Will leave you, your son Dowsecer has made me melancholy with
his humor, and I Will go lock my self in my close walk till supper time.


Lab. What, and not dine to da^?


Flo. No my good head: come Martia, you and I will fast together.


Mar. With all my heart Madam.

Exit.
Lab. Well Gentlemen I Will go see my son.

Exit.
F^y. Birlady Gentlemen I Will go home to dinner.


Labe. Home to dinner? birlord but you shall not, you shall go with us to the
ordinary, where you shall meet Gentlemen of so good carriage, and passing
co^plements, it will do your heart good to see them, why you never saw the best
sort of Gentlemen if not at ordinaries.


Foy. I promise you that's rare, my lord, and Monsieur Lemot, I Will meet you there
presently.


Lem. We Will expect your coming.

Ex^nt all.
Enter Uerone with his Napkin upon his shoulder, and his man Jacques with
another, and his son bringing in cloth and napkins. Uer. Come on my masters,
shadow these tables with their white vailes, accomplish the court Cupboord,
wait diligently to day for my credit and your own, that if the meat should
chance to be raw, yet your behauiors being neither rude nor raw, may excuse it,
or if the meat should ch^unce to be tough, be you tender over them in your
attendance, that the one may bear with the other.


Iaq. Faith some of them be so hard to please, finding fault with your cheer,
and discommending your wine, saying, they fare better at Verones for half the
money.


Boy. Besides, if there be any cheboules in your napkins, they say your nose or
ours have dropped on them, and then they throw them about the house.


Uer. But these be small faults, you may bear with the, young Gentlemen and
wild heads will be doing.


Enter the Maid. Maid. Come, whose wit was it to cover in this room, name in
the of God I trowee.


Boy. Why I hope this room is as fair as the other.


Maid. In your foolish opinion: you might have told a wise body so, and kept
your self a fool still.


Boy. I cry you mercy, how bitter you are in your proverbs.


Maid. So bitter I am sir.


Uer. O sweet Sateena I dare not say I love thee.


Iaq. Must you control us you proud baggage you?


Maid. Baggage? you are a knave to call me baggage.


Iaq. A knave? my master shall know that.


Ver. I will not see them.


Iaq. Master, here is your Maid uses her self so sawsily, that one house
shall not hold us two long, God willing.


Uer. Come hither huswife. P^rdon me sweet Iacenan, I must make an angry face
outwardly, though I smile inwardly.


Maid. Say what you will to me sir.


Ver. O you are a fine Gossip, can I not keep honest servants in my house, but
you must control them? you must be their mistres.


Maid. Why I did but take up the cloth, because my mistress would have the
dinner in an other room, and he called me baggage.


Iaq. You called me knave and fool, I thank you (...) bones.


Ma. Go to, go to, she were wise enough would talk with you.


Boy. Go thy ways for the prowdest harlo^ that ever came in our house.


Ver. Let her alone boy, I have scoold her I warant thee, she shall not be my
maid long, if I can help it.


Boy. No, I think so sir, but what, shall I take up the cloth?


Ue. No, let the cloth lie, hither they will com ^st, I am sure of it, then If
they will dine in the other room, they shall.


Enter R^l. To. Good morrow my host, is no body come yet?


U^. Yo^ worship is the first sir.


To. I was ^ited by my cosen (...), to see your (...).


Ve. I thank his worship and yours.


R^. Here Is a pretty place for an ordinary, I am very so^ I have not used to
come to ordinaries.


Ve. I hope we shall have your company hereafter.


To. You are very like so.


Enter Berger. Ber. Good morrow my host, good morrow good Monsieur Roll.


To. Good morrow to you sir,


Ber. What are we two the first* giue's the (...), (...) come, this gentleman
and I will go to card^ while (...) be ready.


To. No ^uly I cannot p^y at (...).


Ber. How! not play, O for shame say not so, ^ow can a young gentleman spend his
time but in play, and in courting his Mistress: come (...) this, least youth
take too much of the other.


To. Faith I cannot play, and yet I care not so much to venture two or three
crowns with you.


Ber. O I thought what I should find of you, I pray God I have not met with my
match.


To. No trust me sir, I cannot play.


Ber. Hark you my host, have you a pipe of good Tobacco?


Ue. The best in the town: boy dry a leaf.


Boy. There Is none in the house sir.


V^. Dry a docke leaf.


Be. My host, do you know Monsieur Blanuel?


Ue. Yea passing well sir.


Be. Why, he was taken learning tricks at old Luci^ house the muster mistress
of all the smocktearers in Paris, and both the bawd and the pander were
carried to the dungeon.


Ve. There was dungeon upon dungeon, but call you her the muster-mistris of all the smocktearers in Paris?


Be. Yea, for she has them all trained up before her.


Enter Blanuel. Bla. Good morrow my host, good morrow gentlemen al.


Ue. Good morrow Monsieur Bl^l, I am glad of your quick delivery.


Bla. Delivery, what did thou think I was with child?


Ve. Yea of a dungeon.


Bl^. Why, how knew you that?


To. Why Berger told us.


Bla. Berger who told you of (...)?


Be. One that I heard, by the lord.


Bla O excellent, you are still playing the wagge.


Enter Lemot and Moren. Le Good morrow Gentlemen all, good morrow good Monsieur
(...)*


To. At your service.


Le. I pray my lord look what a pretty falling band he has, it is pretty
fantastical, as I have seen made, with good judgment, great show, and but
tittle cost.


More. And so it is I promise you, who made it I pray?


Row I know not in faith, I bought it by chance.


Le. It is a very pretty one, make much of it.


Enter (...) ^ing. Ca. Boy, I prithee call for a course napkin. Good morrow
Gentlemen, I would you had bin at the tenniscourt, you should have seen me a
beat Monsieur (...), and I gave him fifteen and all his faults.


Le. Thou did more for him, then ever God will do for thee.


Ca. Jacques, I prithee fill me a cup of canary, three parts water


Le. You shall have all water and if it please you.


Enter Maid. Ma. Who called for a course napkin?


Ca. Marry I, sweet heart, do you take the pains to bring it your self, have
at you by my hosts leave.


Ma. Away sir, fie for shame.


Ca. Hark you my host, you must marry this young wench, you do her mighty
wrong else.


Ver. O sir, you are a merry man.


Enter Foyes and Lab^. Foy. Good morrow gentlemen, you see I am as good as my
word.


Mo. You are sir, and I am very glad of it.


Le You are welcome Monsieur Foyes: but you are not, no not you.


Be. No, welcome that Gentleman, it is no matter for me.


Le. How sir? no matter to you, by this rush I am angry with you, as if al our
loves protested unto you were dissembled, no matter for you?


Bo. Nay sweet L^mot be not angry, I did but jest, as I am a Gentleman.


Lem. Yea but there is a difference of jesting, you wrong all our affections in
so doing.


Be. Faith and troth I did not, and I hope sirs you take it not so.


All. No matter for me, it was very unkindly said, I must needs say so.


La. You see how they love me.


F^y. I do ^r, and I am very glad of it.


B^, And I hope Le^ot, you are not angry with me s^


L^. No faith, I am not so very a fool to be angry with one that cares not for
me.


Be. Do not I care for you? nay then.


C^. What, do thou cry?


Be. Nay I do not cry, but my stomach waters to think that you should take it
so heavily, if I do not wish that I were cut into three pieces, and that these
pieces were turned into three black puddings, and that these three black
puddings were turned into three of the fairest Ladies in the land for your
sake, I would I were hanged, whata devil can you have more then my poor heart?


C^. Well hark you Lemot, in good faith you are too blame to put him to this
unkindness, I prithee be friends with him.


Le. Well, I am content to put up this unkindness for this once, but while you
live take heed of: no matter for me.


Be. Why is it such a heinous word?


Le. O the h^ousest word in the world.


Be. Well, I Will never speak it more, as I am a gentleman.


Le. No I pray do not.


F^y. My lord, will your lordship go to cards?


Lor. Yea with you Monsieur Foyes.


To. Lemot, will you ^y*


Le. Pardon good Monsieur Roll, if I had any disposition to gaming your
company should draw me before any man's here.


F^y. Labesha, what will you play?


Lab. Play, yea with all my heart, I pray lend me three pence.


Row I Will play no more.


Cat. Why, have you won or lost?


Row. Faith I have lost two or three crowns.


Cat. Well to him again, I Will be your half.


L^. Sirrah, C^, while they are playing at cards, ^hou and I will have some
excellent sport: sirrah, do tho^ know that same Gentleman there?


Cat. No in faith, what is he?


L^. A very fine gull, and a neat reueller, one that's heir to a great ^ing,
yet his father keeps him so short, that h^ shirts will ^cant cover the bottom
of his belly, for all his ga^ outside, but the linings be very foul and swea^,
yea and perhaps lousy, with dispising the vain shifts of the world.


Ca^. But he has gotten good store of money now me thinks.


Lem. Yea, and I wonder of it, some ancient serving man of his fathers, that
has gotten for shillings in fifty years upon his great good (...), he
swearing monstrous oth^ to pay him again, and besides to do him a good tu^e
(when God shall hear his prayer for his father) has lent it him I warrant
you, but howsoever, we must speak him fair.


Cat. O what else!


L^* God save sweet Monsieur R^, what loose or win, loose or win?


Row. Faith sir save myself, and loose my money.


Lem. There Is a proverb hit dead in the neck like a Co^y, why hark thee
Cata^, I could have told thee before what he would have said.


Cat. I do not think so.


L^. No, thou see heers a fine plumpe of gallants, such as think their wits
singular, and their selves rarely accomplished, yet to show thee how brittle
their wits be, I will speak to them severally, and I will tell thee before
what they shall answer me.


Cat. That's excellent, lets see that in faith.


Lem. Whatsoever I say to Monsieur Rowlee, he shall say, O sir, you may see an
ill weed grows apace.


Cat. Come, lets see.


Lem. Now Monsieur Rowlee, me thinks you are exceedingly grown since your
coming to Paris.


Row. O sir, you may see an ill weed grows a pace.


Cat. This is excellent, forward sir I pray.


L^. What so^ I s^y to Labe^, he shall answer ^e, black will b^e no other hue,
and that same old Justice, as gr^e of a stale proverb, he shall come in the
^e of that and say, Black is a pearl in a woman's eye.


Cat. Yea, much yfayth.


L^. Look thee, here comes hither L^sha, Cat^. and I have been talking of thy
complexion, and I say that all the fair ladies in France would have been in
love with thee, but that thou art so black.


Labe. O sir black will bear no other hue.


F^. O sir black is a pearl in a ^mans eye.


L^. You say true sir, you say true sir, ^rrah Cata^, whatsoere I say to Berger
that is so busy at Cards, ^e shall answer me, sblood, I do not mean to die
as long as I can see one alive.


Cat. Come let us see you.


Lem. Why Berger, I thought thou had been d^d, I have not heard thee chide
all this while.


Ber. Sblood, I do not mean to die, as long as I can see one alive.


Cat. Why but hark you L^, I hope you cannot ^ake this lord answer so roundly.


Lem. O, as right as any of them all, and he shall answer me with an old
Latin Proverb, that is, ^us pro^ facis.


C^. O^ more lets see.


L^. My lord, your lordship could not play at this game very lately, and now
me thinks you are grown exceeding perfect.


M^r. O sir, you may see, vs^ ^ptus facit.


Enter Jacques. Iaq. Monsieur L^ot, here is a Gentleman and two Gentlewomen do
desire to speak with you.


L^. What are they come? ^es, convey them into the inward Parlour by the
inward room, and there is a brace of Crowns for thy labor, but let no b^
know of their being here.


I^. I warrant you sir.


Lem. See where they come: welcome my good lord and ladies, I Will come to you
presently: so, now the sport begins, I shall starte the disguised King
plaguilie, nay I shall put the lady that loves me in a monstrous fright, when
her husband comes and finds her here.


Boy. The Gentleman, and the two Gentlewomen desires your company.


L^. I Will come to them presently.


Foy. Gentlemen, I Will go speak with one, and come to The boy speaks in Foies
his ^ar
you presently.


Lem. My lord, I would speak a word with your lordship, if it were not for
interrupting your game.


Lord. No, I have done Lemot.


Lem. My lord there must a couple of ladies dine with us to day.


Lord. Ladies? Gods my life I must be gone.


Lem. Why, hark you my Lord, I knew not of their coming I protest to your
Lordship* and would you have me turn such fair Ladies as these are away?


Lord Yea but hark you Lemot, did not you hear me swear to my Wife, that I
would not tarry, if there were any women, I wonder you would suffer any to
come there.


Lem. Why you swore but by a kiss, and kisses are no holy things, you know
that.


Lord. Why but hark you Lemot, indeed I would be very loath to do any thing,
that if my wife should know it, should displease her.


Le. Nay then you are to obsequious, hark you, let me entreat you, and I Will
tell you in secret, you shall have (...) worse company then the Kings.


Lord. Why will the King be there?


L^. Yea, though disguised.


Lord. Who are the ladies?


Lem. The flowers of Paris, I can tell you, fair co^tesse Florila, and the
lady Mar^a.


Enter Ia^e. Iaq. Monsieur Lemot, the gentleman and the two Gentlewomen desire
your company.


Lem. I Will come to them straight: but Iaq^s come hith^ I prithee, go to Labesha,
and tell him that the Countess Florila, and the lady Martia be here at thy
masters house: and if it come in question hereafter, deny that thou told him
any such thing.


Iaq. What, is this all? Sblood I Will deny it, and ^eare it too.


Lem. My Lord, I Will go and see the room be ^e and fine, and come to you
presently.


L^. Yea but hark you Let* I prithee take (...) order that they be not known
of any women in the house.


Lem. O how should they now to his wife go in faith!

Exit.
Iaq. Hark you, Monsieur Lab^, I pray let me speak a word with you.


Labe. With all my heart, I pray look to my stake, there is three pence under
the Candl^.


Iaq. I pray see, do you know the Countess Florila and the lady Martia?


Lab. Do I know the lady Martia? I knew her before she was borne, why do you
ask me?


Ia. Why, they are both here at my masters house.


Lab. What, is Mistress Martia at an ordinary?


Ia. Yea that she is.


La. By skies and stones I Will go and tell her father.

Exit.
Enter Lemot and the Countess. Cou. What you are out of breath me thinks
Monsieur Lemot?


Le It is no matter Madam, it is spent in your service, that bear your age
with your honesty, better then an hundred of these nise gallants, and indeed it
is a shame for your husband, that contrary to his oath made to you before
dinner, he shoud be now at the ordinary with that light huswife Martia, which I
could not choose but come and tell you; for indeed it is a shame that your
motherly ca^ should be so slightly regarded.


Co. Out on thee strumpet and accu^st, and miserable dame.


Le. Well, there they are: nothing else now, to her husband go I.

Exit.
Co. Nothing else quoth you, can there be more? O wicked man, would he play
false, that would so simply vow, and sw^re his faith, and would not let me be
displeased a minute, but he would sigh, and weep til I were pleased, I have a
knife within that's rasor sharp, and I will lay an iron in the fire, making it
burning hot to mark the strump^t, but ^will be cold too ere I can come
thither, do something wretched woman, stays thou here?

Exit.
Enter Lemot. Le. My lord, the room is neat and fine, wilt please you go in?


Ue. Gentlemen, your dinner is ready.


All. And we are ready for it.


Le. Iaquis, shut the doors let no body come in.

Exeunt omnes.
Enter Laberuele, Foyes, Labesha, and the Countess. La. Where be these
puritanes, these murderers, let me come in here?


F^. Where is the strumpet?


Co. where is this harlot, let us come in here.


La. What shall we do? the streets do wonder at us, and we do make our shame
known to the world, let us go, and complain us to the King.


Fo. Come Labesha, will you go?


La. No no I scorn to go; no King shall hear my plaint, I will in silent live
a man forlorn, mad, and melancholy, as a cat, and never more wear hat band on
my hat.


Enter Moren, and Martia. Mo. What do thou mean? thou must not hang on me.


Mar. O good lord Moren, have me home with you, you may excuse all to my father
for me.


Enter Lemot. Lem. O my lord, be not so rude to leave her now.


Lor. Alas man, and if my wife should see it, I were undone.


Enter the King and another. Ki. Pursue them sirs, and taking Martia from him,
convey her presently to Valeres house.

What vilain was it that has uttered this.


Enter the Purit^ to Lemot. Le. Why it was even I, I thank you for your gentle
terms, you give me vilain at the first, I wonder where^ this old doter, what
does he think we fear him.


Flo. O monstrous man, what, would thou have him take us?


Le. Would I quoth you, yea by my troth would I, I know he is but gone to call
the constable, or to raise the streets.


Flo. What means the man trow? is he mad?


Le. No, no, I know what I do, I do it of purpose, I long to see him come and
rail at you, to call you harlot, and to spu^e you too, O you will love me a great
deal the better, and yet let him come, and if he touch but one thread of you,
I Will make that thread his poison.


Flo. I know not what to say.


Le. Speak, do you love me?


Flo. Yea surely do I.


Le, Why then have not I reason that love you so dearly as I do, to make you
ha^ull in his sight, that I might more freely enjoy you.


Flo. Why let us be gone my kind Lemot, and not be wondered at in the open
streets.


Le. I Will go with you through fire, through death, through hell, come give me
your own hand, my own dear heart, this hand that I adore and reverence, and
loath to have it, touch an old man's bosom, O let me sweetly kiss it; he
bites.


Flo. Out on thee wretch, he has bit me to the bone, O barbarous Canibal, now
I perceive thou will make me a mocking stock to all the world.


Le. Come, come, leave your passions, they cannot move me, my father and my
mother died both in a day, and I ^ung me a peale for them, and they were no
sooner brought to the church and laid in their graves, but I fetched me two or
three fine capers aloft, and took my leave of them, as men do of their
mistresses at the ending of a galiard; Besilos manus.


^lo. O brutish nature, how accursed was I ever to endure the sound of this
damned voice?


Le. Well, and you do not like my humor, I can be but sorry for it, I bit you
for good will, and if you accept it, so, if no, go.


Flo. Vilain, thou did it in contempt of me.


Le. Well, and you take it so, so be it: hark you Madam, your wisest course
is, even to become puritan again, put off this vain attire, and say, I have
despised all: thanks my God, good husband, I do love thee in the Lord, and he
(good man) will think all this you have done, was but to show thou could
govern the world, and hide thee as a rainebow does a storm: my dainty wench,
go go, what shall the flattering words of a vain man make you forget your
duty to your husband? away, repent, amend your life, you have discredited your
religion ^or ever.


Flo. Well wench, for this foul shame thou put on me, the curse of all
affection light on thee.

Exit.
Le. Go Abacuck, go, why this is excellent, I shall shortly become a
schoolmaster, to whom men will put their wives, to practice; well now will I go
set the Queen upon the King, and tell her where he is close with his wench:
and he that mends my humor, take the spurs: sit fast, for by heaven, i will
iurke the horse you ride on.


Enter my host, Catalian, Blanuel, Berger, Iaquis, Maid, and Boy. Host. Well
Gentlemen, I am utterly undone without your good helps, it is reported that I
received certain ladies or gentlewomen into my house: no here is my man, my
maid, and my boy, now if you saw any, speak boldly before these Gentlemen.


Ia. I saw none sir.


Boy. Nor I, by my maid^ad.


Boy. Nor I, as I am a man.


Ca. Well my host, we will go answer for your house at this the, but if at other
times you have had wenches, and would not let us know it, we are the less
beholding to you.

Exe^t al, but my host and the Gentleman.
Ber. Peradventure the more beholding to him, but I lay my life Lemot has
devised some i^ast, he gave us the slip before dinner.


Cat. Well Gentlemen, since we are so fitly met, I Will tell you an excellent
subject for a fit of mirth, and if it be well handled.


Ber. Why, what is it?


Cat. Why man, Labe^ha is grown mar^elous malecontent, upon some amorous
disposition of ^is mistres, and you know he loves a mease of cream, and a
spice-cake with his heart, and I am sure he has not dined to day, and he has
taken on him the humor of the young lord Dowsecer, and we will set a mease of
cream, a spice-cake, and a spoone, as the armor, picture, and apparel was
set in the way of Dowsecer, which I doub^ not but will work a rare cure upon
his melancholy.


Host. Why, this is excellent, I Will go fetch the cream.


Cat. And I the cake.


Ber. And I the spoone.

Exeunt, and come in again.
Cat. See where he comes as like the lord Dowsecer as may be, now you shall
hear him begin with some Latin sentence that he has remembered ever since he
read his Accidence.


Enter Labesha. La. F^lix que^ faciunt a^iena pericula (...). O silly state of
things, for things they be that cause this silly state: and He spie^ the cre^.
what is a thing, a babble, a toy, that stands men in small stead: but what have
we here? what vanities have we here?


Host. He is strongly tempted, the lord strengthen ^im, see what a vain he
has.


Lab. O cruel fortune, and do thou spit thy spite at my p^ore life: but O
sour cream what think thou that I love thee still? no, no, fair and
sweet is my mistries, if thou had strawberries and sugar in thee: but it
may be thou art set with stale cake to choke me: well taste it, and try it,
spoonefull by spoonefull: bitterer and bitterer still, but ^ sour cream, were
thou an Onion, ^ince Fortune set thee for me, I will eat thee, and I will
de^our thee in spite of Fortunes spite, choke I, or burst I, mistres for thy
sake, to end my life e^te I this cream and cake.


Cat. So he has done, his Melancholy is well eased I warrant you.


Host. Gods my life Gentlemen, who has been at this cream?


Lab. Cream, had you cream? where is your cream? I Will spend my penny at your
cream.


Cat. Why, did not you eat this cream?


Lab. Talk not to me of cream, for such vain meat I do despise as food, my
stomach dies drowned in the cream boules of my mistres eyes.


Cat. Nay-stay Labesha.


Lab. No not I, not I.


Host. O he is ashamed yfayth: but I will tell thee how thou shall make him
mad indeed, say his mistres for love of him has drowned her self.


Cat. Sblood, that will make him hang himself.

Exeunt omnes.
Enter the Queen, Lemot, and all the rest of the lords, and the Countess:
Lemots arm in a scarffe. Lemot. have at them yfayth with a lame counterfeite
humor: ache on rude arm, I care not for thy pain, I got it nobly in the kings
defense, and in the gardiance of my fair Queens right.


Qu. O tell me sweet Lemot, how fares the king? or what his right was that thou
did defend?


Lem. That you shall know when other things are told.


Lab. Keep not the Queen too long without her longing.


Foyes. No, for I tell you it is a dangerous thing.


Coun. Little care cruel men how women long.


Le. What would you have me then put poison in my breath, and burn the ^ares
of my attentive Queen.


Quee. Tell me what ere it be, I Will bear it all.


Lem. bear with my rudeness then in telling it, for alas you see I can but
act it with the left hand, this is my gesture now.


Quee. It Is well enough.


Le^. Yea well enough you say, this recompense have I for all my wounds: then
thus the King inamoured of an other lady compares your face to hers, and says
that yours is fat and flat, and that your nether lip was passing big.


Quee. O wicked man, does he so suddenly condemn my beauty, that when he
married me he thought divine: for ever blasted be that strumpets face, as all
my hopes are blasted, that did change them.


Lem. Nay Madam, though he said your face was fat, and flat, and so forth, yet
he liked it best, and said, a perfect beauty should be so.


La. O did he so! why that was right even as it should be.


Foy. You see now Madam, how much too hasty you were in your griefs.


Que. If he did so esteem of me indeed, happy am I.


Coun. So may your highness be that has so good a husband, but hell has no
plague to such an one as I.


Lem. Indeed Madam, you have a bad husband: truly then did the king grow
mightily in love with the other lady, and swore, no king could more enriched
be, then to enjoy so fair a dame as she.


Cat. O monstrous man, and acurst most miserable dame!


Le. But says the king I do enjoy as fair, and though I love in all hono^ed
sort, yet I Will not wrong my wife for all the world


Foy. This proves his constancy as firm as brass.


Que. It does, it does: O pardon me my lord, that I mistake thy ro^all meaning
so.


Coun In heaven your highness lives, but I in hell.


Lem. But when he vewd her radient eyes again, blind was he strooken with
her fervent beams: and now good King he gropes about in corners void of the
cheerful light should guide us all.


Que. O dismal news, what is my sovereign blind?


Le. Blind as a Beetle madam, that a while houering aloft, at last in cowsheds
fall.


Lab. Could her eyes blind him?


Lem. Eyes or what it was I know not, but blind I am sure he is as any stone.


Q. Come bring me to my Prince my lord that I may lead him, none alive but I
may have the honor to direct his feet.


Lem. How lead him madam? why he can go as right as you, or any here, and is
not blind of eyesight.


Quee. Of what then?


Lem. Of reason.


Quee. Why thou saidest he wanted his cheerful light.


Lem. Of reason still I meant, whose light you know should cheerfully guide a
worthy King, for he does love her, and has forced her into a private room
where now they a^e.


Quee. What mocking chaunges is there in thy words fond man, thou murtherest
me with these exclaimes.


Lem. Why madam it is your fault, you cut me off before my words be half done.


Quee. Forth and unlade the poison of thy tongue.


Lem. Another lord did love this curious lady, who hearing that the King had
forced her, as she was walking with another Earl, ran straightwaies mad for
her, and with a friend of his, and two or three black ruffians more, brake
desperately upon the person of the King, swearing to take from him, in
traitorous fashion, the instrument of procreation: with them I fought a while,,
and got this wound, but being unable to resist so many, came straight to you to
fetch you to his aid.


Lab. Why raised you not the streets?


Lem. That I forbore, because I would not have the world, to see what a
disgrace my liege was subject to, being with a woman in so mean a house.


Foy. Whose daughter was it that he forced I pray?


Lem. Your daughter sir.


La. Whose son was that ran so mad for her?


Lem. Your son my Lord.


La. O Gods, and fiends forbid.


Co. I pray sir, from whom did he take the Lady?


Le. From your good Lord.


Co. O Lord I beseech thee no.


Le. It Is all too true, come follow the Queen and I, where I shall lead you.


Qu. O wretched Queen, what would they take from him?


Le. The instrument of procreation.


Enter Moren. Mo. Now was there ever man so much accursed, that when his mind
misgaue him, such a man was hapless, to keep him company? yet who would keep
him company but I, O vilde Lem^t, my wife and I are bound to curse thee while
we live, but chiefly I, well: seek her, or seek her not; find her, or find
her not, I were as good see how hell opens, as look upon her.


Enter Catalian, and Berger behind him. Ca. We have in faith, stop thou him
there, and I will meet him here.


Mo. Well, I will venture once to seek her.


Ber. Gods Lord, my Lord, come you this way, why your wife runs ranging like
as if she were mad, swearing to slit your nose if she can catch you.

Exit.
Mo. What shall I do at the sight of her and hern.


Ca. Gods precious my Lord, come you this way, your wife comes ranging with a
troop of dames, like Bacchus drunken foes, just as you go, shift for your
self my Lord.


Mo. Stay good Cat^lian.


Ca. No not I my Lord.

Exit.
Mo. How now Jacques, what is the news?


Enter Jacques. Iaq. None but good my Lord.


Mo. Why have not seen my wife run round about the streets.


Ia. Not I my Lord, I come to you from my master, who would pray you to
speak to Lemot, that Lemot might speak to the King, that my masters lottery
for his jewels may go forward, he has made the rarest device that ever you
heard, we have fortune in it, and she our maid plays, and I, and my fellow
carry two torches, and our boy goes before and speaks a speech, it is very fine
in faith sir.


Mo. Sir in this thou may highly pleasure me, let me have thy place to
bear a torch, that I may look on my wife, and she not see me, for if I come
into her sight abruptly, I were better be hanged.


Ia. O sir you shall, or any thing that I can do, I Will send for your wife to.


Mor. I prithee do.

Ex^unt both.
Enter the Queen, and all that were in before. Le. This is the house where the
mad Lord did vow to do the deed, draw all your swoords courageous gentlemen,
I Will bring you there where you shall honor win, but I can tell you, you must
break your shinne.


Ca. Who will not break his neck to save his King: set forward Lemot.


Le. Yea, much good can I do with a wounded arm, I Will go and call more help.


Qu. Others shall go, nay we will raise the streets, better dishonor, then
destroy the King.


Le. God's Blood I know not how to excuse my villainy, I would feign be gone.


Enter Dowsecer, and his friend. Dow. I Will geld the adulterous goat, and take
from him the instrument, that plays him such sweet music.


La. O rare, this makes my fiction true: now i will stay.


Quee. Arrest these faithless tra^trous gentlemen.


Dow. What is the reason that you call us traitors?


La. Nay, why do you attempt such violence against the person of the King?


Dow. Against the King, why this is strange to me.


Enter the King, and Martia. Ki. How now my masters, what? weapons drawn, come
you to murder me.


Qu. How fares my Lord?


Ki. How fare I? well, but you in faith shall get me speak for you another time;
he got me here to woo a curious Lady, and she temptes him, say what I can,
over what state I will in your behalf Lemot, she will not yield.


Le. In Faith my liege, what a hard heart has she, well hark you, I am content
your wit shall save your honesty for this once.


Ki. Peace, a plague OR you, peace; but wherefore asked you how I did?


Quee^e. Because I feared that you were hurt my Lord.


Ki Hurt, how I pray?


Lem. Why, hurt Madam, I am well again.


Quee. Do you ask? why he told me Dowsecer and this his friend, threatened to
take away.


Ki. To take away, what should they take away.


Le. Name it Madam.


Qu. Nay, I pray name it you.


Le. Why then, thus it was my liege, I told her Dowsecer, and this his friend
threatened to take away, and if they could the iustrument of procreation, and
what was that now, but Martia being a fair woman, is not she the instrument
of procreation, as all women are.


Qu. O wicked man.


Le. Go to, go to, you are one of those fiddles too in faith.


Ki. Well pardon my minion, that has frayd you thus, it was but to make you merry
in the end.


Qu. I joy it ends so well, my gracious lord.


Fo. But say my gracious Lord, is no harm done, between my loving daughter,
and your grace?


Ki. No, of my honor and my soul Foyes.


Dow. The fire of love which she has ^indled in me being greater then my heat
of vanity, has quite expelled.


Ki Come Dowsecer, receive with your lost wits your love, though los^* I know
you will yield, my lord and you her father.


Both Most joyfully my Lord.


Ki. And for her part I know her disposition well enough.


Lem. What, will you have her?


Dow. Yea mary will I.


Le. I Will go and tell Labesha presently.


Enter Iaquis, and my Host. Ia. Monsieur I emot, I pray let me speak with you,
I come to you from the lord Moren, who would desire you to speak to the King
for my masters lottery, and he has my place to bear a torch, for bare faced
he dares not look upon his wife, for his life.


Le. O excellent, I Will further thy masters lottery and it be but for this jest
only, har^e you my liege, here is the poor man has bin at great charges for the
preparation of a lottery, and he has made the rarest device, that I know you
will ta^e great pleasure in it, I pray let him present it before you at (...)
house.


Ki. Whith all my heart, can you be ready so soon?


Host. Presently and if it like your grace.


Ki. But hark you Lemot, how shall we do for every man's posie.


Le. Will ^ou all trust me with the making of them?


All. With all our hearts.


Le. Wh^ then I Will go to make the poses and bring I abesha to the lottery
presently.


Enter Florila like a Puritan. Flo. Surely the world is full of vanity, a
woman must take heed she do not hear a lewd man speak, for every woman cannot
when she is tempted, when the wicked fiend gets her into his snares escape
like me, for graces measure is not so filled up, nor so pressed down in every
one as me, but yet I promise you a little more: well, I Will go seek my head, who
shall take me in the gates of his kind arms untouched of any.


King. What Madam are you so pure now?


Flo. Yea, would not you be pure?


King. No puritan.


Flo. You must be then a devil. I can tell you.


Lab. O wife where have thou been?


Flo. where did I tell you I would be I pray.


Lab. In thy close walk thou said.


Flo. And was 'not?


Lab. Truly / know not, I neither looked nor knocked, for Labesha told me that
you, and fair Martia were at Verones ordinary.


Ki. Labesha? my lord you are a wise man to belecue a fool.


Flo. Well my good head, for my part I forgive you: but surely you do much
offend to be suspicious: where there is no trust, there is no love, and where
there is no love twixt man and wife, there is no good dealing surely: for as men
should ever love their wives, so should they ever trust the^, for what love is
there where there is no trust?


King. She tells you true, my lord.


Lab. She does my liege; and dear wife pardon this and I will never be
suspicious more.


Flo. Why I say, I do.


Enter Lemot, leading Labesha in a halter. Lem. Look you my liege, I have done
simple service amongst you, here is one had hanged himself for love, thinking
his Mistress had done so for him: well, see your Mistress ^ues.


Labes^. And does my Mistress live?


King. She does, O noble knight, but not your Mistress now.


Lab. Sblood, but she shall for me, or for no body else.


Lem. How now, what a traitor, draw upon the King.


Lab. Yea, or upon any woman here in a good cause.


King. Well sweet Besha let her marry Dowsecer, I Will get thee a wife worth
fifteen of her, will thou have one that cares not for thee?


Lab. Not I by the Lord, I scorn her, I Will have her better if I can get her.


King. Why that's well faid.


Lem. What Madam, are you turned puritan again?


Elo. When was I other, pray?


Lem. Marie I Will tell you when, when you went to the Ordinary, and when you
made false signs to your husband, which I could tell him all.


Flo. Cursed be he that makes debate twixt man and wife.


Lem. O rare scripturian! you have sealed up my lips, a hall, a hall, the
pageant of the Butterie.


Enter two with torches, the one of them Moren, then my host and his son, tben
his maid dressed like Queen Fortune with two pots in her hands. King. What is he?


Lem. This is Verones son, my liege.


King. What shall he do?


Cat Speak some speech that his father has made for him


Qu. Why is he good at speeches?


Cat. O he is rare at speeches.


Boy. Fair ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose wits
be scarce.


Ki. My host, why do you call us nobles most slender?


Host. And it shall please your Grace, to be slender is to be proper, and
therefore where my boy says nobles most slender, it is as much to say, fine and
proper nobles.


Le. Yea, but why do you call us gentles whose wits are scarce.


Host. To be scarce, is to be rare: and therefore where as he says Gentles
whose wits be scarce, is as much as to say, Gentles whose wits be rare.


Lem. Well, forwards trunchman.


Boy. Fair ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose
wits be scarce, Queen Fortune does come with her trumpe, and her drum, as
it may appear by my voice.


Lab. Come hither, are you a schoolemaister, where was Fortune Queen, of what
country or kingdom?


Host. Wy sir, Fortune was Queen over all the world.


Lab. That's a lie, there is none that ever conquered all the world, but master
Alisander, I am sure of that.


Lem. O rare Monsieur Labesha, who would have thought he could have found so
rare a fault in the speech.


Host. I Will alter it if it please your grace.


King. No, it is very well.


Boy. Father I must begin again they interrupt me so.


Ho. I beseech your grace give the boy leave to begin again.


King. With all my heart, it is so good we cannot hear it too often.


Boy. Fair ladies most tender, and nobles most slender, and gentles whose
wits are scarce, Queen Fortune does come with her Fife, and her Drum, as it
does appear by my voice, here is Fortune good, but il by the rood, and this
naught but good shall do you, dealing the lots out of our pots, and so good
Fortune to you sir.


Lem. Look you my liege, how he that caries the torch trembles extremely.


Kin. I warrant it is with care to carry his torch well.


Lem. Nay there is something else in the wind: why my host that means thy man
Jacques to tremble so?


Host. Hold still thou knave, what art thou afraid to look upon the goodly
presence of a king: hold up for shame.


Lem. Alas poor man, he thinks it is Jacques his man: poor lord, how much is he
bound to suffer for his wife?


King Hark you mine host, what goodly person is that? is it Fortune herself?


Host. I Will tell your Majesty in secret who it is, it is my maid Iaquena.


King. I promise you she becomes her state rarely.


Lem. Well my ^ege, you were all content that I should make your poses: well
here they be every one: give Master Verone his five crowns.


King. There Is mine and the Queens.


Labesh. Theirs ours


D^w. And there is mine and Martias.


Lem. Come Labesha thy money.


Lab You must lend me some, for my boy is run away with my purse.


Le. Thy boy? ^ never knew any that thou had.


Lab. Had not I a boy three or four years ago, and he ran away.


Lem. And never since he went thou had not a penny, but stand by, I Will excuse
you. But sirrah (...), thou shall stand on one side and read the prises, and I
will stand on the other and read the Poses.


Cat. Content Lemot.


Lem. Come on Queen Fortune, tell eueryman ^is posie, this is orderly, the
King and Queen are first.


King. Come let us see what goodly poses you have given us.


Lem. This is your Majesty's, At the fairest, so it be not Martia.


King. A plague upon you, you are still playing the villains with me.


Le. This is the Queens, Obey the ^ueene: and she speaks it to her husband,
or to Fort^ne, which she will.


C^t. A prise: your (...) is the sum of four shillings in gold


King. Why how can that ^e (...) is no such coin.


H^st. Here is the worth of it, if it (...) your grace.


Quee. Well, what is for me?


Ca. A heart of gold.


Quee. A goodly jewel.


Le. Count Laberuele and Floril^.


La. What Is my posie sir I pray?


Le. Mary this my Lord,
Of all fortunes friends, that has joy in this life,
He is most happy that puts a sure trust in his wife.

La. A very good one sir, I thank you for it.


Flo. What Is mine I pray?


Le. M^ry this Madam,
Good fortune be thou my good fortune bringer,
And make me amends for my poor bitten finger.

La. Who bit your finger wife?


Flo. No body; it is vain posie.


Ca. Blanke for my lord Laberuele, for his wife a posie, a pair of holy beads
with a crucifix.


Flo. O bommination Idol, I Will none of them.


Ki. Keep^ them thy self Veron, she will not have them.


Le. Dowsecer and Martia I have fitted your lordship for a posie.


Dow. Why what is it?


Le. An^o omnia vna.


Ma. And what is mine sir?


Le. A serious one I warrant you change: for the better.


Ma. That's not amiss.


Ca. A price: Dow^r has a cats eyes or Mercuries rod of gold, set with
Ia^inths and Emeralds.


Do^ What is for Martia?


Ca. M^rtia has the two serpents heads set with Diamonds.


Le. What my host Uerone?


Ki. What ^s he in for his own ^ewells.


Le. O what else my liege, it is our bounty, and his po^e is To tell you the t^th
in words plain and mild, Veron^ loves his maid, and she is great with child.


Ki. What Queen for^e with child, shall we hau^ young fortunes my host?


Host. I am abused, and if it please your Mai^stie.


Maid. ^le play no more.


Lem. No says you need not now, you have played your (...) full already


Host. Stand still good (...), they do but jest.


Ma^a. Yea, but I like no such ieasting.


Lem. Come great Queen Fortune, let see your posies, what madam, alas, your
ladyship is one of the last.


Coun. What is my posie sir I pray?


Lem. Marie Madam your posie is made in manner and form of an Echo, as if you
were seeking your husband, and fortune should be the Echo, and this you say:
where is my husband h^d so long vn^askt, maskt? says the Echo, but in what
place sweet Fortune? let me hear: hear says the Echo.


King. There you lie Echo, for if he were here we must needs ^ee him.


Lem. Indeed sweet King there me thinks the Echo must needs I^e, if he
were here we must needs see him, it is one of the^ that caries the torches: no
that cannot be neither, and yet by the Mass here is Jacques, why my host, did not
you tell me that Jacques should be a torchbearer: who is this? Gods my life, my
lord.


Mor. And you be Gentlemen let me go.


Coun. Nay come your way, you may be well enough ashamed to show your face that
is a perjured wretch, did not you swear, if there were any wenches at the
or^narie, you yo^ld straight come home.


King. Why, who told you Madam, there were any there?


Coun. He that will stand to it Lemot my l^ge.


Lem. who I stand to it, alas, I told you in kindness, and good will, because
I would not have you company long from your husband.


Mor. Why lo you bird, how much you are deceived.


Co. Why wherefore were you afraid to be seen?


Mor. Who I afraid? alas I bore a torch to grace this honorable presence, for
nothing else sweet bird.


King. Thanks good Moren, see lady with what wrong you have pursued your most
inamored lord: but come now al are friends, now is this day spent with an
hurtful motives of delight, and over joys more my senses at the night: and
now for Dowsecer, if all will follow my devise, his beaut^ous love and he shall
married be, and here I solemnly inuit you all home to my court, where with
feasts we will crown this myrthfull day, and vow it to r^nowne.


FINIS.
LONDON

Printed by Valentine Simmes.

1599.


