A TRVE DISCOVRSE OF ALL THE ROYAL PASSAGES, TRYVMPHS and Ceremonies, observed
at the Contract and Marriage of the High and Mighty CHARLES, King of Great
Britain, and the most Excellentest of Ladies, the Lady HENRIETTA MARIA of
Burbon, sister to the most Christian King of FRANCE.

Together with her Journey from Paris to Bulloigne, and thence unto Dover in
England, where the KING met her, and the manner of their enterview.

As also the tryumphant Solemnities which passed in their Iournies from Dover
to the City of London, and so to Whitehall, etc.

O quam te memorem virgo. --
-- O Dea Certe.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for HANNA BARRET. 1625.

A TRVE RELATION of all the Royal Passages, Triumphs and Ceremonies, observed
at the Contract and Marriage of the High and mighty CHARLES, King of Great
Britain, and the most Excellentest of Ladies, the Lady HENRIETTA MARIA of
Burbon, Sister to the most Christian King of France, together with Her Journey
from Paris to Bulloigne, and thence unto Dover in England, and so to the City
of London, etc.
AMongst all the infinite blessings wherewith it has pleased the Divine
Goodness to cloth and adorn our Nation: None is more remarkable or
glorious, then this happy and long wished for Union between the two great
Monarchies of France and Great Britain, since by it we have attained to the
full height of all our hopes, all our wishes, all our contentments, and
beholding, as in a goodly Myrrour, the full pourtrature of all our joys, we
find our Kingdom fortified against the threatenings of Envy, our throne
established with the hope of a most flourishing Issue, and the hearts of all
true subjects revived with the memory of this blessed Match, and Conjunction:
which may work terror amongst our adversaries, as often as they hear the joint
names of Great Britain and France, in a cheerful manner repeated.

To proceed then to those Royal Passages and triumphant Ceremonies which were
performed at these great Nuptials. It is to be understood that upon Thursday,
being the eight of May, according to the French Computation, but the eight and
twentieth of April, according to our English account, the most Christian King
of France, with his Queen, and the Prince his only Brother, and attended by
my Lords the Dukes of Nemeurs and Elbeuf, the two great Marshalls of France,
Mounsieur de Vitry and Bassompiere, With a world of other Noblemen, Ladies,
Knights and Gentlemen, came forth of his Bedchamber or Cabinet, into the
public Presence Chamber, where he sent for the most Excellent Lady his
Sister, who with all Solemnity was presently brought forth by the Queen her
Mother, and attended on by the Princess of Conde, the Princess of Countee,
the Duchess of Guise, the Duchess of Cheureuse, and the Duchess of
Elbeuf, and diverse other Ladies of State, and Maids of Honor: Her garments
that day were exceeding rich and sumptuous, her Gown being of cloth of gold,
cut upon cloth of silver, and richly embrodered all over with Flower de Luces
of gold, and chased and interlaid with Dimonds, Rubies, Pearl, and other rich
Iuelrie of an inestimable value: Her Train was borne up by the young Lady of
Burbon, her dear Kinswoman, and a Lady of exceeding great beauty and
wonderful admiration.

After the Princess had in reverend and solemn wise done obeisance to the
King her Brother, in which action of humility a man might have beheld all the
glorious beams of Majesty and sweetness: there presently entered into the
Chamber the Earl of Carlisle, and the Earl of Holland, being both Ambassadors
for his Majesty of Great Britain; and both so rich and sumptuously attired,
that neither art nor wealth was able to exceed them. These two noble men in a
most solemn and respective manner Delivered to the King of France the Contract
of Marriage, which was forthwith opened and publicly read by the Secretary of
the Kings Cabinet in an high and audible voice, and then all other Covenants
and agreements concluded upon, the Contract was allowed and ratified by the
Lord Chancellor, who made a congratulatory speech in honor of that days
Ceremony.

As Soon as these things were performed, the two English Ambassadors withdrew
themselves into the Duke of Cheureuse Chamber which was the Kings lodgings,
when all accommodations necessary for them and that days solemnity was in
goodly order prepared, here the Ambassadors communicated unto the Duke the
Contract, who forthwith returned again to the King his Master, having the
Ambassadors also with him, and diverse other Noblemen of great rank and place.
The Duke was also himself most richly attired, and though the ground was
black, yet was the imbrodery of admirable value, and abundance of Diamonds and
other Precious stones bestowed within the same, but especially upon the panes
of his breeches and the tagges of his points, which were praised at an infinite
world of treasure.

As Soon as the Duke was come before the King (after solemn reverence done)
he presented to his Highness his procuration, and showed the authority and
Commission which the King of great Britain had given him, being in a certain
scedule annexed and fixed unto the Contract, which after the King had read, he
allowed and signed also: so did the great Lady her self the Queen of France,
and the Queen Mother, the Duke of Cheurus^, to whom the proxey belonged, and
both the Ambassadors for England; then all things being brought to this
perfection, the Cardinal de la Roche Faucault attyred in all his pontifical
roabes, after the custom and manner of the French Nation performed the
Contract and published the affiance in a most stately and reverend manner, to
the infinite joy and contentment of all the beholders, and the unspeakable
comfort and prosperity of both the happy Kingdoms.

This Contract thus happily performed in the Kings Palace of the Louure,
forthwith our Ladies Church in Paris is chosen for the Celebration and final
conclusion of the euer-happy marriage; and that it might be the fitter for the
receipt of so great a pomp and state, it was out of hand hanged all over with
wonderful rich Arras, cloth of Tissue, cloth of Gold, and cloth of Silver;
there was also in the same Church raised up upon goodly pillasters and gilt
columbs a most rich and stately gallery or Scaffold of state, which extended
from the first entry of the Archbishops house to the very Quire or uppermost
end of the same Church, being a structure of such good lives, that art could
not possible express any thing beyond it. The Pillars and railes which did
underprop this gallery were at the top covered with a very curious Purple or
Violet colored Satin, all imbrodered and powdered over with golden Flower de
Luces, and at the bottomes they were ouerspread with very fine white linen and
many burning tapers of wax flaming about the same, so that the Church seemed
like the Palace of the Sun, described by Ovid in his second Book of the
transmutations of shapes.

Through this Gallery the whole pomp and body of this Royal and unmatchable
solemnity was to pass, which I have thought good briefly to set down as I
received it from those which were Noble eye witnesses of the same.

First, the perfixed day and hour for the solemnity of this Royal and sacred
Marriage being come, and the whole pomp thereof in a full readiness, the first
that marched forth were the hundred Swissers of the Kings Guard all clothed in
the Kings livery of estate with their Drums beating before and after them,
the Fifes whistling, their Ensign displayed, and all other things suitable to a
warlike preparation, for these are the Kings first, and indeed most
souldier-like guard, being men of that temper and condition, that they are
truly said to be borne Soldiers, live Soldiers, and dye Soldiers. A good
pretty space after them went twelve Hoboyes in the Kings livery of Estate also,
who playing upon those loud Instruments struck into some admiration, but into
all delight and pleasure. Next unto these marched in two ranckes eight of the
Kings principal Drums in their Liueries of Estate also, and these were said
to beat their Drums with that bravery and couragiousnesse, that as it was said
of Alexander, that when he heard Ionicke music, he would start up, call for
his sword and armor, and express all the passions of anger and fury, so
there was not an ear that heard these, but awaked the heart to think of
heroycall atchieuements. After these marched the Kings second Guard, consisting
of Frenchmen: Then came at least a dozen Trumpets in their Liueries of Estate
also, with rich Banners containing the Kings full Coat Armor, and fair
Cordans of watchet silk and gold suitable to the rest in every proportion.
After these Trumpets came in a stately manner Mounsieur de Rhodes, who is the
great Master of the Ceremonies, being wonderfully richly apparrelled, and at
the least twenty of the Kings ordinary Gentlemen attending about him.
Immediately after him went all the Lords, and others who were Knights of the
great and renowned Order of the Holy Ghost, in the rich Roabs of their Order,
and with their Palkes or Mantles of watchet velvet all, most bravely embrodered
with Flower de Luces of gold, and their other garments shining with precious
stones and rich Iuelrie. Near unto these Knights went seven Heralds at Arms
in very rich Coats of Crimson Velvet, with the Arms of France, and all powdered
over with golden Flower de Luces. Close unto these Heralds followed the two
great great Marshalls of France, Mounsieur de Vitry, and Mounsieur Bassompiere;
and after them came alone the Duke of Elbeuf in most sumptuous attire. Then a
little distance from him came (representing the Person of the Royal
Bridegroom) the Duke of Cheureuse, in a suit of most rich perfumed
blackecloth, cut upon cloth of gold, and lined with rich Tissue; upon his head
he wore a Cap of cloth of gold, on which was fixed a Jewel of a most
inestimable value, every Diamond being so glorious, that it dazelled the eyes
of all that gazed upon it; about his body Bautricke-wise he wore a wonderful
curious rich Scarffe, all embrodered over with Roses, and powdered with Paragon
Diamonds, and great orient Pearl; he wore a short cloak all embrodered over
with gold, and set with Diamonds so wonderful thick and furiously, that in
his moving he seemed to burn and bear a living flame about him. After him
came the Earl of Carlisle, and the Earl of Holland (being the Extraordinary
Ambassadors for the Majesty of Great Britain) and they were both apparrelled
in white cloth of silver, richly embrodered and interchased with many precious
stones and wealthy Iuelry. Then came the King of France in his own Person, in
Royal garments of Estate, all embrodered over with gold and silver, and almost
covered over with rich Jewels, in his right hand holding the most Excellent
Princess his sister, who that day wore a Crown of gold upon her head, chased
and set with Diamonds, and a world of other precious stones, her Gown was all
powdered over with golden Flower de Luces: and on her other hand went Mounsieur
the Kings Brother, wonderful sumptuously attired, and not inferior to any
that hac place in the Royal assembly. Next unto the King, Prince, and Royal
Bride, followed the Queen Mother of France, very grave, yet richly attired: and
after her came the Queen of France, whose Gown was all lulyeoly, embrodered
over with gold and silver, and set, and inchased with a world of precious
stones, Pearl, and other Iuelry; the Princess of Conde, and the Princess of
Countee bore up the Queens long Train. And after them followed the young
Lady of Montpensier, and the Countess of Soysons, and other Ladies of the
Kings blood, in rich gowns brodered about with golden Flower de Luces. And
after them the Duchess of Guise, the Duchess of Cheureuse, and the
Duchess Elbeuf, with a world of other Ladies and Gentlewomen, which like so
many fair Planets moving in their several orbs, made all the place like the
Heavens sparkle with renown and glory about them. After these came a little
world of Noblemen, Knights, and Gentlemen. And last of all came the Kings
principal and chief Guard, consisting only of Stots and no other.

All this royal and admired assembly having in this worthy equipage before
described, advanced themselves from the Kings Castle of the Louure to our
Ladies Church, they all made a stand at the entry of the great porch of the
Church, before which was a most stately scaffold mounted whereon to celebrate
the marriage, and in which place was raised a wonderful rich and curious
Canopie or vealt royal of cloth of gold richly embrodred, and held almost of
and incomparable value: to this Canopie or Vealt royal the King and Monsieur
his brother conducted the Royal Bride their sister, and placing her under it,
they there left her till some ceremony were finished, then they resigned her
up into the hands of the Duke of Chereuse, to whom the Cardinal de la Roche
Foncault came and performed all the ceremonies of marriage according to the
orders of the Church, and the royal ceremonies of the French Nation, all
acclamations of honor and renown ringing about the Church in a wonderful
manner.

The ceremonies being thus finished all, the troops and orders before
rehearsed, passed in a most solemn manner up into the quire through along the
gallerie, principally erected for that purpose, and going by a direct line,
just through the midst of the Church, and every part thereof hung and adorned
with wonderful rich cloth of Arras, being more then three quarters of gold or
silver.

In the midst of the quire on both sides were placed diverse eminent and
stately seats of more respect and view then any formerly repeated, on the
principal side whereof sat all my Lords the Presidents of the Parliaments of
France, with their morters of gold upon their heads, and their gowns, robes
and hoods of rich scarlet all lined with Ermines, and some small degree below
them sat all the Counselors of the high Courts of Parliament in gowns like
unto the Presidents, and other things appropriated unto their places.

In opposition unto these, and in seats of like eminence, sat first alone by
himself the Provost of the Merchants of Paris, clothed in a long roabe of
Crimson and Purple, or Violet colored Velvet, and near unto him the Sherifes
of the City of Paris, and other principal Magistrates which were of especial
note both in the City and in the University.

Not far from these seats, and in the quire also was mounted another scaffold
or flore, being raised full three steps high, upon which was mounted another
large and goodly Canopie or Tent royal, under which the K. the Q. and the Q.
mother, and Monsieur the Kings brother were placed and conducted this thereby
the Duke of Cheureuse, and the two extraordinary Ambassadors for the majesty
of great Britain, who after they had seen every ceremony fitted, they
withdrew themselves into the Archbishops palace until the whole service was
ended, and then they returned again to the K. and Queen.

When the forms or ceremonies of the French devotions were ended, and that the
acclamations of the people had carried joy to every proceeding, then the whole
troop returned, in the same form or equipage as they came thither unto the
Archbishops palace, where the whole Court supped, and were entertained with
all the state, pomp, and magnificence that could be devised. During all the
pomp and solemnity of which feast, there was heard such thundering vollies of
Cannon, and other great shot that the ecchoing report thereof was carried many
leagues off, and even judgment it self could not but stand amazed to see and
hear the wonderful terrors which proceeded from pleasure and reioycings.
After these infinite vollies of shot, was seen many other triumphs, as
bonefires, fireworkes, feasts, musickes of all kinds, and all sounds, dancings,
maskings, and all manner of reuells, that France seemed to intend nothing but
the present rauishing joy, and well; and truly may it be said of her that then
now she was never seen more pleasant, never more abundantly clothed with
contentments and comforts.

But here least I might be thought to gallop too swiftly over the glory of
this high state and magnificence, and like the dogs upon the river Nilus to
catch here and there a lap running, I will borrow leave a little to speak of
the powerful state and magnificence of this hardly paralleld feast and
sumptuous triumph.

It is therefore first to be understood that this glorious and royal feast was
held in the great hall belonging to the Archbishops palace, being a room of
wonderful long extent, the table stretched out from the one end of the hall to
the other, and being covered and adorned with wonderful rich damask, and the
salts and other apparel of infinite price and value, the King of France sat
in the midst of the table, and was served by the grand Prior of France, who
that day represented the person of the great Master of France, before him
marched eight drums, four fifes, and sixteen trumpets, besides a world of
clarions, hoboyes, cornets, and other loud instruments, his person was
accompanied with Monsieur Beaumont, Lord grand Steward of the kings house, and
two and thirty other inferior Stewards of his Majesty's household with white
staves in their hands, and other ensigns of their several places.

The meat was this day carried up by the Lords, Princes, Dukes, Peers,
Marshals, and Barons of France, followed by Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen of the
Court, and other inferior officers and servants. Now touching the particular
services of state, you shall understand that Monsier Iainuilde served this day
as the Lord great Pantler of France, the Duke of Elbeufe was Cupbearer, and the
Earl of Harcourt was Caruer. The Queen mother sat on the right hand of the
King, and her person was attended by the Duke of Belgard principal Sewer, the
Duke of Vzias, and the Duke of Luxembourge. The Queen of France herself sat
on the right hand of the Queen mother, and was attended by the Duke of Aluine,
the Duke Brissac, and the Duke of Chaune. The Queen of great Britain sat on
the Kings left hand, and was attended by the Marshall de Vittry, who served her
as great Pantler, the Marshall de Aubeterce, who served her as Cupbearer, and
the Marshall Bassampiere as Caruer. My Lord the Duke of Cheureuse sat next the
Queen of great Britain, and was attended by the Lord of Rochfort. The Earl
of Carlisle, and the Earl of Holland Ambassadors for the Majesty of great
Britain sat next the Duke of Cheureuse, and lastly Monsier the Kings brother
sat near unto the Queen, and after him the rest of the Peers and Princes,
all which were served and attended on in most magnificent and heroycall manner.

After the solemnity of this great and royal feast, the King, Queens, and
Princes returned back to the Louuer, where there was great store of Music,
Dancing, and Reuells, and the joy of that days happy and blessed union,
deprived the night of her ordinary accustomed dues, so that rest was in a
manner quite forgotten, and the night and day were both thought too scant and
confined to express a joy so strong and dylated.

After these ceremonies and celebrations were to the contentment of all true
hearted subjects finished, the ever admired and most excellent Queen of great
Britain, after some short time of repose, with a wonderful glorious train
of Princes, Noblemen, Ladies, and all the choicest flowers of France, took her
happy journey toward Bulloyne, where after some travel, and the expense of
some few days, her Majesty arrived with great prosperity; for in that place
lay at anchor the goodly fleet of great Britain, ready to waft and carry
her Majesty over at her own appointment, and in the passage of this fleet,
there was one thing remarkable, as that in their departure from England the
wind rose up so full South and South-West, being the only wind which was
opposite and contrary to their course, that but with infinite great trouble
and vexation they had power to attain to the French shore, but being there
arrived, immediately the wind rose up full North-East, which was likewise the
most contrary wind for their return that could possibly blow from any part of
the Compass, neither was the Contrariety of this wind of a mean and
indifferent nature, but so violent, feirce and impatient that it was hardly
possible for any Ship to live or Continue upon that road, and although the
necessity of their present occasion, the command and service to which was bound
the uttermost of there obedience, and many other ties inforst them to use all
Art, Care and wisdom still to continue in that place, yet was the impatience
of the winds so great that in despite of all art or industry the goodly and
tall ship called the Prince spent an anchor of above 30. hundred weight, the
Anne, the Assurance, and all the rest of the fleet were on drift, and all hope
being cut off to continue longer in that place, and they must now look for
foreign safety. But Ecce quam opportunum, behold how great and good our God
is in these fatal extremities, for in the very minute of this Desperation and
Coffeehouse the Queen of great Britain came to Bulloigne, and as if her
very presence had dispeld the wind, or the sweetness of her excellent
nature, had put into insensible things a sensible feeling of the Injuries which
might be done to her goodness by the impatiencie of such stormy weather,
presently the storm and winds ceased and the Sea became so calm and mild
that not a wrinkle was to be seen upon Neptunes face, and the winds as if
they strugled to Conduct and bring her to the place where both her royal Lords
and her own wishes and the peoples longings hourly aspired and that withal
ease comfort and sweetness, they presently rose up so calmely and with such
delicate breath that Joining with the gentleness of the easy tides all so
happily concurred together that not the best wish was able to out-reach the
happy event.

This observation being taken both by her Excellent self, and those careful
Princes who had the charge of her Royal Person, she presently took her Barge
upon Sunday about ten of the clock in the fore-noone, being the ninth of this
instant June, according to our English computation and so came a board a goodly
and stately ship, called the Prince, being Admiral, where after a world of
shouts, prayers, vows and acclamations for the prosperity of her happy
journey; they hoisted sail, and came that day about six of the clock in the
afternoon unto the Town of Dover in England, where she was received with
that joy and humble respect, that never Queen could boast of a more general
applause. From the water she was conducted in most stately and magnificent
manner to Dover Castle, where her Highness reposed her self that night, being
royally entertained both by the Town and Country, and magnificently feasted
and accommodated with all the delights and pleasures which the leisure of that
busy affair could give any liberty unto.

Upon Monday being the thirteenth of June, the Kings most Excellent Majesty
came unto Dover about ten of the clock in the fore-noone, and after little
short preparation, the Queen being full of all joyful expectation, they met
together in the Privy Chamber, where in the first encounter she threw her
self into his arms with that boundless and vnexpresseable affection, that
virtue, modesty, and all the perfections which can crown the best and most
excellent creature, might there have learned the worthiest rules both of
honor, true love, and obedience; neither did she so soon cast her self into
his arms, as withal instantly threw down her self upon her knees before
him, giving up into his sacred protection, her life, liberty, service, and
everlasting obedience, acknowledging her selfean Handmaid to his goodness, and
that all the powers and strength both of her mind and body should wholly and
absolutely, next unto her God, rest ever bound to his Kingly Commandments.
What tongue or pen is able to express that joy wherewith he received her, and
her dear protestations, for scarsely could you say she is now upon her knees,
when with all the tendernesses which an immaculate and unspotted affection
could express, he presently took her up into his arms, kissed her again, and
gave her those dear expressions of a never changing love, that the beholders
might see how each others heart flew out at the windows of their eyes, and by
adeliazan enterchange lodged themselves in each others bosom: after these pure
and unfeigned caressments, they fell into private conference, and so passed the
time till dinner; which finished, the King and Queen departed from Dover, and
being come out of the Town, a gallant volley of shot was delivered both from
the Castle and ships, which continued so long and loud, that the very peale in
the echo carried back her royal welcome unto Callyes. Being come from the
Town of Dover, they came upon Barrome Down, a spacious and goodly place,
where were assembled all the English Nobility, and many Ladies of Honor and
high place, which being ranckt according to the dignity of their great places,
and the knight Marshall with a careful respect keeping the vulgar from
intruding or doing them offense. The King and Queen in great State rode
between them, giving such respect and grace to every one of deserving
quality, that every one strove in their prayers and praises, to let the world
understand the infiniteness of their joy and comfort.

From Barrome Down the King and Queen came the same night to the City of
Canterbury, all the ways whereupon they rode being strewed with green
rushes, Roses, and the choicest flowers that could be gotten, and the trees
laden with people of all sorts, who with shouts and acclamations gave them a
continual welcome. Being come near unto the City, their Highnesses were met,
and received by the Mayor, and the rest of the City Magistrates, and so
brought within the walls, where was pronounced before them diverse learned
gratulatory Orations, and such infinite preparations made of all kinds for the
general entertainment, that Canterbury seemed for that little time, a very
Eden or Paradise, where nothing was wanting that might serve joy or delight.

Master JOHN FINCH his Speech to King CHARLES at Canterbury, May 30. 1625.
MOst Gracious and dread Sovereign: Those that would keep their spirits in a
just and true temper, useful for speech or action, had need of a watchful eye
upon two principal causes of their decay, the ouer-contracting, and the
too-much extending of them; whereof the last does most impouerish and weaken:
whence it comes, that in weighty griefs the spirits being pent up and
imprisoned, have often the doors of utterance shut against them: but in
excessive joy, where they spread and make have to get forth by expression, they
are commonly scattered and lost.

Both these are at this time combined against us, your Majesty's humblest and
meanest subjects.

When we remember what a glorious and good King we have lost. A King from his
cradle to those very years that are the common measure of this short line of
Life, exercised in all the wisdom of well governing. A King that having taken
away the wall of Separation united two puissant and military Nations reduced
Ireland by foreign plantations, gave this Realm a large portion of the new
world, and reigned above twenty years in such peace and felicity, as was
beyond the event of former times; for even in the happy days of Queen
Elizabeth of famous memory, her first years were interrupted by a Rebellion in
England, and her last by a Rebellion in Ireland. A King that by his
incomparable Writings, proclaimed himself true Defender of the Faith; and like
Joshua, made the walls of spiritual Ierico fall down before him. When we but
remember this (as who can ever forget it) how are our sorrows pressed together,
or who can find any door of speech to let his grief forth at? Non est dolor
sicut iste, There is no woe can parallel this.

But when we turn our eyes and hearts upon your most excellent Majesty, the
true Heir of all his Princely Virtues, when in your Royal Person we see all
these blessings and favors of God entailed upon us, and by this happy
Conjunction now descendable to all posterity: who can draw forth the Legions
of his joy in order, or find a language fit for the gladness of his heart.

He that is borne a King (most Gracious Sovereign) can hardly attain one
point of perfection in Government, the knowledge of obeying well. A
contemplation which in one act of obedience in Henry the fifth, (who was one of
the noblest Princes that ever swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom from the
Conquest to his times, and he matched with a Daughter of France) gave
extraordinary comfort unto his Father, a wise and prudent King. What happiness
then has your Majesty sealed us an assurance of, who having in all the
actions of your life been an excellent Son to your Royal Father, can never
be other then an excellent Father to your people. On the Throne (for Hills best
discover Valleys) Princes may with much advantage, as in a perspectiue glass
draw the state of the Commonwealth nearer their sight; but when they descend
from themselves, and grow acquainted with the hearts and affections of their
subjects; this is to measure the Valleys at hand, and not at distance, and
does at once win hope of their goodness, and make us in awe of their wisdom.

Such were the effects of your Majesty's Princely Judgment, when in the last
(by you made happy) Parliament, and in the Assembly preceding it, your
Highness, Exuta purpura, forgetting you were the only Son of the King,
became the Son of the Kingdom, and took upon your self the cares and desires
of it. (By which, as by the balm of Gilead, our wounds were healed in time,
and all of us as much encouraged (in humble and dutiful manner) to present our
just greuances unto you, as we are deterred from creating any such out of our
own vain or unmannerly fancies. Your Majesty's beams like those of the
Sunne-rising were then most comfortable, now that your Majesty is in the
exaltation of your orb, we cannot but hope to find more benign and serene
aspects.

But there is yet one joy above all these and which seasons all our other
blessings, your Majesty's so known and knowing zeal for true religion.
Princes endued with moral virtues are like Diamonds, rich, but rough and
unpolished, it is the knowledge and fear of God only adds the true luster and
sets them fair.

This was our unspeakable comfort, and a blessing England must never be
unmindful of, when you our Sun were in the West, and a full half years
night clouded all our hearts with a fearful darkness.

Let it not (most gracious and mighty King) be registered in your Royal heart
amongst the errors of this City, that your Highness was here stayed in that
your Journey, (for I see they are damp at the remembrance of it) and humbly
expect to have their pardon sealed by one gracious look of yours.

True it is, like unskilled Astronomers, not knowing the Suns proper course,
we had all our eyes only on the rapid motion of those times. But therein these
your Majesty's faithful subjects did but in little draw a perfect model of
the secret votes and desires of your whole Kingdom, which afterward upon your
Highness return, brake forth into flames of joy not unacceptable unto you.

The hearty affection of your subjects is like the soul of man, all in all,
and all in every part of your Kingdom. Vouchsafe then (most Gracious and
Sovereign Liege) as in that, so now from these your humble and faithful
subjects, the Mayor, Aldermen, and whole comminalty of this City, graciously to
accept that Loyal and hearty welcome which the fullness of joy makes dew from
all, and be not displeased, if as Jacob did the King of Kings, we have once
more stayed your Majesty till we might receive a blessing from you.

This City (my most gracious Sovereign) has been the seat of Kings and in
repute amongst other Cities of this Kingdom. Velut inter ignes Luna minores.
In King Ethelberts time above a thousand years since, it was Caput imperij
sui: and by his donation to Austen made the first Archbishops Sea, in which the
most part of threescore and fourteen Metripolitans have kept their residence.

Many of the Saxon Kings lie buried here, and since the conquest Henry the
Fourth, the first King of the line of Lancaster, and that famous Edward the
black Prince, who brought almost as much sorrow to France as your Majesty has
now done joy.

Fuimus Troes, but by fire and consumer worse then that (Intestiue discord and
dissension) it has been so often torn and defaced, that scarce any footsteps
of the ancient splendour are now to be discovered. Some favors only of your
Majesty's Royal Progenitors have kept life in it, and held it up by the Chinne.

Henry the third endowed it with many ample privileges.

Henry the sixth bestowed the Maioraltie upon us, from whose time downwards,
Dum nos aliquod nomenque decusque Gessimus, forty together of the best name and
blood in this country, bear that office here.

Edward the fourth made it a County of it self, severed and distinct from the
rest of Kent.

Your Majesty's most Royal Father (of ever blessed and happy memory) confirmed
all our ancient liberties and bestowed on us this sword, the ensign of Honor
and Justice.

The competent distance from the Sea, and a River that with no great cost might
be made nauigable, show how natural apt it is to embrace great traffic: And
since it is the stayers by which all Ambassadors of foreign Princes and
strangers ascend your Imperial chamber of London, we hope it will one day be
held not unworthy the high thoughts of so great and glorious a King as King
Charles, to make it in some sort proportionable to the rest of that building.

It had once a Mint in it, but this poor present, will quickly tell your
Majesty that is gone. Only as the glory of stars is not always in their
magnitude, we hope the humble Zeal with which it is offered will find your
Majesty's Gracious and benign Interpretation.

The God of David be ever with King Charles, and make his throne greater then
the throne of his Father.

Master JOHN FINCH his Speech to King CHARLES and his Queen at Canterbury,
June. 1^. 1625.
IN all Sacrifices under the Law, Most High and Mighty King (Most Gracious and
most Illustrious Queen) two things were of Principal use and mystery, Fire
and Salt, one taught us the necessity of Zeal, the other how to make that
Zeal acceptable by right guiding and ordering of it: for preposterous Zeal is
like an excellent Instrument well strung, but out of tune. The glory and grace
now shining upon us from your High Majesty's, like the heavenly fire of Elias
Sacrifice, has so filled our souls with joy and gladness, that our humble
and hearty expressions can never distrust your gracious acceptations, when all
things concur to inflame the zeal of English hearts, that we could hope, or our
Enemies fear.

This happy Union of two great and Potent Kingdoms in this so glorious and
blessed Conjunction of your most Excellent Majesty's, and this Regina votorum,
this fair Daughter of France, whom our prayers and earnest expectations have
so long attended. Kingdoms are but Epitomies of the World, as families are of
them, yet in good neighbors both take comfort. If we credit some remains of
Antiquity France and England have been heretofore co^ioyned by an Istmus of
land, where that small channel runs that now diuides us. Certain it is we may
say with the Poet, Hic vertex nobis semper sublimis. One Sun serves our turn
by day, and the same Pole-starre by night: At illum sub pedibus Styx atra videt
manesque profundi, There be that glory of many scattered kingdoms and titles
in every part of the world one: But in this neighborhood of hearts is yet
nearer then that of habitations. For kingdoms separate in affection, are like
the feet of Nebuchadnezzers Image, part iron, part clay, that never mingle
well. No two Nations under heaven (the Spaniards and Mores except) give more
assurance of consanguinitie by the affections and dispositions of the people,
then these two, both of able bodies, and fitting spirits, free and sociable, of
a sweetness not allayed with the dullness of some, nor blown up with the
affected gravity and pride of others, a finer and gentle temper, such as
should be in men that were created for Cities, and not for Deserts. Both
Nations military and populous, both joining together able to afford many
armies, without the aid of auxiliary forces. France the best Caualry of the
world, and what Infantrie England yields, Spain can best tell.

Your thrice renowned Father, Henry the Great (Most excellent Lady) knew well,
and loved well this Nation: Nor was the faithful service it did him without
some secret and divine instinct that from his loins should come; Magnae spes
altera Britanniae, a companion fit for the glory of the British Throne, as at
this day to our infinite comfort we all behold. It was the Daughter of
Clotarius, King of France, that in this City lived and planted the Christian
Faith here. From a Daughter of France came Edward the third of England, a
glorious and happy Prince. By another match with the Daughter of Charles the
sixth of France did our Henry the first reconcile those differences, which the
sword and war could never do between us. All ages have found happiness in
our uniting: and our dissensions never relished of others misfortune. But if
ever, now, even now was the true period of time to summon our ancient
affections to a new league, when the Chariot of Iehu drives so furiously, when
our neighbors and allies are so near danger, if not ruin, when (Oh that my
tongue could not speak it, but graciously be pleased in the day of the
gladness of thy heart, O Queen, to be put in mind of it) so many Royal
branches of that blessed tree that now grows in Paradise, live transplanted,
nay torn away from their own proper soil, and still droope by the
ouer-dropping of far-spreading trees whose sap is sower and leaf balefull.

The Kings of England and France have ever balanced the affairs of
Christendom, and severally put weight into the western scales, or abated them
by counterpoyse as occasion of) state has required. Now they both meet in one
scale, no doubt the hand of heaven has written Mean tekel upon the painted
wall of their opposers, numbered and weighed their strength in the balance, and
found it to light.

A blessing not to have been hoped for, but in this happy union of your sacred
persons, in whom (as many waters that make one great river) the Royal blood of
many Princes is met to make perfect your greatness in glory and alliance. That
of England Scotland and Denmark but one descent of, in your sacred person
(Dread sovereign) and though farther (which perhaps does best, for some
springes run clearest far from their head) the blood of Spain also in your
most excellent person (Thrice illustrious Queen) the blood of France, Navarre,
and the greatest Princes of Italy in both of you, and not without some great
and happy prediction (for Heavenly bodies in conjunction have their glory
doubled) the two Royal branches of Charlemain, and Hugh Capell are now grown
into one tree.

It was a Charles brought the Empire first to France, A Charles that brought it
first to Spain. Non indebita poscas Regna tuis fatis. It would ill become our
joys to take time from yours. Be graciously pleased (most gracious and
excellent Princes) in this poor earnest, of that humble, Loyal and hearty
affections, with which these grave Magistrates meet the felicity you bring us,
to take possession of this City, our hearts, and all that is ours. And the
Author of all goodness, power down upon you and us, the eternity of Joys,
that the Daughter, Sister, Spouse of Kings may be here made the Mother of
Kings, who when you are crowned with heavenly glory may sit upon this Throne
for ever. Et nati natorum, and qui nascentur abillis: to the end of all
Kingdoms.

nothing was wanting that might serve joy or delight.

On Wednesday the King and Queen departed from Canterbury, and rode in the
most triumphant manner that might be to Cobham Hall, finding (as before I said)
all the highways strewed with Roses, and all manner of sweet flowers, and here
at Cobham they lodged all that night, where there was all plentiful
entertainment, and nothing wanting that might add any honor either to the
King or Kingdom.

On Thursday being the Sixteenth of June according to our Computation the King
and Queen departed from Cobham all the ways prepared as has been before
showed, and so in most glorious manner came to the City of Rochester where
there was expectation of some stay; but the day being spent too far they rid
through the City, notwithstanding the Mayor, Magistrates and Citizens of that
City gave both the King and Queen a noble and most hearty welcome, and the
Recorder of the City made unto them a most learned and eloquent oration, for
which both the King and Queen returned back their Royal thanks and so passing
away from the City a brave volley of shot and great Ordnance was delivered from
the Ships which lay upon the River.

From the City of Rochester the King and Queen came to the Town of Grauesend,
where whether it was the ignorance of the Pourtereeue or the ouerruling power
of weak (but imagined wise) Counsel, or that the preuiledge of old rusty
custom, or some other knot which my weak brain is not able to untie. I know
not, but most assured it is, that neither the Portereeue nor any of his
brethren gave the King or Queen any entertainment or tender of service until
their highnesses were come into the very midst and as it were the very Center
of their Town, and there they made tender of their service and obedience,
which was received withal Royal alacrity both of the King and Queen, and so
they passed away in state toward the Bridge where the Barges of State attended
their approach, here they dismounted, and all the Nobility attending on each
side of the Bridge, with a world of Ladies and Gentlewomen: here they took
sollemne leave of the King and Queen, and kissed both their hands, but such
was the excellent disposition of the Queen, and so royal and bountiful, her
grace and favor, that to every Lady that came to kiss her hand, she bowed
her self down and kissed their cheeks. As Soon as the King and Queen were
entered into their Barge of Estate, and had a little put off from the shore,
the Blocke-house which stands upon the Kentish shore first let fly all her
Ordnance, and sent forth a peale, that the Rocks and Chaulkie Cliffes
resounded again, which was no sooner finished, but immediately the
Blocke-house which stands on the Essex shore made answer with the like
Music, and discharged all her Ordnance; so that the smoke mixing and meeting
together, made a cloud which enterposed betwixt the earth and the Suns
brightness making an Evening at Noone day.

After the Blocke-houses had thus discharged all their Ordnance, then as the
King and Queen passed along, the Ships which lay and anchored in the way,
discharged their vollies distinctly after one another; Insomuch that the vollie
was hardly ever found to cease for the passage of twelve or fifteen miles
together. And the nearer the King and Queen came to the City of London, the
greater and greater still the volley increased. Lastly, a little before the
King and Queen had shot the Bridge, the Tower of London let fly her Ordnance,
which did so thunder and rattle in the air, that nothing could be heard for
the terror of the noice. The throng of spectatours was so great, that about two
hundred being in a ship that lay almost dry, and leaning against the Wharfe,
they with their weight and motion overthrew the Ship into the Thames. And by
the way during all this long passage, both the King and Queen stood publicly
in the open Barge, and not only discovered themselves to every honest and
cheerful beholder, but also with all Royal affability and grace distributed
their favors to all those which came to admire them, so that there was not a
living soul which did not in heart conclude and say with the Poet, Qua^ been
co^ueniunt et in vna sede mora^tur
Maiestas and Amor. --


And thus at last the King and Queen came to the Kings Palace at White Hall,
where they were received with all the acclamations of joy that might be, and
where I am now enforced to leave them with this true and ever hearty prayer,
that it would please God to bless them together with days of the longest
extent that ever made happy any mortal creature, to send them fair and
flourishing Issue, and when they shall of necessity be translated from this
life, that they may reign with God in glory everlasting. Amen.

The Feasting of the Duke de Cheueres, and the two French Ambassadors, with
the declaration of the Marriage of the King and Queen.
THe Tuesday being the 21. of June, the great Banqueting House of Whitehall
was prepared, and hung very richly with hangings of Silk and Gold, where at
the one end of the house was placed the Chaires and Cloth of State, at the
other end a sumptuous Cupbord of Plate in manner of an arch; in the middle of
the house was placed one other Cupbord, not so great, but of a far greater
value, being Basins, Ewers, Cups, Salts, etc. all set with Jewels, and of
Crystal at the root. Then about eleven of the clock the the King leading his
Queen, accompanied with the Duke de Cheueres, and his Duchess, with the two
French Ambassadors, with all the rest of the Nobility and Ladies, as well
English, as Scots and French, in most glorious attires and bravery, and such
like as never before has been seen in England, so that the Jewels of the Duke
de Cheueres were reported to be worth an hundred thousand pounds. The King
being placed on this manner, with the Queen on his right hand, the Articles of
the Marriage were read there in public assembly, and approved by the King and
the French Ambassadors: After the which blessing being given by a Bishop, the
King kissed the Queen in presence of the whole people. After which they
retired to the Privy Chamber, while the dinner was prepared, which was brought
up; after warning given with Drums and Trumpets, whereunto the King, with the
Duke and the two Ambassadors came, the King sat in his Chair of Estate, the
Duke at the end of the Table, with one Ambassador at either hand, where in the
time of Dinner the King drank three Healthes to the Ambassadors, which was
proclaimed all over the house, one to the King of France, one to the Queen,
and one other to the Queen Mother. Thus being feasted with three great
services, and music playing all the while, they ended the Banquet at four of
the clock, and retired back to the Privy Chamber, where they continued one
hour, and after the King and the Queen, the Duke, and the rest of the
Nobility, Lords and Ladies, returned, where they had dancing for the space of
one hour: which being done, the Duke returned to Somersethouse in great State,
his Coach having eight horses, Coach-harnesse, and all being embrodered,
together with three or four score of Coaches of the richest that ever was
seen in England, accompanied with diverse of the Nobility.

FINIS.

