A DISCOVRSE upon the liberty or captivity of the King.

1562.

Imprinted at London by Henry Sutton for Edward Sutton dwelling in Lumbard
street.



A DISCOVRSE Upon the liberty or captivity of the King.
UPON the letters parents publysshed under the Kings name, the viii. of
Apryl, in the which it is said, that there runs a brute through this
realm, the king and the Queen his mother, should be against their pleasure
withholden and carried where it should seem good to some princes and lords that
are about their Majesty's: but yet that the same report is an untrue and
false sclaunder: for as much as their persons are in the same liberty that
at all times they have been: it has been thought good to publysshe this
small discourse, to the end that thereby the subjects of the King might
the more clearly understand, and put their minds out of all doubt and
cumbre, whereby they may yealde unto him that obedience and feaultie, which
they owe unto him like good and faithful subjects of his majesty.

Every man knows the enterprise that the last winter was taken in hand for
the having the Duke of Orleaunce out of this Realm: men know also both by
whom and to what end the same was done. But least those whom this matter
touches should complain as though men in the report offered them wrong: we
will simply set before all men the witness and deposition of the said young
Duke of Orleaunce: upon the which we will stay our selves without prejudice
of his authority: leaving to them that shall find themselves grieved,
liberty to attempt the diminishyng of his credit, as to them shall seem good.
The tenor of the said deposition is thus. The Saturday which was the day his
majesty began first to come out of his chaumber after the recovery from his
sycknesse, the Duke of Orleance being in the kings chaumbre, the duke of
Nemours came unto him, who asked him, whether he were a Hugenot or a Papist.
Whereunto the Duke of Orleaunce answered, that he was of the religion of the
Queen his mother. Than said the Duke of Nemours, might it not please you that
I spoke unto you half a doseyn of words? The other answered (yes.) The duke
of Nemours than took him aside unto a coffre which was nere unto the door of
the kings bedchambre. and said unto him. Sir I see the realm of France is
undone and ruyned by these Hugenots, and the King and you be not in surety:
because the king of Navarre, and the Prince of Conde will make them selves
kings, and will so handle the mattier as they will both cause the King and
you to be put to death. Sir if you will avoid this danger, it is
needful, that you do well advise your self. And if you will, the house of
Guyse and I will healpe and succoure you, and will send you either into
Lorayne or Sauoye. The Duke of Orleaunce answered that he would not leave the
king nor the queen his mother: The other yet replied thereto, saying, Advise
your self well of that I tell you. For it is for your advantage. Whereunto the
other said nothing. Than said unto him the duke of Nemours: Do you not very
well trust Carnaualet and Villarquier? Yes said he. Than said the other: Tell
them nothing of this I have said unto you, nor of the purpose I have so long
holden with you: but if they ask you what it was that I said unto you, tell
them that I told you of certain plays and Comedies. and so the said duke of
Nemours left him. While this was a doing, the duke of Guyse (who standing
before the fire, talked with his son the prince of Ginuille) perceiving that
the Duke of Nemours had left the Duke of Orleaunce, came toward him and
said: Sir I have heard say, that the Queen will send the Duke of Aniew and
you, into Lorayn to a very fair castle, that you may there take the air:
Upon condition that you would come thither, we would make you good cheer
there. Whereunto the Duke of Orleance answered: I do think the Queen my mother
would not that I should leave the King. Whereunto the prince of Ginuille
replied, saying: If you will come into Lorayne, and think upon that which
the Duke of Nemours has said unto you, it will come you well to pass. The
Duke said nothing thereunto. The morrow after, the prince of Gynuille came
again toward the Duke, and said unto him the self same that he had done
before, addyng further, that if he would understand the mean how they would
carye him away, he would tell him. The duke answered, that he would gladely
learn it. The prince of Gynuille said: They will carry you away even when it
is mydnyght, and will help you to comme out at a wyndowe, which is right over
the bridge in the park, and immediately they will set you in a coche, and so
shall you be in Lorayn before any man be ware thereof. The Duke answered
nothing hereunto, and so he left the said prince. The morrow after, the duke
of Nemours departed, and came to take his leave of the king. and in taking
leave, said unto the Duke in his ear: bethynke you of that I have said, and
tell no body thereof. And so the said Duke of Nemours went on his way. This
conspiracy happenyng al together otherwise than those, which are reckened the
heads and authors thereof looked for: it is not to be meruayled at, if men of
a long time exercised in the feats of war, seeing they had nothing profited
by these ambusshes and coouert enterprises (nor if I may so term them) by
these under ground works, if they determined to enter by open force and
manifest violence, as men do into a strong hold or town. Natwithstandyng yet
to be sure of a back door (as the proverb says, least happelye their
second attempt might speed as evil as the first: The house of Guyse (who
a long while before had written to one of the greatest princes of Germany,
and one of that religion which is called Protestant, to entreat him to enter
with them into sum conference of the Ausburgh confession, wherein they gave
him sum hope they would gladly be instructed) went their ways into
Lorayne, and from thence to a little town need unto the Rhyne called
Sauerne: In the which place they had such communication with the said
prince the fyftenthe, syxtenthe, and seuententhe of Februarye, as after they
had all promised to follow the Relygion of the Gospel: In the end the said
Duke of Guyse (in token of the favor he bare to that Religion) prayed him to
do so much with the other Protestants princes, that for as much as of old
auncientie the house of Lorayne had been of the Empire: By that mean, both
he and his brethren, might also be aduowed as Princes of the Empire,
having their voices and consentes in all Commyssyous Imperyall, that by that
mean they might withdraw and exempte them selves from under the kings
subjection: offryng theimselues to sign and subscribe unto the said Confession
of Awsburghe, and that they would put them selves in the roll and number
of the said Protestants. Whereunto the said prince was so wyllyng to put to
his healpyng hand (hopyng by this mean to win the said house of Guise to
the religion of the gospel) as he failed not to put forth the same in a
dyete, a little while after holden by sundry of the said princes in the town
of Brouxell, about the beginning of March following. and was never the less
refused of the other princes for many consideratio^s, but chiefly by reason of
ye news of ye horrible bouchery of Vassy: as the said prince since that time
has expressly written unto the said Duke of Guyse: sendynge him word that the
said company was much offended and provoked against him by occasyon of that
cruel murder: and prayed him that he would send him the true certainty
with a full declaration of his intent and purpose therein without any
disguysing: For such are the propre words of his letter. Upon this departing
from the court, in taryeng while the winter ouerpassed, it was determined
between the said Duke of Guyse, the Constable, and marshall saynct Andrewe,
that during their absence every one of them should practice with the greatest
number of gentlemen, and other men of war as much as in them lay, to cause
them meet together in arms at Nantheull, and near to Paris about the last
of winter in the month of March.

This practice could not be so closely conveyed, but that the Queen was
quickly advertised thereof, not only by some of this realm, but also by
certain strange princes: Who could so well appoint her the time as they told
her before hand, that it was in the month of March, that execution would be
done: yea (that more is) a certain gentleman stranger, gave the king of
Navarre so sure foretokens, as he told him that they would go about to win
him to the intent they might help themselves with his title and authority for
a season, but in the end laughe him to scorn: Whereupon the said king of
Navarre brought him to the Queen to cause her understand the said
aduertisementes, and to preserve her from such enterprises. Well, this
practice nevertheless going on for the beehoufe of the said king of Navarre
(and GOD will) Those unto whom the appoyntemente was given, failed not to
find them selves with all their force in time and place: so as the said Duke
of Guyse coming to Nantheull at the appointed season, was by and by met
with the Constable, the Duke of Aumale, the Marshall Saint Andrews and
others of their faction: Among whom were the Lords of Mezieres, and of
Courtenaye, by whom men may conjecture the peryllous point and dangerous
enterprise: by this that making them ready to go to the place of this
assemble, they put them selves in such order as like personnages are wont
to do when they shall enter the battle or any dangerous adventure:
shriuynge them selves to a priest, and receyuyng their housell (as it is
reported) after they had well and deuoutely heard their Mass.

While this was in hand the provost of the Merchants of Paris (who is one of
the principal mynisters and instruments of this faction) had so ordered all
mattiers, and prepared the way to bring these troops into the town of
Paris, that the queen being advertised, that their determynation was for to
go thither, sent sundry times unto the said duke of Guyse that he would
comme to her in her house at Monceaulx, where he should be very welcome,
forbyddyng him expressly the entrance into Paris with such a company, meaning
thereby to avoid those troubles and inconveniences which she foresawe would
come to pass: specially remembryng the execution and boucherye newely
committed in the town of Vassy: upon the which most instantely men cried
for Justice to the King and her, who hard nothing but Playntes and
Lamentations in every place where they went in this Realm concerning that
cruelty. Hitherto than it appears, that this enterprise of puttyng on
armor, was appointed on, long before hand by the duke of Guise as the Queen her
self, and the king of Navarre were right well informed: for the day of meetyng
was justly kept: wherein men came thither from all parts in open armor and
order fit for the war: where as before their coming to gether, the realm
was in a deep rest and quietness: till such time as harness was put on
contrary to the kings proclamations, and so continued against the express
pleasure and prohibicion of the Queen so often renewed: Finally till the said
Duke of Guise made his enter into Paris, in open arms against the very
countremou^dyngs and forbiddyngs by the King and the Queen his mother.

Now let us see what followed. The abouesayde capitaynes of this army being
at Paris, they began to hold a council as though the same had been a
council royal: making to assemble the presydentes, the councillors, the
kings officers, the shriefes or head officers of the Town, even as though they
had had the kings Superiority in their hands, notwithstanding that the queen
were nothing at all advertised hereof, neither that she had any understanding
or communication with that which passed in the said council, so as her will
and appoyntmente which she had determined to go on with her voyage toward
the town of Bloys increased with her more and more: to thend she might
withdraw her self to some place where she should not be compelled: if happly
the reports and aduertisements which she had hard before should be found true.

Now are we come presently to the knot and chief point of this question. For
the Queen who was with the King, and the duke of Orleance her children in his
house of Fountainbleu, and being in her way toward Orleance, going on of her
journey, having sent folks to Amboise to cause the young Duke of Aniow her son
to be brought unto her to Orleaunce: and having no force in the world about
her, neither of horseman nor of footeman: sodeynely arrived the forsaid
capitains of this enterprise with an army of horsemen in fair armure, and
planted themselves before the said Fountainbleau, and round about. Now I ask
those that under the kings name publyshe those letters patentes, whereof before
mention is made, whether, to compass a young king of the age of a leven or
twelve years being only accompanied with his mother and his little brother
with pistolyers, and harquebusiers, be not properly the same thing, yt in good
terms men call (the besieging of the king) or if that term mislyke them,
what other word they could devise for the namyng of such an act?

But let us be content yet that all this be esteemed as a thing of none
importance. We will only see what followed of this siege laid before
Fontaynbleau, it is well known that the Queen abydyng constantlye in this her
pleasure to go to Orleans and desyryng to make thytherwarde: Great importune
instancye, to much unworthy of her majesty, was made unto her, to cause her
turn head, and come back her way to return to Melune. Men know also that
she her self persuadyng with tears the naughtye air and other reasonable
causes of her refusal, did a great while wythstande the departing from the
said fountainebleau: declaring unto them there was no cause why they should
give the king such an alarm. Men know also that the king seeing himself
compassed about with those that ouerruled him, began to weep exceadynglye,
and protested, that he would not depart thence, pronouncyng these words with
the tears in his eyes. Wherefore will ye carye me hence where I find my self
well? What neade is there thus to put on armor? If it be for religion, I
will take order for it as I shall ware elder: In the mean season why do not
men observe the laws? Alas let no man trouble my state. Men know that
after the Queen had roundly declared, that she would not depart from the said
Fontainbleau: These words following were said unto her: Madame, of necessitye
you must come, and when you will not so do, we shall be constrained to
carye the king with us. To conclude, men know that upon this matter, and
after the Queens resistance, after the tears and sighynges of the king, they
were both led away, first to the castle of Melune, next to the castelle of
Vincenes, and lastely into Paris, being continually compassed about with the
said army, and all the force of footmen and horsemen, that since that time
have been assembled there.

Hereupon now let men without affection judge of the controversy wherein we
differ, to wete, whether the king and Queen be at this time in liberty, or
rather in captivity: whether their wills be free, or in bondage: whether they
may go to such places to lie at, as to theymselues seems good, or not rather
be carried and withholden against their good pleasure and contentation.

Surely all men (yea though they have but a commune sense or understanding)
do call to be in captivity:

WHEN A MAN after he has been besette not only contrary to his trust
and opinion, but also against his express pleasure, by men that without
comparyson are stronger than himself: In steed of going to one place,
whereto he has appointed to go, is not only let from going thither, but
also brought back again, and led a contrary way: men call it also a
captivity when a man is so much a prisoner, as he can no more be able to
fly over a rampires of pistoliers and harquebusiers than over the top of a
castle, being either stone or brycke: To be short, men call it a
captivity when one is so much afraid thorough the dread of armed
persons, as he dare not utter his will in such sort, as he would do, the
same men being further from him.

THIS thing being well considered, let all men judge of this second
point, whether to publysshe such a Letter in the name of the King, whereby
they force him to say, that he is not in bondage, but in his large and fulle
liberty: whether to make such a Letter to be printed and publyshed by the
sound of a trumpet thorough all the Realm, be not as much as to abuse and
defyle most villainousely and unnaturally the name of his majesty, and to make
the same despised and skorned of all nations: where nevertheless the same should
be holden holy and honorable, and not to be used, but in matter clearly exempt
from all passion and affection of men, (as much as is possible.) Let men
also judge, whether the witness of a person that is reported to be captive
through constraint and violence, ought to have such a credit as to justify
the doing of those by whom it is said, that the same is withholden: Chiefly
when the question is of such age and sex as our ennemies deal withal. But
let those, that would artificially cloak and color this their deed,
remember always to make answer unto these three points: First, wherefore the
house of Guyse have armed them selves within a peasible Realm, that was full
of rest and quietness: Secondely, who they be that enforced the King and
Queen to weep and lament at Fontainbleau: Lastly, wherefore the Queen going on
her journey to Orleance and Blois, was compelled to turn back with threttes,
that in case she would not so do, they would carye the king away with them.
Let this shame and ignomie than which they have done to the majesty of the
kings name be accounted for one mattier. but immediately after there followed an
other. For the house of Guyse, and those of their faction perceiving that the
people complained and lamented over the thraldom and oppression of their king,
very wittyly devised an inuencion utterly contrary: which was to publyshe,
that the Prince of Conde was prisoner in the town of Orleance. And to give
color and authority to their assemble of soldiers, have so vyllainously
played with the name of the King (even as with a babyll or cockscombe) that
they have caused him to say and publyshe his letters patentes in his name, that
the cause of gatherinig this people together was, to deliver his dear and
well-beloved cousyn the prince of Conde out of captivity. Now I demand of
every man of sound judgment, whether this be not so much as to buffette the
king: and after to ask him, Who is it that smote thee? Natwithstandyng
because we will forbear from all vehemence of speech, and talk of this
matter without any mood or alteration, let us symply compare the state of
the king, whom we say to be captive, with the condition of the said Prince:
who yet matcheth not him self with his majesty, of whom he is a most humble
servant: but only to make a judgment of all lykelyhode, to which of both,
the name of prisoner or captife may be ryghtlyer attributed. The king is of the
age of about a leven or twelve years. The Prince is a father of five children,
all living. When the house of Guyse came with all their force to Fountaynbleau,
The king had but his simple ordinarye guard: When the Princes and Lords
which are at Orleance came to mete with the prince at Meaux, or otherwhere, he
had with him his force wherewith he was driven to strengthen him self before
hand in the town of Paris. All those of the faccion of Guyse came with one
shuffe and in one troop to Fontaynebleau. The lords that are with the prince
came to find him one after an other, and from places far a sundre. The king
and the Queen his mother, did many and diverse times command all those that
be about them to leave of their armoure, and expressly forbadde them coming
to the course with harneissed arm: The Prince because he would warraunte him
self from the tempeste which he saw coming, sent and sent again, as
well sum of the noble men of his company as others, to request all
men, that camme to him, that they would comme strong and well
accoumpanyed. Those that are about the king waste his good, and suck out the
small remnant that was in his treasure to satisfy their creditoures: The noble
men that are at Orleaunce, are there upon their own costs and charges, yea
almost every gentylman that there is.

Those of the faccion of Guise, pain themselves to cause strangers come into
the realm, without having either compassyon of the poor haried people, or
respect to the manifest peril yt thereof may follow: Those of Orleaunce
protest that although strangers would come to their succors, yet they would
rather spare the country of the King and his poor subjects, thanne their
own proper lives. To be short, those at Orleaunce offer to lay down all
weapon, and to take leave of the prince to wythdrawe theymselues every man to
his own, condicyonallye that they which detayne the king and the queen his
mother, would first put of their armor and give good exaumple: The house of
Guise and their companions, let not to say dayelye in the hearing of all the
world, that they will rather see the ashes of all the realm, than to go from
the kings person the dystance of.i. league.

Now let all men judge what lykelihode here is, nay rather what infamye it
is, thus to profane and abuse the name of the king, and to make him say by his
letters patentes, that his dear and well-beloved coosyn, the Prince of Conde is
prisoner at Orleaunce: and that for the delyuerie of him he is constrained to
call together his ban and ariere ban. But let us admytte, that it were so.
If the Prince of Conde be withholden prisoner, what rebuke have they caused the
king to receive, and what injustice have they don, to declare the said prince
a rebel and culpable of treason, because he came not to the court nor laid
down weapon when they sent to him so to do? For in good logic they be
things repugnaunt, to be kept against his will as a prisoner in a town,
and to deserve to be proclaimed a rebel because he comes not thence.

These things considered, it is easy to conclude, first that the king and
the Queen his mother with the Duke of Orleaunce, have by a devise of long
time handeled and contrived, been violentlye and forceablye seized, carried
away and possessed against their will and pleasure, by those who thorough
their insaciable greediness declare how feign they would be his successors:
Secondarily, that the above said letters patentes in the which it is said
that the king is in his full liberty, and the Prince a prisoner, is none
other thanne a manifest reproach against the majesty of the name of the king
the which by this means is wyckedlye, vyllanously, and shamefully, defiled
and laid abroad to all strange nations to be mocked, defamed, and taunted.

And that for this respect, none can be holden nor esteemed to be a true
French manne, a good subject, and faythefull servant to his majesty:

Onelesse with all those good and honest means possible, and according to the
degree of his calling, he do endeavor him self to restore him to his full
power and liberty, and to deliver his name from that reproach and
vnwoorthynesse which they have caused him to receive in this his minority.
Wherwyth we trust his majesty, being comme to full age will find him self
touched, as well to the vengeance of his enemies as to the just rewardyng of
his good and lawful servants and subjects.

FINIS.

