A RELATION OF THE NOW PRESENT WARS, BETWEEN the Illustrious L. CHARLES
EMANVEL, D. of Sauoy, Piedmont, etc. and the L. CARDINAL of Mantua, D. of
Montferrat; seconded by the King of SPAIN.

The Emperors Decree, and the Duke of SAVOY his Letter to the Emperor, wherein
the whole occasion of the Wars is briefly declared.

Translated out of the Latin COPY.



LONDON, Printed by W. Stansby for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at his
shop under Saint Augustines Gate. 1615.

CHARLES EMANVEL DVKE OF SAVOY, TO HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY.
THESE my Letters shall perhaps come to your Majesty later, then the matter
required, your Majesty desired, and my self purposed. But it is not always
in our power to satisfy to our desires, when we list, and businesses falling
out daily do often force us to defer that, whereunto we have a propension
and will. For as I was purposing with my self to open the state of my
businesses to your Majesty, and not only to take counsel, but also to
implore your clemency and equity in this my new controversy with the King of
Spain; an Imperial Decree, whereof here follows the copy, was sent me by
the Prince of Castillion.

THE DECREE OF HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY, concerning the present Wars in SAVOY,
etc.
WHereas notice has been given to his sacred Imperial Majesty, our most
gracious Lord, by a true relation and authentical record, that the Imperial
Decree concerning the dismissing and cashiering of the Soldiers, and the
removing of all other things, which might hurt the Province of Montferrat, or
in any sort trouble the peace and tranquillity of Italy, given against the
most illustrious Lord, Charles Emanuel, Duke of Saucy, Piedmont, etc. has upon
the eight day of July, in the year of our Lord 1614. been duly and lawfully
proclaimed and published, insomuch that the Tenor and Contents thereof are
fully come to the knowledge of the said Duke, of whose obedience to which
nevertheless, there is not as yet any due assurance come, either to his said
Majesty, or his Imperial Deputy: Therefore his Imperial Majesty does
again seriously and severely ordain to the said Duke, presently and without
any further exceptions or delays, to satisfy thoroughly, and in all points to
the said Decree; to withdraw and cashiere, as soon as possible may be, all his
Troops, without endamaging any body; to abstain from henceforth from all
actions of hostility against the Lord Cardinal of Mantua, Duke of Montferrat,
and his Dominions, or against any man else; and a month after the
signification hereof (which time is prefixed unto him for all term and
prorogation) to show fully in the Imperial Court, to have sufficiently and
thoroughly satisfied to the said Decree and this Imperial sentence, and that
upon pain (if he neglect to do it within the said time) to be declared
allyable now as then, and then as now, to the penalty contained in the said
Decree, and that it shall be proceeded against him more sharply.

Decreed by the Emperor the 24. of December, in the year of our Lord 1614.
Subscribed, Barvitius Chauncellor.

Wherefore having received the said Decree, I could not but be much moved at
it, when I saw it was done against the orders of Law, against the ordinances of
our Predecessors, and against common custom, in a thing of such weight,
wherein a Duke of Sauoy, Prince of the sacred Empire, and perpetual Vicary in
Italy, was to be brandmarked with the shameful note of the Imperial Ban,
unless he would dismiss the Troops by him gathered; specially when I observed
that the date thereof showed no certain place, and that it wanted the
subscription of the Imperial hand.

But what is this, how grievous is it to read, and harsh to hear, that being
ignorant of your former Decrees, and of all your significations and
threatenings, I should be so severely checked as disobedient to the Imperial
injunctions; and that being bound to repress the Governor of Millane, who
these many months, with his great Troops of armed men, has troubled the
peaceable State of Italy, and attempted not only to invade, but also to spoil
utterly the Frontiers of my Dominions, you (as though you were ignorant of what
is known to all the World) should wincke at his too bold attempts, and out of
your absolute Authority, command me, who do nothing else but most justly
challenge my own right alone to lay down the Arms, which I have taken up for
the preservation of mine own Dominions?

What means this, I pray you, to dismiss my Troops against any man else
soever they should be intended, but only (if thereby the Governor of Millane
be understood) to take from me all means of defense in a most just cause,
which are not only granted by humane Laws, but by divine also, to defraude me
of the hope I have in your Justice, in this dangerous estate of my affairs,
and willingly to arm the hand of mine enemy for the destruction of my self
and my Country? All which (most invincible Caesar) should I confess, have
wounded my mind more deeply, if this cogitation of mine had not applied some
remedy unto it, viz. that this Decree has either been made, your Majesty
being ignorant of it, or is slipped from your hands through the deceit and fraud
of some crafty and wicked men, to which it cannot have been hard to deceive
your Majesty, being ignorant of the subtle fallacy of this business.

Wherefore, I think, I shall do well and fitly, briefly to show your Majesty
the state of this controversy, repeating the same from the very beginning,
that knowing the equity of the matter, you may fully and absolutely judge, not
of my cause, but of yours.

What moved me first to take Arms against the Duke of Mantua, your Majesty
may easily have known, both by the publishing of my Writings, and by the
general speech of all the World; neither do I think you are ignorant of my
readiness, in fulfilling the desires, both of your Majesty, and the King of
Spain, by my surrendering, at your only nodde, those Towns that by right
belong to me, and which I had taken by force, in the Province of Montferrat. At
which time, may it please you, but to call to mind, what great and diverse
matters the Governor of Millane promised, though but with a wavering faith.
For having begun to satisfy on my side, and my mind expecting some performance
of his promises, he, without shame, has broken his faith, which he had
obliged before so many witnesses, denying, for the most part, his said
promises, lingering and delaying in those, which he can by no means deny,
without showing himself willing to fulfill any thing. And not contented with
that, he has not feared to enjoin me two things, in the King of Spaines
name: First, that I should dismiss two thousand Swissers, or thereabout, which
I had been long a getting for the defense of my State, and which had been long
bound unto me, through their stipend they have received, though in regard of
their small number, they could give no just suspicion, specially to his Royal
Majesty. Secondly, that I should not defer to join by marriage, the Infant
my Daughter, heretofore Duchess of Mantua, with the now Duke of Mantua;
promising that then he would procure, that my controversies, with the Duke of
Mantua, should be handled, which at that time could not be.

To which demands (as being against all reason) I let him understand, both by
letters, and by my Ambassadors, I could not satisfy, unless the
controversies were first ended.

And thus thinking to have sufficiently answered the Kings will, the Governor
of Millane found out a new trick, to wit; that it would be a thing pleasing
unto him, that the matter should not be decided by Arms, but that the
controversies should be ended by friendly means; and therefore desired I should
send certain Deputies to Millane, which meeting with as many of the Duke of
Mantua, should, in my name, handle and compound all the business.

Wherefore having thought good to yield thereunto, not only to avoid the note
of obstinacy, but also to show to the world by a most sure testimony, how much
I did love both mine own quiet, and the public Peace of all Italy; I sent to
Millane three men skillful in the Law; who having remained there a long time,
to put an end to the controversy propounded often, and at diverse times,
several Articles, though with damage to my right, and much inferior to the
goodness of my cause.

But what did here the Governor, that man (forsooth) so desirous to keep
peace, and so constant in his faith? He caused a great Army, both of Horse
and Foot, secretly to be gathered, and enrowled in the Dukedom of Millane,
and the Countries thereunto adjoining, and commanded my men to depart, without
effecting any thing, and to tell me, that there was order come from the King,
forbidding the handling of the composition of the controversies, before I had
discharged all my Troops, and accomplished the marriage of my Daughter; yea,
that he was enjoined by the King to have a care, not only to incline me to
those things he commanded, but also to constrain and force me to the same by
Arms.

Upon this so sharp and severe Declaration, what counsel I took, and what I
did, not only my published writings may testify, but also the Reverend Lord
Sauellus, Nuntius of our most holy Father, coming not long after, can be a
most sufficient witness; who, having invited me to the laying down of Arms,
(though it were requisite, the same should be done by the mightier first)
found me not only not unwilling, but most ready thereunto; contented only with
this condition, that I did desire the Governor of Millane should obliege his
Faith to our most gracious Lord, the most Christian King, and the Illustrious
Commonwealth of Venice, that he should hereafter attempt nothing against my
Dominions, and dismiss his Army raised against me.

Hereupon, he said flatly, he would do none of all this, and showing
himself more ready for the destruction of my Country, then desirous of the
peace of Italy, he entered at the same time with a great Army into the Province
of Vercelles, and spoiled, overthrew, and burnt in a most pitiful manner, some
Towns of the same.

Wherefore, that I might procure some ease to my distressed Province, and
diverse some whither else the most vehement and impetuous fury of the enemies,
I led my Troops to Nouarre, a Town of the State of Millane, where I showed
evidently, that I wanted no opportunity to revenge the injuries done unto me.
I could have taken that Town, I may say, with no difficulty at all, as being
guarded by an insufficient Garrison, and might also have brought, if I had had
the will, the whole state of Millane into utter danger; but that his Catholic
Majesty might see my love to public peace, and my respect to him, I did not
only spare to satisfy to my grief, but forbad also at my depart by a most
strict Edict, that none of my men should, in any sort, endamage the People or
Lands belonging to the said Town.

What shall I say more? when I was at Vercelles, the Popes Nuncius, the most
reverend Sauellus, and the most illustrious Marquis of Rambouillet, Ambassador
of the most Christian King, to preserve the public Peace of Italy, and mine,
having propounded certain Articles of agreement, I (though little aduantageous
to me) assented thereunto, and signed them with mine own hand. Whereupon they
hoping, that without any doubt, the Governor would likewise approve and sign
the same, and judging that for my part I had satisfied to the same, and that no
further thing was wanting in that business, the peace was proclaimed by their
own mouth, as being already confirmed; but the unlooked for event deceived, as
in other matters, so in this, not only their expectation, but their assured
trust: for the Governor refused to sign, and the King himself, neglecting
the answer, which we looked for in few days, sent word secretly to the
Governor, that he should suddenly oppress me, being unready, and
mistrusting nothing less, and enter with all speed into my Dominions,
continuing the War undertaken against me with all vehemence.

Thus I make no doubt, but that it had been already done with my estate, if
those Letters, whereof I have caused a Copy to be sent to your Majesty,
being divinely come into my hands, as I may justly believe, had not given me
assurance of the whole business. Wherefore, who can justly find fault with
me, if being stirred up by so frequent a breach of faith, I have recourse to
Arms against my most hateful enemies, for the welfare of my self, my
children, and my country; for the defense of my honor, and for the liberty and
dignity of Italy, yea and of the holy Empire?

How unworthy a thing of your Majesty, how shameful should it be, if the
Empire of Italy, which is committed to the Emperor, as he is King of the
Romans, should be said by all the World, to have only, during your Reign,
been translated, under a color and false shadow of Religion and public
Peace, to the Kingdom of Spain, which acknowledges to hold of you the
Dukedom of Millane, Sicily and Naples of the Pope?

What shall we think the world will say, when it shall hear that the attempts
of the Spaniards have proceeded so far unpunished, as not only to fright
with threatenings, but also to dare to assault with armed hand, and to draw to
an unwilling war a Duke of Sauoy, most renowned through his Predecessors,
and most famous through his affinity and alliance of blood with most Kings of
Europe, a Prince of the holy Empire, and perpetual Vicary in Italy, drawing
his offspring from the Saxonian stock, having held large and ample Dominions
in Italy long before the Spaniards had any footing in the same, challenging
his own by a most just right, and attempting nothing at all against them?

Moreover, with what mind, do we think, shall the Germane Princes of the
Empire give hearing to Fame, when she shall tell them, that they contend that
the City of Asty and County thereof, which I have acknowledged to hold of the
holy Empire by my Edict, set up in a place near the said City, while I was in
the same, accompanied with the Ambassadors of diverse Princes, belongs unto
them, as if, by my taking Arms against him, I had forfeited the same, which
should be now fallen and adjoined to his Dominions, and publish that the
Subjects and Vassals of the said Country, are freed from the Allegiance they
have sworn to the Duke of Sauoy? For certainly those great Princes could not
but be much moved at the tidings of such a thing, which by an Act of mine,
published in the public places of the Dukedom of Millane, has appeared to be
idle and vain, and which we know of a certain, that the Magistrates of
Millane themselves have thought to be frivolous and ridiculous.

What will they say, when they shall hear at the same time, that the Marquis
of Saint Cross upon the coast of Genua, having craved the help of the City,
has with a mighty Navy seyzed upon my unarmed Towns of Vnelia, Macer, and
Petra-Lata, which the most Illustrious Duke Emanuel my Father, having bought of
the Lords thereof, had subjected to the power of the holy Empire, and in the
Inuestiture caused the same to be named, together with his other Dominions,
which are yet at this day detayned by him? I doubt much, they will confirm
therewith the opinion they have of the Spaniards too greedy desire of getting.

Hence your Majesty may conjecture, to what end I have caused certain small
Towns belonging to the Empire, and seated within the bowels of my Dominions,
to be seyzed upon, which has been only to save them from being taken and
spoiled by the Spaniards, and the better and with less danger, to defend my
possessions from their attempts: For I have thought, the occupation of those
places to belong to him, who has promised by a public Act, all being
pacified, to restore the same unto your Majesty, and to one that is called
perpetual Vicary of the Empire, the only Prince of the same now left in
Italy, and Vassal of your Majesty; by whom your sacred Person coming down
into the said Country, either to take the Imperial Crown, or for any other
cause, shall be accompanied and honored: For shall we think, that the King of
Spain, who plays the Emperor in Italy, will follow after your pomp? May
we suppose, that the Commonwealth of Venice, that of Genua, or the Duke of
Florence, will by duty celebrate your coming with their company? Nay, they
do boast to be freed from the Empire.

What of the Duke of Mantua himself? Who is ignorant that he depends only,
and altogether upon the King of Spain, observes his nods, has committed
himself to his protection, and has vowed himself and all he has very
strictly to his service?

And the other Princes, What? Are they not almost all subject to the Sea of
Rome, and do they not al receive their Dignity of the same? I am then reserved
alone for the Splendour and Dignity of your Majesty, who acknowledge my self
a Germane Prince, and my Possessions, and of my Predecessors, to have proceeded
from the liberality of the Emperors; and shall the Spaniards, with the
knowledge of your Majesty, dare to assault, and war against me? Shall the
Title of King of the Romans, which you bear, restrained within the most
strict limits of my Possessions, be suffered to be violated and cut off, in
the person of your Subject and Vassal? Shall your Majesty judge it to be
fit, that a man, whom you ought to help and defend with all your forces, yea,
against those of your own Nation, if need required, should not only be
suffered to be oppressed by the Arms of the Spaniards, and unworthily used
like a slave by the Governor of Millane, but also esteemed worthy to be
punished by the severe Proclamation of an Imperial Ban? What so grievous, and
so heinous a thing should have moved the Spaniards to take Arms against my
Country, and your Majesty, to decree an Imperial Edict against me? Is it
because, the King bidding me to lay down my Arms, I have not presently
obeyed? But whence have the Kings of Spain this new Authority over the
Princes of the Empire? Whence this altogether new power? By what sign can they
prove the same? Truly, seeing the King does not acknowledge the voluntary
observance, which he has received from the Princes of Italy, and chiefly from
my self, not out of duty, or as due, but out of good will, and of our
alliance of blood, he deserves with good right, to have the same no more
yielded unto him hereafter.

Besides, after I had promised to the Illustrious Ambassadors, to lay down my
Arms, why did he not, as I requested, free me from the fear and danger I
stood in, lest he would attempt some thing against me? Was it, because I had
entered with armed hand into the Dukedom of Millane? But he first had not only
invaded my Dominions, but also by his Soldiers wickedly raged in the same. But
what hurt, what damage can he show I have done to his? I have things inow to
show most vilely committed by his men, as spoiling of houses, whole Herds
carried away, and Towns burnt.

Is it, because I have restored the golden Fleece? But if the Spaniards be
wise, they will rather attribute this to my respect to the King, because I
durst not defend my self by Arms against him, before I had sent back the
Collar of the Order; deeming it an unfit thing, if being a Knight of the Kings
Order, I should with the same fight against his Arms, though in defense of
mine own.

Or lastly, is it, because the Spanish Ambassadors wife, after the depart of
her husband, has been ill dealt withal, which was not suffered to go out of
Turin, before she had paid whatsoever she owed in the Town for daily
household provisions? But how foolish and ridiculous a thing is it, to tax me
with what has been done altogether without my knowledge, whilst I was in the
Camp at Vercelles? For if I had been present, I would have paid the said
debts with mine own money.

Wherein did the Magistrate offend? Should they have denied Justice, to such as
demanded their own by order of Law? How often did they admonish that Lady,
after a friendly manner, to give satisfaction to those poor men, and to remove
that shame from her self? But she refusing to pay, they were at last
constrained against their will, to grant a Sequestration of some small household
stuff of hers, which not long after they released. But grant we that they
offended in some thing, in that business; must Arms be taken up therefore?
Must a small injury be revenged with so much eagerness? Must the Duke
therefore be set in the Ban of the Empire? There was more reason, that a laying
down of Arms should have been enjoined to the Spaniards, which had taken
them up without any cause, only under a false color of the public Peace. It
was upon them, that the thunderbolt of the Ban was to be thrown, not on me,
whom so many times breaking their faith, they have deceived, whose subjects
they have gone about to draw from their sworn allegiance, whose Dominions they
had entered and occupied by maine strength.

I have taken up Arms; I do not deny it: but I was thereunto constrained. I
have invaded the Dukedom of Millane, but being first provoked. But what have
done those most glorious Dukes my Predecessors? Have they not for the space of
almost six hundred years made wars in Italy? What possessions have they
brought under their authority by Arms? How many of their Neighbor Princes
have they constrained to do homage unto them? And yet we shall not find, that
ever any Emperor did check them with the Imperial Ban.

Shall I be then the only Duke of Sauoy amongst so many, whom the Prince of
Castillion (a Minister not so much of your Majesty, as of the King of Spain,
of whom he has received the golden Fleece, and an yearly entertainment)
shall have accused by his said Edict? Will he not blush for shame, to bring
against me the sentence of the Imperial Ban, by him received (as I suppose)
from the Governor of Millane? For I will never be persuaded to believe, that
such a Decree, dated at no place, vnsigned by the Imperial hand, as was
requisite, should have proceeded from your Majesty, rather will I ever
constantly affirm it, either altogether false, or at the least gotten by
stealth from your Majesty's Ministers by the Governor of Millane.

Thus then being the matter, nothing else seems to remain, but that the
equity of my cause being known, I should request your Majesty out of your
supreme authority, of which, as of an Oracle, not my self only, but all the
world besides, does depend, to declare the said Edict granted against me (since
it was made without the knowledge and consent of your Majesty) to be void, and
of no worth, to make known to all the world my innocence, and severely to
punish those Ministers of yours that have subscribed thereunto.

It will be your Majesty's part likewise, out of your full power, to command
the King of Spain, as Duke of Millane, and consequently Vassal of the Empire,
to dismiss with all speed, the Troops he has leuyed without any cause, for
to harm me, to confirm with his own hand the Articles of Peace, to which I
have already subscribed, and to free all Italy, troubled with the gingling of
the Spanish Arms, from further fear, as likewise to check and chastise, as he
deserves, the Governor of Millane, who with a mad and furious mind,
carries the firebrand of wars in his hands, only to satisfy his greedy
desire of money, filling with his whispering the Kings ears with many false
things against me. And so doing, I hope your Majesty will, with more glory,
maintain your own, and the holy Empires authority in Italy, which otherwise
will be transferred to the Spaniard.

As for mine own part, your Majesty shall ever find me most ready, not only
to lay down the Arms which I have taken up for mine own safety, but also
(after the example of my forefathers) to hazard all I have, and mine own life
at your only nodde. In the mean time, hoping to have your singular and
favorable clemency and equity, in these my hard controversies against the
Spaniards, I will earnestly pray God, the only giver of all things, long to
preserve your Majesty in full prosperity.


