A RELATION OF THE GLORIOUS TRIVMPHS AND ORDER of the Ceremonies, observed in
the Marriage of the High and Mighty CHARLES, King of Great Britain, and the
Lady HENRETTA MARIA, Sister to the most Christian King of France.

TOGETHER WITH THE CEREMONY observed in their Troth-plighting, performed in
the Castle of the Louure, in his Majesty's Chamber there.

AS ALSO THE KINGS DECLARATION containing a Prohibition unto all his Subjects
to use any Traffic or Commerce with the Kingdom of Spain. Published in the
Parliament of Paris, the 12. of May, 1625.

Whereunto the Original French Copy is added.

LONDON* Printed by T. S. for Nathaniel Butter, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Pyde-Bull, near S. Austens Gate, 1625.

THE GLORIOUS TRIVMPH AND ORDER OF THE Ceremonies observed in the Marriage of
the High and Mighty CHARLES King of Great Britain, and the Lady HENRETTA
MARIA, Sister to the most Christian King of FRANCE.
NOW at last, God being favorable unto our Country of France, has pleased to
grant what we most desired so long since; and those thick clouds which
seemed to obscure the luster of our Country, and had as it were conspired to
kill the fruit thereof in the very blossom, are now scattered and blown
over, together with the bad influence which threatened us, God in his secret
will permitting that two of the most mighty and potent Kingdoms of
Christendom, should be united together, by the most glorious Marriage that
ever was seen in the world. Therefore now our Invincible King Lewis the Just,
must needs promise to himself all felicity, glory and happiness heaped upon
him by this Union.

What great contentment has France, and Great Britain profit, to see
themselves so inseparably united, by a more vndissoluable knot then the
Gordian, and by a friendship better cimmented together, then the Stones of the
Babilonian walls, founded by Semiramis? For never shall any enemies be found
strong enough to shake two so flourishing Kingdoms, which derive their
greatness from heaven, and their limits from the circumference of the Globe:
Let all good Frenchmen now then rejoice, at such time as the adversaries of our
State, trembling with amazement and fear, have their very souls afflicted
with so goodly an alliance: And that I may leave an eternal memory thereof
unto all posterity, I will most succinctly here declare, the magnificent
triumphs and true manner of this happy marriage.

ON Thursday, the 8. day of May, the King came forth into his Chamber, and
there appeared like the glorious Sun, out-shining the other Stars, having
his Queen with him, his second light: the Prince his only brother, my Lords
the Dukes of Nemours, and of Elbeuf, the Marshals of Vitry and Bassompiere,
with other Lords of his Court, and sent for the Lady his Sister, who came
thither accompanied with the Queen her mother, the Princesses of Conde and of
County; the Dutchesses of Guise, of Cheureuse, and Elbeuf, with many other
great Ladies. Her Gown was of cloth of gold and silver, all poudered over with
Flower-deluces of gold, and enriched with many Diamonds, and other precious
stones, and her train was borne up by the young Lady of Burbon.

As she entered into the Kings Chamber, with a Majesty correspondent to her
birth, my Lords the Earls of Carlisle and Holland, Ambassadors for the King of
Great Britain, came likewise also in, as richly clad as can possibly be
expressed, giving unto the King the Contract of Marriage, which was read alowd
by the Lord Chancellor, after the King had agreed unto the Covenants. This
done, the Ambassadors withdrew themselves into the Duke of Cheureuse his
Chamber, which was over the Kings, and having communicated the Contract unto
him: He forthwith repaired unto his Majesty, accompanied with the aforesaid
Ambassadors, and many other great Lords, apparelled in a Suit of Black, the
Pains whereof were all garnished with Diamonds, and the very tags of his
points were enriched with the like.

Being come before his Majesty, he presented unto him his Procuration, and the
power which the King of great Britain had given him, which was inserted at
the end of the said Contract, which the King signed, and the Lady, both the
Queens, my Lord the Duke of Cheureuse, and the Lords Ambassadors likewise.
This done my Lord the Cardinal De la Roche Foucault made them sure, after the
manner accustomed.

Now as such an union as this could not be performed without great pomp, and
infinite joy and contentment: So our Ladies Church was chosen for the
Ceremonies of the accomplishment of the Marriage and was hung with rich
tapistry and cloth of Gould and Silver Tissue.

Then was there a fair and long Gallery raised, beginning at the entry of the
Archbishops palace, and reached even unto the Quire of the said Church: This
gallery was vnder-propped with many pillars, which were covered at the top with
Violet-colour Satin, embrodered with golden Flowre-deluces, and below with
fair fine lynnen, trimmed with wax, through this same passed along all the
Ceremonies of the Marriage as follows.

First, the hundred Suissers of the Kings Guard, clothed in his Majesty's
Lyuery, their Drumbe beating and their Ensign displayed. After them 12.
Haulbois clothed in the like lyuery, which ravished the hearts of the hearers.
Then eight Drumbes covered with the like, which were so lustily beaten up, that
the most coward courages were animated with the noise thereof.

Ten Trumpets also sounded so merrily that it rejoiced all the hearers. Then
followed Monsieur de Rhodes, great Master of the Ceremonies, bravely
apparelled, and well accompanied. After him marched my Lords the Knights of the
Order of the Holy Ghost, all glistering with precious stones. Then came seven
Heralds of Arms with their Coats of Red Crimson Velvet, powdered all over
with golden Flower-deluces.

Then followed them my Lords of Vitry and Bassompiere, Marshals of France:
After them my Lord the Duke of Elbeuf. Then my Lord the Duke of Cheureuse,
apparelled in a Suit of Blacke-Cloath, cut and lyned with cloth of Gould, with
a Cap also of cloth of Gould, and upon his head a Jewel, which dazelled the
eyes of the beholders, a Scarf spotted all over with Roses of Diamonds, with a
short Cloak all imbroidred with Gold, and powdered with precious stones.

Then followed both my Lords the Ambassadors Extraordinary of the King of Great
Britain, etc. clad in cloth of silver.

Then came the King of France, in a garment all imbroidred with Gold and
Silver, holding the Lady his Sister in his right hand, who had a crown upon
her head, and her Gown powdered all over with Flower-deluces of Gold: And
Monsieur the Kings Brother on the other side, who led her in his left hand,
being very bravely accoutred.

The Queen Mother followed next.

The Queen her self, in a gown all imbroidred with Gould, Silver, and
precious stones. The Princesses of Conde and of County bearing up the long
Train of the same. The young Lady of Montpensier. The Countess of Seisons.
Madame De Guise. Madame De Chereuse. Madame De Elbeuf, with many Lords and
Ladies, of whom I cannot now make rehearsal the number of them was so great.

All this Royal and generous troop stayed at the entry of the great Portall
of the said Church, before which was a place appointed to celebrate the
Marriage in, and whereon was raised a Canopie of inestimable vallew, under
which the King and Monsieur his Brother left the Lady their Sister, and
consigned her into the hands of my Lord the Duke of Chevreuse, and then my Lord
Cardinal de la Roche Foucault espowsed the Lady with the ordinary ceremonies
of the Church.

From thence all the Orders above said marched into the Quyer through a long
Gallerie which was squared out by a line, in the midst of the body of the
Church all covered with Tapisterie, the richest that might be.

In the midst of the said Quyer were all ready placed on the one side upon
emminent seats, my Lords the Presidents, having their Morters of gold on their
heads, and in their scarlet Robes lyned with Ermines, and the Counselors of
the Court of Parliament in the like Gowns.

On the other side fate alone the Provost of the Merchants, in a long Robe of
Crimson and violet velvet, being accompanied with the Shirifes of the Town.

In the Quyer of the said Church, was there moreover another floor raised
three steps high, upon which was another great Canopie, where the King, the
Queens, and Monsieur the Kings Brother were placed and conducted by the
forenamed Duke of Chevreuse and the Ambassadors, who withdrew themselves into
the Archbishops Palace until the Service was ended, and then afterward
returned to the King and the Queens.

Prayers being done, they returned all in the like order as before into the
Archbishops Palace, where the whole Court supped.

During which, was heard such a noise and thundering of Cannon, as men would
have judged that heaven and earth had joined together: In the like sort
Bon-fires, squibes, and such like were not spared throughout all the streets:
and it may well be verified that France never saw so much rejoicing.

And God I pray, who has ever been propitious unto us, maintain our Country
in her greatness, and grant our King a glorious triumph over his enemies,
and a large extent of his Dominions.

The Order of the Royal Feast.
THe Suppper was kept in the Archbishops great Hall, and the Table reached from
the one end thereof unto the other,

The King sat in the midst of the Table, served by my Lord the great Prior,
who represented the great Masters person, before him there marched a number of
Drums, Trumpets and Clairons, accompanied with Monsieur de Beaumont, great
Steward of the Kings House, and thirty two others Stewards of his Majesty's
Household, with their staves in their hands.

The meat was carried by my Lords the Princes, Dukes, Peers, and Marshals of
France, followed by the Gentlemen of the Court and their servants.

Monsieur de Joinuille served as great Pantler, Monsieur d' Elboeuf as
Cup Bearer, and my Lord the Earl of Harcourt as Caruer.

The Queen Mother sat on the right hand of the King, served by my Lords the
Dukes of Belgarde, d'Vzais, and Luxembourg.

The Queen her self on the right hand of the Queen Mother, served by my
Lords the Dukes d' Alvin, Brissac, and de Chaune.

The Queen of great Britain sat on the Kings left hand, served by the
Marshall de Vitry as great Pantler, the Marshall d' Aubeterre as Cup bearer,
and my Lord of Bassompierre as Caruer.

My Lord the Duke of Chevrouse sat next the Queen of great Britain, served
by the Lord of Rochefort.

The extraordinary Ambassadous of great Britain sat next unto the before
said Duke of Chevreuse.

My Lord the Kings Brother sat near unto the Queen, and next them all the
Princes, served in most magnificent and Royal manner.

The Kings Declaration, containing a Prohibition unto all his Subjects, to have
any Trafique or Commerce with the Kingdom of Spain, Published in the
Parliament the 12. of May.
LEWIS by the grace of God King of France and of Navarre, To all unto whom
these pre-sent Letters shall come greeting. Upon the complaints which have bin
made unto us by many of our Subjects traffiquing into Spain, of a Decree made
the 2. of this month by our most dear and wellbe-loued Brother, and Brother in
law, the Catholic King, unto his Officers, to seize upon and stay in all his
Ports and Havens, the Ships, Goods, and Merchandise of the French (our
Subjects:) under pretext of Reprisals of some sums of money, which Our most
dear and well-beloued Cousin, the Duke of Guise, our Governor and Lieuetenant
General in Prouence, did make stay of certain Barques, not far from
Marseilles, as belonging unto some Genoway Mercha^ts: as also because they
haunted the desert Havens of our said Country of Prouence, to the prejudice of
our Ordinances and Provisions made by Our Court of Parliament of Aix: The said
King prete^ding that some part of ye said money did appertain unto his Subjects
(which is a thing not yet verified) and part thereof unto the said Genowaies.
NOW therefore, because it is a matter of great importance for our Subjects
good, to prevent them from receiving any further loss or hinderance of such
their seizure and detention of their Ships and Goods as is ordained in
Spain, wherein there can be no better order taken, then a general
interdiction of Commerce in those places, where the Merchants Our Subjects can
no longer be at their liberty. WE make it known, That having deliberated of
this affayre in Our Council, where was present Our most honored Lady and
Mother, some Princes of Our Blood, other Princes and Officers of Our Crown,
Lords and notable Personages of Our said Council, WITH THEIR ADVICE, and of
Our own knowledge, full power and royal Authority, We have made, and do by
these presents, signed with Our hand, make most express prohibition unto all
Our Subjects, of what Quality and Condition soever they be, to have any
Trafique or Commerce in the Kingdom of Spain, of any Corn, Wine, Cordage,
and generaly neither to carry thither, transport or buy any Merchandise
whatsoever, upon pain unto the Offenders, of the confiscation of their Vessels
and Goods, and to be punished according to the rigor of Our Laws: and this
to continue until a restitution be fully made of Our Subjects Goods seized
upon in Spain, or that by Our Letters Pattents We shall otherwise ordain.

WHEREFORE We charge and command all Our loving and loyal Officers in Our
Courts of Parliament, that they cause these Our present Letters to be read,
published and Registered, and the contents thereof to be kept and executed each
one apart, and Our general Procurors or their Substitutes, to make for the due
execution of the same, all diligent and necessary persuite and inquiry.

Also We give charge unto Our Governors, and Our Liuetenants General in Our
Provinces, particular Captains and Governors of Our Towns and places, chiefly
those upon Our Frontiers, and the Bayliffes, Seneshals, and Prouosts of Our
most dear Cousins, the Constable and Marshals of France, or their
Lieuetenants, And unto all Our Justices, Officers, and Subjects, to assist unto
the due execution of these presents: for such is Our pleasure.

In Witness whereof, We have caused Our Seal to be put unto these aforesaid
presents.

Given at Paris the 23. of April; in the year of Grace, 1625. and of Our
Reign the fifteenth. Lewis. And upon the Fowld By the King. De Lomenie.

And Sealed with the Great Seal of yellow Wax, upon double tail: And upon
the Fowld hereof is written:

Read, published, and registered in Court, yea and the Kings Attorney general
requiring the same to be put in execution, kept, and observed according to
their tennor and form, and collected Copies of the same to be sent to the
Bayliffes and Seneshals of that Jurisdiction, to be there likewise read,
published, and executed by the diligence of the Substitutes of the aforsaid
general Attorney, which he enioyneth to certify the Court hereof within the
month. In the Parliamement at Paris the 12. of May, 1625.

Signed Du Tillet. Cum Priuiligio Maiestatie
Imprinted at Paris, 1625.
Le Triomphe glorieux and l'ordre des Ceremonies obseruees au marriage du Roy de
la Grand' Bretagne, and de Madame soeur du Roy. Ensemble l'ordre tenu aux
fiancailles faictes au Chasteau du Louure, en la Chamber de sa Majeste.
EN fin le ciel propice a la France, a voulu ce qu'elle respire, il y a si long
temps. Les nuages qui sembloient vouloir obscurcir son esclat, and qui auoient
comme conspire de fair mourir le fruict en sa fleur, sont maintenant dissipez,
and cette mauuaise influence est aneantie a ce coup, Dicu a permis par vne
volonte secret, que les deux plus puissantes Couronnes de la Chrestiente
soient vnies ensemble, par le plus celebre marriage qui se soit iamais veu
dedans l'Vniuers. C'est donc auiourd'huy que tant de felicite, de gloire, and
de bon-heur ne promettent pas moins a nostre grand Roy, invincible LOVYS LE
IVSTE, que l'Empire de tout le monde. Quel contentement a la France, and quel
profit a la grand' Bretagne, de se voir vnies si inseparablement, par un noeud
plus indissoluble que le gordien, and par vne amity mieux cimentee que les
murs Babiloniens fondez par Semiramis? Il n'y a point d'ennemis assez forts
pour esbranler iamais deux Royaumes si florissans, qui puisent leur grandeur du
ciel, and borner leur puissance de toute la terre. Resiouissons nous donc, bons
Francois, a ceste heure que les aduersaires de l'Estat tremblant de peur and de
crainte, ont leur ame ^migeed vne il belle alliance. Mais pour en laisser la
memoire eternelle, and la donner est depost a la posterite. Ie veux descrire
icy le plus succintement qu'il me sera possible, les magnificences, les
triomphes, and l'ordre veritable de cet heureux marriage.

Le Ieudy huictiesme iour de May, le Roy paroissant dedans sa chamber comme un
beau Soleil qui luit au dessus de tous les autres Astres, ayant auec luy la
Royne second lumiere, Monsieur son friar unique, Messieurs les Ducs de Nemours
and d'Elboeuf, Mareschaux de Vitry and de Bassom-pierre, and autres Seigneurs
de la Cour, enuoya querir Madame, qui y fut assistee par la Royne sa mere,
Mesdames les Princesses de Conde and de Conty, Mesdames les Duchesses de Guyse,
de Cheureuse, and d'Elboeuf, and plusieurs autres grandes Dames. Sa robe estoit
de toil d'or and d'argent toute parsemee de fleurs de Lys d'or, and enrichie
de plusieurs diamants, and autres pierres precieuses. La queue de ladite robe
estoit portee par Mademoiselle de Bourbon.

Comme elle fut entree dedans la chamber du Roy auec vne Majesty digne de sa
naissance, Messieurs les Comtes de Carlisle, and Milor Holand, Ambassadeurs pour
le Roy de la Grand' Bretagne, y entrerent aussi tossed, vestus auec le plus bell
advantage qui se puisse dire, donnant au Roy le contract de marriage, qui fut
leu tout haut par Monseigneur le Chancelier, apres que sa Majesty eut agree les
conuenances. Les Ambassadeurs se retirerent en la chamber de Monseigneur le Duc
de Cheureuse, au dessus de celle du Roy, and luy ayant fait entendre les
accords. Il fut trouuer aussi tossed sa Majesty, accompagne desdits sieurs
Ambassadeurs and plusieurs autres Seigneurs de marque, estant vestu d'vn habit
noir a bands toutes garnies de diamants, and les fer d'aiguillettes en
estoient enrichis.

Arrive deuant sa Majesty il luy presenta sa procuration and le pouuoir que luy
auoit done le Roy de la Grand' Bretagne, qui ^ut inc^^ce au bout dudit
contract de marriage, que le Roy sig^a, Madame, les Roynes, Monseigneur le Duc
de Cheureuse, and Messieurs les Ambassadeurs. Co^a fait and arreste, Monsieur
le Cardinal de la Roche-foucaut fit les fiancailles a la maniere accoustumee.

Comme vne tell union ne se pouuoit pas paracheuer sans de grandes pompes, and
d'infinies resiouissances.

L'Eglise de Nostre-Dame fut choisie pour les ceremonies de l'accomplissement
du marriage, and fut toute tendue de riches tapisseries, tissues de soye, d'or
and d'argent.

L'on esleua enuiron de huict pieds de terre, vne belle and longue gallerie,
qui prenoit son commencement des l'entree de la maison Archi-Episcopale, and se
venoit render a l'entree du Coeur de ladite Eglise. Elle estoit soustenue de
plusieurs pilliers, couuerte par le haut de satin violet, tout broad de fleur
de Lys d'or, and par le bas d'vne belle toil de lin ciree, par dessus laquelle
passerent toutes les ceremonies du marriage, comme il s'ensuit.

Premierement, les cent Suisses des Gardes du corpse du Roy, vestus des liurees
de sa Majesty, le tambour battant, and l'enseigne desployee.

Douze haut-bois vestus de semblables liurees qui rauissoient par leurs sons
agreables les ames par les oreilles.

Huict tambours couuerts de pareilles parures battoient si furieusement que les
courages les moins hardis s'animoient au bruit d'vn tell tintamarre.

Dix trompettes faisoient sauter de joy and d'alegresse les coeurs dedans les
corpse.

Monsieur de Rodes Grand Maistre des Ceremonies marchoit apres tout cela, vestu
a l'aduantage and fort bien accompagne.

Apres luy Messieurs les Cheualiers de l'Ordre du S. Esprit tous brillans de
pierreries.

Sept Herauts d'armes alloient en suitte auec leur cottes de velours rouge
cramoisy fleurdelisees d'or.

Messieurs de Vitry and de Bassompierre, Mareschaux de France.

Monsieur le Duc d'Elboeuf.

Monseigneur le Duc de Cheureuse, vestu d'vn habit de d^ap noir tout couppe and
d'ouble de toil d'or auec vne tocque aussi de velours noir, sur sa test vne
enseigne qui esblouyssoit la veue par son esclat, vne escrape toute couuerte de
roses de diamants, un capot tout broad d'or and seem de pierreries.

Messieurs les deux Ambassadeurs Extraordinaires, tous deux couuerts de toil
d'argent batu auec la toque.

Le Roy auec un habit tout en broderie d'or and d'argent, tenant a sa main
droite Madame, qui auoit vne Couronne sur la test, and sa robe toute parsemee
de fleurs de Lys d'or.

Monsieur de l'autre cost qui la tenoit de sa main gauche aussi superbement
vestu.

La Royne mere.

La Royne couuerte d'vne robe toute brodee d'or, d'argent and de pierreries.

Mesdames les Princesses de Conde and de Conty, portans la longue queue de
ladite robe.

Mademoiselle de Mont-penfier.

Madame la Comtesse de Soissons.

Madame de Guyse.

Madame de Cheureuse.

Madame d'Elboeuf.

Et tous les autres Seigneurs and Dames de la Cour queie ne peux specifier par
le menu, tant le nombre estoit grand.

Toute ceste Royale and genereuse troop s'arresta a l'entree du grand portail
de ladite Eglise au deuant duquel estoit un grand parterre destine pour fair
le marriage, and ou estoit esleue au dessus un grand poesle d'vne valeur
inestimable, sous lequel le Roy and Monsieur son friar quitta Madame, la mirent
enter les mains de Monseigneur le Duc de Cheureuse, and alors Monsieur le
Cardinal de la Roche-foucault espousa Madame, auec les ceremonies ordinaires de
l'Eglise.

Dela tout l'ordre cy-dessus s'en alla dedans le coeur par vne longue gallerie
qui est oit allignee au milieu de la Nef de l'Eglise toute couuerte de
tapisserie, la plus bell^ qui se peust iamais voir.

Au milieu dudit coeur estoient des-ja placez d'vn cost en des sieges
eminents, Messeigneurs les Presidents ayant leur mortier d'or sur la test
vestus de leur robes d'escatlates doublees d'hermines, and Messieurs les
Conseillers auecques de semblables robes.

De l'autre cost proissoit a part Monsieur le Provost des Marchands, convert
d'vne longue robe de velours rouge cramoiscy and violet, assiste des Escheuins
du corpse de ville.

Dans le coeur de ladite Eglise estoit esleue de trois marches un par-terre, au
dessus duquel estoit un autre grand poesle, ou le Roy, les Roynes, and Monsieur
furent placez, and conduits par lesdits Duc de Cheurcuse and Ambassadeurs,
lesquels se retirenta l'Archeuesche iusqu'a ce que le service fut acheue, puis
y retournerent trouuer le Roy and les Roynes apres la fin de l'office.

Leurs oraisons finies, ils s'en retournerent au mesme order dedans
l'Archeuesche, ou toute la Cour soupa.

Et puis en mesme temps, l'on ouyt un tell bruit des coups de canons qui se
tirerent, que l'on eust dit que la terre and le ciel se vouloient ioindre
ensemble.

Les feus de joy and d'artifices se firent par toutes les reus, and l'on peut
dire auec verite, que iamais la France n'cust plus de resiouyssances.

Dieu qui luy a este tousiours favorable la maintienne en sa grandeur, and
face que son grand Roy triomphe glorieux de tous ses ennemis, and borne ses
terres de l'enclos de tout le monde.

L'ordre du festin Royal.
LE soupper fut dans la grand' Salle lambrissee de l'Archeuesche, and la table
tenoit d'vn bout a l'autre.

Le Roy estoit au milieu de la table, seruy par Monsieur le Grand Prieur,
representant Monsieur le Grand Maistre, deuant luy marchoient nombre de
tambours, trompettes and clairons, accompagne de Monsieur de Beaumont premier
Maistre d'Hostel, and trente-deux Maistres d'Hostel, tous le baston a la main.

La viande estoit portee apres eux par Nosseigneurs les Princes, Ducs, Pairs,
and Mareschaux de France, suiuis des Gentiles hommes de Cour and seruans,
Monsieur de Ioinuille seruoit de grand Panetier: Monsieur d'Elbeuf d'
Eschanson, and Monsieur le Comte d'Arcourt d'Eseuyer tranchant.

La Royne Mere au cost droict du Roy, seruie par Messieurs le Ducs de
Bellegarde, d'Vzais and Luxebourg.

La Royne sur le cost droict de la Royne Mere seruie par Messieurs le Ducs
d'Aluin, Brissac, and de Chaune.

La Royne d'Angleterre a cost gauche du Roy, seruie par Messieurs les
Mareschaux de Vitry, comme grand Panetier: Monsieur le Marshall d'Auloterre
Eschanson; and Monsieur de Bassompierre Escuyer trenchant.

Monsieur le Duc de Cheureuse sous la Reyne d'Angliterre seruy par le Sieur de
R.

Les Ambassadeurs extraordinaires d'Angliterre pres dudit Sieur de Cheureuse.

Monsigneur friar de sa Majeste estoit assis aupres de la Royne, and toutes les
Princesses a la table, qui fut seruy auec quantite de services autant
magnifiques que splendides and Royaux.

Declaration du Roy, portant defenses a tous ses subjets de fair aucun traficq
ny commerce au Royaume d'Espagne. Publiee en Parliment le douziesme, May, 1625.
LOVIS par la grace de Dieu, Roy de France and de Navarre, A tous ceux qui ces
presents Lettres verront, Salut. Sur les plaintes qui nous ont este faictes de
la part de plusieurs de nos subjets traffiquans en Espagne, d'vne Ordonnance
decernee le deuxiesme de ce mois, par nostre tres-cher and tres-ame bon friar
and beaufrere le Roy Catholic, a ses officiers, pour saisir and arrester en
ses ports and haures les nauires, effects and marchandises des Francois nos
subjets, sous pretexte de represailles de quelque sum d'argent que nostre
tres-cher and bien-ame Coufin le Duc de Guyse, Gouerneur and nostre Lieutenant
general en Province, afaict arrester dans des barques es enuirons de nostre
ville de Marseille, comme appertenans a des marchands Geneuois, aussi qu'ils
alloient dans les ports des-habitez de nostredit pais de Prouence, au prejudice
de nos Ordonnances, and des Arrests de nostre Cour de Parliament d'Aix:
Pretendant ledit Roy, que party dudit argent appartient a ses subjets (chose
qui n'a point este verifice) en party aux Geneuois. Et d'autant qu'il importe
pour le bien de nos subjets, d'empescher qu'ils ne puissent receuoir plus
grande perte and dommage de la saisie and detention de leurs nauires and biens,
qui est ordonnee en Espagne: a quoy il ne peut estre plus conuenablement
pourueu, que par vne interdiction generale du commerce au lieu ou les marchands
nos subjets ne sont plus en liberte: SCAVOIR faisons, Qu'ayant mis cet affair
en deliberation en nostre Conseil, ou estoient la Royne nostre tres-honoree
Dame and Mere, aucuns Princes de nostre Sang, autres Princes and Officiers de
nostre Couronne, Seigneurs and notables personnages de nostredit Conseil: DE
L'ADVIS d'iceluy, and de nostre certain science, pleine puissance and
auctorite Royale, Nous auons faict and faisons par ce presents signees de
nostre main, tres-expresses inhibitions and defenses a tous nos subjets de
quelque qualite and condition qu'ils soient, de fair aucun trafficq ny
commerce au Royaume d'Espagne, de Bleds, Vins, toils, cordages: and
generalement d'y mener, conduire, transporter ny achepter aucunes marchandises
de quelque qualite que ce soit, sur peine aux contreuenans de confiscation de
leurs marchandises, vaisseaux and effects, and d'estre punis and chastiez selon
la rigueur de nos Ordonnances, and se iusques a ce quela main leuee des effects
saisis en Espagne sur nos subjets, aye este pleinement donnee, and que par nos
Lettres patentes Nous en ayons autrement ordonne. SI DONNONS en mandement a nos
amez and feaux les gens tenans nos Course de Parlements, Que ces presents ils
facent lire, publier and enregistrer, and le contenu en icelles, garder and
executer exactement chacun endroit soy, and a nos Procureurs generaux ou leurs
Substituts, de fair pour l'execution d'icelles, toutes poursuites and
diligences requises and necessaires. Mandons aussi aux Gouuerneurs and nos
Lieutenans generaux en nos Provinces, Capitaines and Gouuerneurs particuliers
de nos Villes and places, mesmes celles qui sont sur nos frontiers, Baillifs,
Seneschaux, Preuosts de nos tres-chers Cousins le Conestable and Mareschaux de
France ou leurs Lieutenans, and a tous autres nos Iusticiers and Officiers and
subiets, de tenir la main a l'execution de ces presents: CAR tell est nostre
plaisir. En tesmoin de quoy, Nous auons faict mettre nostre seel a cesdites
presents.

Do^ne a Paris le vingt troisiesme iour d'Auril, l'an de grace mil six cens
vingt-cinq. Et de nostre regne le quinziesme, Sign, LOVIS. Et sur le reply,
Par le Roy, DE LOMENIE.

Et scellees du grand sceau de cire iaune sur double queue. Et sur ledit reply
est cscrit, L^ues, publices and registres es Registres d'icelle: Ouy, and ce
requerant le Procureur General du Roy, pour estre executees, gardees and
obseruees selon leur form and teneur, and copies collationnees d'icelles
enuoyees aux Bailliages and Seneschaussees de ce ressort, pour yestre
pareillement leaves, publices, registrees and executees a la diligence des
Substituts dudit Procureur General, ausquels enionct d'y tenir la main, and
d'en certifier la Cour auoir ce faict au mois. A Paris en Parliament le
douziesme iour de May mil six cens vingt-cinq.

Sifine, DV TILLET.





