REMONSTRANCES, TO THE DVKE DE MAIN: Lieu-tenaunt general of the Estate and
Crown of France. Wherein, by way of information, are discovered diverse
priueties, concerning the proceedings and affairs of that Duke, and his
Associates.

Truly translated out of the French coppie, printed at Paris, by Ant: Ch:



LONDON, Printed by John Wolf. Anno. 1593.

Remonstrances to the Duke de Main, Lieu-tenaunt general of the Estate and
Crown of France.
Wherein, by way of information, are discovered diverse priueties, concerning
the proceedings and affairs of that Duke, and his Associates.
MY Lord, the ancient duty that I bear to your house, and the service which
(after none) I have vowed unto you: commands me to make you these
remonstrances; which (in most humble manner) I beseech you to read with such
affection as I present them unto you withal, from him, which (after the honor
of GOD) has nothing in so much esteem as the repose of this estate, and in
like manner of you, and al which is yours. We all aspyre unto peace, and yet
there is none that hops it: great misfortune, every man divines his own
ill, knows, and sees the cause of it: I must tell you freely my opinion of
the matter. I have since these troubles always excused your demeanure until
this day, I say (expressly) excused, although it may seem that this word may
fall vnrespectiuely from my pen: but in regard that the question was not of small
consequence, Whether it were standing with law that a Subject might take Arms
against his King? yet notwithstanding, the just passion which you have
conceived of the death of my Lords your two Brethren, the people whom you
found voluntarily disposed, and above all, seeing he that pretends for the
Crown, is diverse from our ancient Religion, all that (I say) considered, gave
you cause to take Arms, and after, not to desist from the bearing of them. So
much as concerns the first point, the true blood cannot lie, none can say how
pleasing that revenge is, but he that has received injury: and withal, what
the fashion of their two ends has procured, may be the more a mean to good
minds to extinguish the memory of it, (though doubtless they were of great
importance.) As touching the second cause, the people had a far off confirmed
themselves in an obstinate envy to their King, which even died of joy to hear
the news of Bloys. And as concerning the last, it is very hard to take from us
the fear which we have conceived of the subversion of our ancient Religion,
if we submit our selves unto a King diverse from us therein.

I desire not to impeach the famous memory of the last King, neither that of
my Lords your Brethren, neither yet the proceeding of the King of Navarre, and
far less your own: for it is my intent to proceed with few words, not of
sharp intention, or ceremonies, to the drift of my discourse: for I call God to
witness, I have no intention to write in a partial humor.

You represent (at this time) in the unfortunate Theater of France a mighty
Prince: think not that your proceedings, by how much the more they are
apparent, may not but be so much the more exposed to adulation, and be subject
to slanderous inuectiues: and surely it is hard to judge which of these two
is aptest to prejudice your fortune. Those which adapt themselves to impeach it
with slanders, say: That neither revenge nor disorder in affairs beseemes you
to take Arms, but that they were only pretexts to culler your desseignes. And
as touching the new religion of the King, that it is apparent by your
proceedings, that you take hold of it, as an opportunity or masque to shadow
your pretense, and have used the same as a mist to delude our eyes withal,
whilst (mean while) you cover in your heart an unmeasured ambition, intending
the subversion of the whole state. That until now they remained as blind in
conceived passion, but now that time has taught them to see clearly, even as
before they had their ears stopped against whatsoever proposition might be
objected to you: and that contrariwise, they have both eyes and ears too great
to afflict your honor and reputation; For first as touching the revenge, they
all affirm vna voce, that your own self was the first and last that condemned
the progress of my Lord the deceassed Duke of Guyse, your Brother his
policies. And firstly, because that in the year 1585. being solicited by him
to enter into that part of the holy League, you were six whole weeks before
you would condescend; Lastly, for that five or six days before his death, you
advertised the King of an enterprise that he intended against his Majesty.

And withal, these fellows can tell that you were not of such internety with
him, but that to infest, or hasten his death, you would set fire in the midst
and every corner of the kingdom: for you complained your self most apparently
at Vimory, that he had laid wait to butcher you, though against his
expectation you had had good success, and at the last adiewe of you two, you
failed to come to the enterprise.

If the same be true (or not) you best know: sure it is that who so would enter
into the demeanure of your two Brethren with the Estates of Bloys, should
necessarily be enforced to confess, that there was sufficient subject to
induce the King to a despair. They had so well grounded their desseignments,
that the three parts of the Deputies (of which the fourth did all,) was at
their will and devotion: the chief Presidents of every order, were their
principal partakers; There past not any Holy-daie in which our Ministers
preached not amongst the Iacobins, and with a holy throat tore not in pieces
the honor of the King and his Servant. From day to day Embassages went
between Paris and the two Brethren: we continued every day in making
provisions, not against the King of Navarre, but against the King our
Sovereign.

The Duke of Guyse made public protestations, that he would not be
disseuered from the confederacy between him and the King of Spain, and all this, notwithstood the union by him sworn with the same King upon the holy
Sacrament of the Altar; Nothing was concluded in the assembly, which before was
not at large debated on between the two Brethren in secret, and which tended
not to the shame and confusion of the King; of all which there were made braues
and vauntings by little little men, which else had not dared to have lift up their
eyes, unless under the protection of these two Princes. The King came to
prayers, as well amongst the Deputies, to be amongst them more acceptable, as to
the Duke of Guyse to mollefie him. And to all this there will be no lystning.
It was not above four or five days before their two ends, that the Duke of
Guyse himself injured the King about the Town of Orleance: It cannot be but
that some of his servant (even my Lady your Mother, full of all goodness and
understanding) knowing that al these goades might sting the King to the heart,
and give him cause to misdeeme, counseled him to retire to Orleance, where his
life should quickly be disposed of, for the conservation of that of my Lord the
Cardinal your brother, which should have contained himself within Bloys: your
self can witness all this. And this is the reason why these fellows that
impeach your proceedings so slanderously, say, that measuring the opinion and
respect of the King by your own, you would never have conceived hard opinion
of their ends, for your self fell into the like desaster with Sacremore, for
some (I know not what) desire he had to attempt against the family of your
wives house, and after those troubles in the person of the Marquis of Menelay,
(murdered only upon a bare suspicion that he would broach new devises against
your self:) And more-ouer, that you fell into dislike with ill governments of
the deceased K. to the end thereby to make your self Protector of the people;
the same contemplative Doctors play upon you thus in that respect, inferring
that you have borne a great sway in these matters, and withal, for further
confirmation, produce diverse Edicts, pretending their utter subversion, which
by often importuneties you have obtained of the King; As for example, that of
the particular Lieuetenant of the chosen, through all Cities, Towns,
Borroughes, and townshippes of France, the most wicked and unfortunate that
has happened in our age: and to confirm this desire, no better witness then
your self, of Mounsier Ribault, Treasurer general of your revenues, which
then solicited the pursuit of the verification, as well in the Court of wards
as elsewhere.

They persist and affirm, that what countenance so ever either you or the
Duke of Cuyse, had set upon the beginning of these troubles, you intended to
be irreconcilable enemies to the Heretics: and to make that more apparent,
you had diverse Preachers in pay under you, which should serve you for trumpets:
yet nevertheless I know there is no such meaning between GOD and your soul;
For that after the death of the Admiral Chastillon, in the year 1572. the
house of Guyse was a secure Sanctuary to the most part of the Nobility that
professed the religion: and your self (my Lord) had never better means to
reduce the Dalphinate under the obedience of the last King, then by a truce
wrought by your self, twixt the Lord D' Ediguire and his partakers, which you
knew so well to entertain, that from that time you were surnamed The Prince
of the faith, by reason you had so faithfully kept your faith and promise.

Lo, such be the discourses and reports which these slanderous enemies of
yours make to your disadvantage, which I would desire might be buried with
the death of the deceassed King.

How then more-ouer will you fore-stall this, if fortunately it should be
objected, that you only intend to have peace, which most freely is proffered
by our enemies: Why? all the quarrel that we have with the King of Navarre, is
but for matter of Religion; But take away that obstacle, you cannot deny but
that the Crown is peculier to him, notwithstanding all the declarations that
the Duke of Feria would not long since have prevented it with; For if after the
death of the deceassed King, we should adiudge the Crown to my Lord the
Cardinal of Bourbon, as next in degree, (notwithstanding the much distance of
consanguinitie which there is between them) I see no cause of sufficient
argument why we should reject this ancient and first of the blood, but only
for this, that we hold him diverse from us in regard of religion: which might
worthily be proved no obstacle at all, if we respect his promise which he has
made conditionally, that he would be content to yield himself, upon the
convent of Estates and Prelates of his kingdom.

Now, in respect of the peace treated on the last year, between the Lords of
Villeroy and Plessis Mornay, the first proposition that the first of these two
made, (and I think that he did it upon the instructions from your own mouth)
was, that we would acknowledge the King of Navarre for our right and lawful
King, and that we had no desire to force his conscience, but recommending the
whole to God, whom it might please to shine forth the beams of all happiness on
him: insomuch, that all their conference was upon the assurance required of
you. Which notwithstanding it was answered even to your mind, yet upon the
last gasp you revoked your Deputy, showing in kind (at that time) that you
never had such fear as that which then returned unto you, of parting with any
thing that might detract from the maintayning of you in your wonted greatness.
In which, (if poor I may believed) you did most wisely: For, for to move
dispute with the King of Navarre, (touching matter of Religion) it was as much
to say silently, an accord, that you had been instructed, not to lay by Arms
after the death of the deceassed King, for other subject then a singular zeal:
and in so doing, you laid an especial ground of your reputation in every
place, but above all in Rome; And there is the principal drift of all your
affairs.

Since which time of treaty, you have assembled the Estates of Provinces and
Cities, with intent to choose unto us a King: but before ouerture to this
matter, you made a protestation full of all piety, importing most express
significations, that you never had undertaken this quarrel, but only in this
regard, that the King of Navarre was an Heretic: and that when he should be
reconciled to the Church, you would be most content to hold him for your King.

Protestations which awake both the one and the other, upon which since that
time we are entered into conference, with an unspeakable joy even of those
which before held nothing in like fear with peace: and in this conference we
have utterly derogated from that of the last year; For first we stick at
this, that it is questionable whether the King of Navarre would make himself
Catholic, or no, declaring, that where he would not be such, that there this
conference was to no effect: But in case that he were found conformable, we
should afterward bethink us of assurance. I have never heard a matter
proceeded on with less simplicity, unless by our enemies: for even from the
first motion they embraced this proposition, and commended two Lords of their
part to communicate it to the King: which not by any entreaty of his own
people, but of his proper motion, pronounced his will not to be of himself, but
to insist in that of his own Bishops and Prelates. This word was no sooner
spoke, but through all the Towns under him, general Processions were made, to
give God thanks that he had inspired so holy a desire into their Prince: We
alone have sung the Requiem, as fearful that through this desperate passage,
issue might be found for the soueraneties which we now hold having none above
us. VVherin (my good Lord) you shall be pleased to give me thus much leave, as
to say I am nothing edified in one respect: for before, I coniectured that all
these mischiefs were neither familier with GOD nor the devil, or that it was
not respected whether they were mad men or Machiauils. And through this
public joy in the Church of God, they are all as we are, true Roman
Catholics, but of a more wary conscience then we. They esteem that of what
religion soever it pleases God to give us a King, we are all bound to obey
him: and that we are so commanded by S. Peter in two places, and by S. Paul
writing both to the Romans and to Titus: In brief, that our Savior Jesus
Christ, upon the moulde on which we ought to frame all our actions, said:
That we ought to give that to God, which belongs to God, and to Caesar, that
which belonged to Caesar: and hold, that if they do amiss after Jesus Christ,
that then that fault is pardonable.

But to the end that I may not too long dwell upon this point, or to sound
deeper in their consciences: presently after the King had made this
protestation to become Catholic, with solemnities aunswerable, the wise
Gentlemen our Deputies demand day of answer with deliberation: and after
respette, at length made answer: That they saw nothing in him that might
minister this hope unto them: That he was only in words, and his Ministers
performed nothing. Ho, ho, quoth I, is the game to that? And I pray you what
hinders, that so much may not be said of my Lord the Duke de Main: That they
saw nothing in him why they might judge he would alter his opinion, any of his
protestations not withstood: That he is the man that he has been from the
beginning of four years: That he favors and authoriseth the Preachers of the
Religion, which (among all other,) are the principal Orators and ministers of
these troubles; And that it is not to be thought strange that their King
desires not to persevere in error, but will not forget to praise God, so that
he receives the instructions of our Church: otherwise, it should be a mean to
open a way to Atheism and impiety.

After having persused these Articles, I return unto that by which our
Deputies infer, that the King of Navarre may receive instructions from the
Prelates and Docters of France, but that having received it, it appertained to
the holy Father of Rome to have the especial government in that business:
since it was only he that had authority to approve the conversion, and to give
him absolution, without which, he could not be held for one converted or
reconciled to the Church. And did I exclayme then? Lo here the consummation of
our work: The physic of the Duke of Feria has not had his operation in Paris,
it should be carried to Rome there to have his working; Say that you will not
go, why this were to found a new heresy amongst the people. But put case
that fortunatly you may go, who knows not the Spanish concetis, to whose
judgment you must commend the conversion of a Prince of the blood? Has not
the Duke of Feria sufficiently instructed you in the ground of his intended
policies? which is to no other end then to auere the Crown of France to his
own state. My good Lord, the Legate which at this instance is in Paris,
shows he not by his demeanure, what commandments he has from the holy
Father?

No, I must have patience: it is to you my Lord that I must speak, for I can
gather no other but that this counsel proceeds with your own advise: as from
him that in respect of the degree you are in, have more reason to hinder the
course of these affairs: or at the least wise, that it may not seem so
intricate, as thereby it may appear illusiue unto you whilst you gather up the
fruit of your greatness. Say, I beseech your excellence, when you took Arms
against the deceassed King, which we acknowledged for the most Christian King
in all Europe, sude you to the Court of Rome for license? Have you since craved
absolution of the holy See; For indeed we are not to doubt, but that such
bearing of Arms was a very heresy, being borne against a King so far from
being an Heretic: Well then you have not done so, and yet will you
willingly send your King? (so I am forced to name him, if I see him abjure
that error which he has been nourisht in from his infancy.) Certes you
address your self to think upon your ill-willers, which respect not the Sea
of Rome, but so much as you profit by it.

Let us shun all shadow and dissimulation of this quarrel: let us leave
apart all ambitions, and let us acknowledge that which is of the ancient faith
of our Church, which Saint Jerome said had never nourisht Monsters, meaning
(under that word) Heretics.

The general proposition of our Church, since and from the passion of Christ,
was to reduce al her thoughts to the union of the Roman Church: to hold it
for chief: to simbolize with it in the Articles of our faith: And if our
Prelates entered into any doubts touching it, to have recourse to it, as the
true source from which they ought to draw all water of life. And further, all
having Diocese, had all power and authority to perform their own will within
their own Diocesses, but only in matters of especial importance; in which
they had recourse one while to the Councels provincial, another while to
another place, without any interposition of Romish Authority. And in this order
lived they from the death of our Savior, even until the first line of our
Kings, and from that to the second; And howbeit that it was not so when the
great Pagan King Clouis revolted from his paganism, yet, did he sue for pardon
at Rome? surely no: but he received the holy Sacrament of Baptism at the
hands of S. Remy, Archbishop of Reims, who was so francke a Catholic, as he
would never have done it to the prejudice of the holy See, if he had thought
that in such matters recourse thither had been needful. I acknowledge that
under the second line, the Sea began to authorize it self more in France
then before it had done: and why then? but because that King Pepin, to the
intent he might in better sort usurp the kingdom, had been at Rome to seek
instructions for his tyrannous reign: and could not set any gloss on his
aspyring, unless it were by making the Sea a wonderment above all things:
which is the same artefice which now we infer as especial engine of your
greatness. Nevertheless, what pre-eminence soever his holiness then took to
himself, yet shall you never find, that he made so bold as to condemn any K.
in France for what offense soever they had committed, but did it in an open
assembled counsel of our Prelates, which thing was continued under the 3. line,
witness the great counsel of Cleremont in Auuergne. In brief, I see not any
one Pope which has so much forgot himself, but only (good-face, or) Boneface
the 8. against Phillip the fair: but God would that with open signs he should
confess the repentance of such sin* to serve as an example unto his
successors, how to enterprise any thing against any king. When the Emperor
Theodosius had caused the general massacre of the Thessalonians to be made,
what stopped the door of the Church against him? S. Ambrose Archbishop of
Mylan, who opened it unto him after penitence. Went the Emperor to Rome? No, it
was the self same Ambrose. And are we better Christians then S. Ambrose or S.
Remy? Shall we condemn the actions of al our ancient Prelates of France? It
shall follow that they were heretics, if the Maxim which we propounde to the
king of Navarre be true: and yet there is no doubt made but that they were all
most holy and sanctified men. But what religion is this of ours? We have
taken Arms against our most dread Sovereign and indoubtable king, without any
license from the Sea: we have made a Saint or canonized brother, Friar Iacques
Clement his murderer, without going to Rome: treading under feet the example
of David toward Saul. We are commanded to obey our kings notwithstanding they
be even Pagans. Now after all this, our King will be Catholic, and do penance
worthy his fault, even in the midst of the French-church, and yet we will indent
with him, and turn him over to Rome. Good God, what need have we of further
ceremony then that which we would use, if willingly we would submit our
selves to his obedience? It Is true, but you will tell me that you suspect deceits.
Call you the^ deceits? when in the face of the church, and before all our
Bishops and Prelates, he will make confession of his faith, in the presence of
the Princes and the Officers of the Crown, which shall be there called to
witness? If he hyde any deceit in his head, he will be the first that shall
be deceived: for GOD oftentimes deceiues the deceiuer. It cannot be thought,
but that all good Catholics, which have made general professions only on
his bare declaration, will be prompt enough to forsake him, if he again
forsakes God; It would be the greatest and easiest victory which you could
obtain of him, if he be so obstinate as not to yield, after a faith plighted
of all his own Friends.

And as touching you my Lord, whom I honor and reverence above all other,
(thinking that there could be nothing but a holy zeal that did accompany your
holy actions,) think not but God will confound all those counsels and
deceits, (what masque soever of authority you pass them under,) if it fortune
so that the King of Navarre should but only satis-fie his faith. You shall be
neither the first nor the last of yours, which shall be fallen into this
desaster. I will acknowledge freely, that to increase your greatness in full
perfection, you have not forgotten any one point; First, seeing the fury of the
people to have all authority, you made your self altogether popular: leaving
the Controwlershippe general of the Town of Paris, to sixteen persons of
most low condition, which the license of time gave reason to suspect: and to
one counsel of forty, you commended almost all the affairs of estate, in
retayning them from you, and then did you scarce know the way of Paris: Not
long after, you broke of this counsel of forty, approaching it near to your
person: The necessity after the siedge was raised, taught us for our own
security not to refuse a garrison of Spaniards; From that time forward you
fought between two extremities, between the King of Spain and the
Comminaltie. For notwithstanding you make fair wether with the King of Spain,
yet you would be right sorry that he should have attained the drift of all his
inventions; And in like case, although he aids you for the defray of this
war, yet he would be sorry too, that you should have your wish. The Duke of
Parma, the interpositus in these affairs, has showed it well as often as ever
he came to our succors: well, he is dead, and that makes you more assured of
your hope.

The Sixteen by a desperate fury, have lost the deceased Mounsier, the
President Brisson, and Arcter counselor in the Parliament. This injustice
inuites a public choler of all in general, and moves you by these means to
make the boldest trait of estate that ever was since these troubles, because
you caused four of these 16. to be hanged: and that at one instant you brought
to beggary that little Tyrant of Paris, Bussy le Clear, chasing him from the
Bastillion, the sanctuary of all his robberies and thefts. And since, you have
much more familiarisde your self with our Town of Paris then erst: such be
the means, by the which you have made your self Master of the people, being
assisted of the Spanish garrison; and having swallowed down the whole
authority of those 16. now you have to combat with the king of Spain, which
feeds on the wind of the Crown of France. But to keep him in breath betwixt
hope and fear, you enter into diverse motions of peace, which even withal you
break as soon as you make them, and that after fair proffers; These you
break (I say) to show that you have both peace and war in your hands, and
that you have means to bring all these Spanish vanities to naught, if he still
aids you not with men and money; by this means stretching the very
quintescence of even half half a farthing, to make thereof the principal
stay of your greatness: And since we are now in some path toward peace, let
Mounsier the Spanish Legate be rid till his back be gauld.

O but you have erected Marshals of the union, to the intent that if a peace
should fortune, these would be a singular piece of good to you: and that
being now in war, the peace may confirm them. Is it possible to have acted
with more witty endeavors then you have done even to the end? and yet I
despair to: for I judge it fatal to your house to work ruin to that of
Burbon, and to be as circumspect as may be: yet nevertheless at length all
vanishes to idle smokes, and that even then when you think your self nearest
the perfection of your will. Even so did it befall my Lord your Father in
Orleance, the year 1560. when under the authority of Frauncis the second,
(whom he was possessed of) intending to spoil both of lands, goods and life,
the deceassed King of Navarre and the Prince of Conde, God took away the king
even when he thought that he could not choose but have his full will every way.
Even so of latest memory fortuned it to your Brothers, which never endeavored
any thing so much, as to declare the vnhability of the King of Navarre, and
how incapable he was of the Crown. Such fatal descent is there betvveene your
two houses: be it that the quarrel of the house of Bourbon is more just, (in
regard of his blood royal) or that the desaster of your house is such.

I am not that Nostradamus, that by an interlaced coppie of words obscure, in
1553. would by his fore-smellings divine the mishaps in which we are now
plunged. Sure it is, that seeing the late Kings dissolute living, had
ingendered in the hearts of his subjects a general coffeehouse, I held it
for sure, that he should live to see the utter ruin of his estate and
himself: for in his actions there was such a flowing of particularities, as
the very least was sufficient to overthrow a Prince. But when on the
otherside, I considered the demeanures of the Duke of Guyse, his arrival
unexpected in Paris: the shameful (and yet happy) retreat of the King, the
election of Prouosts, made of Merchants and chief men of that Town in all
poast: the Brauadoes that they gave the King, demanding their confirmation,
assignments, and pryces of Towns to his teeth, whilst a treaty of peace was
concluding: the stay of the verification of the Proclamation of unity, to
disapoynt entertaining the ancient Captains of the Town and their
Lieu-tenaunts, and to suborne other to his devotion, and all that which since
that time he enterprised in Bloys, (by me heere-to-fore particularised) I
promised unto my self no less matter and man of him then the king; the one by
growing too loose in his actions toward his Subjects, the other too ambitiously
familiar toward his King: insomuch that the ouer-crowing of the people
toward their King the day of the Barracades, was even the same of the King
over the Duke of Guyse the third of December following.

You perhaps will tell me, that I do nothing but recapitulate things as they
have fortuned: I pray God they may most happily live, and joy eternal
felicity, to whom I have afore-hande (diuiningly) imparted them. There be some
matters of estates as infallible, as the rules running according to the
Mathematiques. It is the very same that made me fear some (I know not what)
misfortune of you: I doubt not but the Baise les mains evidences, which you
receive now, of a troop of such as are slaves to your fortune, has caused you
to foresee as much to their promotions: which fortune proves as improuedently
to them, as improuedently does that of you to your self.

They furnish you with sophistical memoratiues, to make this effect of
conference and agreement utterly void, doubting that if such a peace should
fortune, their fine knacks vvoulde have no longer induraunce: none of them are
capable of the ancient modesty of a Roman Cincinatus. My Lord, I most
humbly beseech you, hold not your self scandelisde, if I term those
sophistical memoratiues, the return which you commend to the King of Navarre
unto the Sea of Rome, whom we ought to esteem for our most dread Sovereign,
whensoever he shall be made a true Catholic: for before that time I shall
never agree upon that point or Article. For our ancient decrees and Canons of
France, cannot, neither do accord upon this sending of the king to Rome. Yet
nevertheless, if this See of the Pope were implacable, if in our Popes there
were not found a thousand angry and intractable passions, toward those
Princes which prosterne themselves even at his feet: in brief, if they were
not disturbers of all estates politic when soever we suffer them to reign
over us.

Well, say we that we may lawfully send him to Rome, yet even in this we
trouble the estate of France, and that of the holy Church thereof, which is
the especial sinew and dependant of the Romish Church; but are not all
histories full of the miserable spectacles? It is no heresy to read them,
since we read them in one Platin, which by reason they have altogether been
nourished in the Court of Rome, do what they may for the advancement thereof.

More-ouer, I say that if the case were put that such a thing might be
tolerated, (let us speak with a true heart) the Pope which now is, has he not
been and is he not a creature of the King of Spain, before but Cardinal
Cremone: a Town at his devotion, and brother to one of the greatest favorites?
It is well known what bribes King Phillip gave to have him preferred, how much of
his purse was bestowed in effecting that complot, what supporters he has in
Rome whilst obstacles are laid, before any that is friend to the French-king.
It is well known how that most wise and right Catholic Marquis of Pisam has
been entreated. All know, that the Pope is content to send us into a France
a Legate altogether Spanish, and yet to second him he would have sent another,
Cardinal de Pelce, a Norman espaniolised, a man which never did good but when
he intended worst, and esteemed for such almost in every Consistory wheresoever
Pope Sixtus the fifth had to do. I hold that by hazard and not by any good
policy he sent these unto us.

Think you that he dare encounter with the King of Spain his neighbor,
being so ambicious as he is, in regard of Naples and Sicelie which holds so
many intelligences with Rome? Has not my Lord the Legate, (with reverence be
it spoken) spend out all the venim which he had hid in his breast, when he
saw that the King of Navarre was fully bent to become a Catholic, and that
the matter of peace was not spoken of with small likelihoode? And at his
departing, is there any man (any honest man I mean) that bears but the least
zeal to the peace, that would find the sending of the King of Navarre to the Sea of Rome either honest or profitable, of which if so we would gratefie the
King of Spain, we should find eternal matter of perpetual troubles.

My Lord, I desire to be held, and would that al should know, I humble my self
as most obedient, and desire to be held most aunswerable in all service to you:
and to that intent I have undertook thus much. Sure I am that diverse about you
ambitious of promotions, and that feed themselves fat with your ruin, will
say that I am a turne-coate, which would make semblance to be of your side,
notwithstanding that otherwise I nourish no such intentment in my mind. Be not
wondered at my name, let it suffice that I am only a poor Citizen of
France, without charge or public office: far from ambition, that know not
what the meaning is of riches or avarice, but only so far as the necessities
of my house do command: but happily auare and covetous of the quiet of the
VVeale-publique; Otherwise, such a man as thinks he can have no other treasure
the^ an honest liberty, with which I accompany my actions: a liberty which
causes me to tell you the truth plainly.

The Surgeon which flatters the wound, spoils it, and you should have no
greater enemy then your self, in flattering your self more then needed. But
to what purpose is this preamble? To tell you that by this expedient of Rome
which now is proposed, you divert the course of the peace; I denounce and
prognosticate unto you, not a tax, (for the King of Navarre was never familier
with such a beast) but a ruinous end, and that as certain as the end of the
late King, or as that of my Lords your Brothers.

Indeed this is somewhat boldly said, and yet such as beseemes a loyal and
faithful servant toward his good Lord: I doubt not but since you swallowed or
received down the whole authority of Sixteen, and since lost the object of
the Prince of Parma, that you may have gained 45. to the advantage. I on the
otherside fear very much, that, that on which you shall establish your
fortune, will be the cause of your misfortune; For the just punishment which
you laid on the 16. was a blood-letting very necessary for the health of the
people, and to purge that evil spyrite of which they were possessed: And the
life of the Duke of Parma, nourisht an ambitious fever of our estate in the
body of his Master, knowing that so long as he was living, he would hinder
your incroach upon his intentions: and now that he is dead, it is impossible
to meet with any man of his own forces which were a man of like valor. He
which would not make himself a stock of mockery to all strange Nations, it is
very easy to be thought, that he will have finer conceits, when he shall see
that all his hopes depend but upon you only, which have another mark in your
head, and yet seem to shoot at him.

Yet nevertheless, I pray you my Lord let it be considered of in your mind,
the means by which you have aspired so high; Has it been by your own
gravity? I would willingly say it was by a popular fury, but I dare not. Has
it been by your prowess, which I hold most high? Pardon me if I set before
your eyes, a good part of that which is past between the King of Navarre and
you; All that which was done at Deep: the battle of Pure: the unexpected
surprise of our Subburbs: the reducing under the Kings power the Country of
Maine, Alancon, and of the greater part of Normandy teach us the clean
contrary: I represent this unto you in gross, not standing to particularise
them: for I would be humbly sorry, that it should be thought I would
obscure any thing of your glory.

Needs must I affirm thus much, that in matter of ruin against a poor
inhabitant that knows not what war means, we only have the Superficies,
but from Warrior to Warrior I cannot say it: If there be any notable
thief, he makes himself chief in one Country, under the Standard of
punishment which he awaits from us, if so it be that by any means whatsoever
he afflicts the contrary part, without exception of persons; but when we
shall have leave to enjoy a rightful combat, then will we leave the lystes,
because that every one that makes profession of theeuery, never makes
profession of a lavvfull quarrel. In this there lies gain of gold and
Silver, in that nothing else but bare blows. I will not say but that at one
time or other we may have good success in vvarres, for vvarres resemble the
fortune of the Dyce: but so it is, that misfortune wills thus much ill report
to be said of you, That you never durst encounter with the King of Navarre but
you went by the worst: which I conjecture to have been the cause why you
would not come to combat any more, although he has oftentimes sommoned you;
And yet (O God forbid that I should blame you) for having conquered a great
part of France without any blows, it is passing wisdom not to hazard all by
decision of one battle.

Let us then (if it stands with your good lyking) acknowledge how you came to
this highness of your degree and estate, which you enjoy here amongst us; The
Town of Paris, (upon the model of which all other are ruled) put it self in
Arms and made you her chief, not so much for any amity or familiarity which
it has had with you or your house, as for an extreme hate conceived against
the late King: And withal, remembering us of the day of the Barrecades and
other things which insued, that we were put in fear to be most grievously
punished, having lost Mounsier De Guyse our chief stay: rather choosing to play
to loose all, then to see our selves exposed to so ignominious a punishment.
And so between quaking fearful, and bloody hateful, and muzing what might
have become of your Brethren, which ought to have moved you, either by honor
or by just desire of vengeance: we, and (by our example) all other Towns, had
recourse to you. Lo here in general, the cause why you are entitled
Lieu-tenaunt general of the estate and Crown of France: to whom (after the
deceasse of the late King) all the sway of the people generally inclined. And
in all this you knew so well to demean your self, that you had diverse Friars
ready, which in their Pulpits, did openly declaime against the late King, and
the King of Navarre, which was no small secret in matter of civil war. It
follows then (my good Lord) that you acknowledge, to hold in faith and homage
to the people, both your promotion, the progress thereof, and your workings
underhand: yea, and even that you had no power of your self, to bring in the
Spaniards into Paris, (which now seeks to set foot on her throat) but by
the consentment of the same people after the siedge, and that for the
conservation and surety thereof. If this foundation be true, then withal you
must agree with me in this, that in like quantity as the love of the people
diminishes toward you, even so your greatness must agree with the same, since
it is a general and infallible rule of nature, that all things have their
decrease, with the decrease of humor, from which they have life, and increase
themselves. But as touching the hate between the late King and the people, it
lies buried with his body; And as touching that which remains toward the King
of Navarre, think not that if he abiures his error, and that we see him go
to mass, and submit himself in as full sort as we, we would think himself
less Catholic then either you or yours. Nay, but you will say, O he leaves
the way of Rome: so does the Common People to, when we say in common proverb.

Good Horse or ill man, till the day of Doom
Shall nere amend, because he was at Rome.
So that then the cause of that hatred ceasing, in like manner the effect shall
end: Well may you redouble your Guardes, disperse them in corners, create new
Marshals, have recource to the Spaniard, and yet al these shall be but so many
instruments of your ruin; You are like the man that would hold a handful of
Ants in his fist perforce. The redoubling of the late Kings Guardes, could not
prevent the day of the Barricades. The establishing of new Captains and
Lieutenaunts, made by my Lord your Brother, could not for stall his ill hap
when the time was come.

And touching the Spaniards, if you hope to have any aid of them, to resist
the common hate of the people which I see altogether framed against you, I
doubt not but a while they will bridle the^, and yet at last escape. It was a
rule which never succeeded well to any Prince, when he said: Let them hate me,
yet they shall fear me: because that it brings this comentary with it, that
there is nothing so long a depositaire as fear. But let us give all fashions
that we may to our discourse, for I desire nothing so much as that I may see
you prosper. There remains one means which shall be more sweet and myld, to
have recourse to Friars, which oftentimes tyrannise our consciences by places
of the Scripture, which they appropriate to their passions; That had been good
at the first, when choler did transport and bear us away, for then they might
have made us have believed, that you were enterd into some town of Tours, into
the Suburb of the which you were no sooner entered then you retired: and as
touching the battle of Yuny, since victory should doubtedly have been on
your side: and when they should assure us, that in all the Towns of the Kings
side there was public Religion preached. These were things which be
believed, and yet notwithstanding the time has proved them false. Then we were
in a burning Ague, which since is turned into a Tertian, having certain days
of respit, and some hope that our Fever will be gone. The often letting of
blood, and long dyeting which we have kept, has now healed us. We begin now
all (God be thanked) to reknow our selves on al parts. Every man is starued
for want of peace, and perhaps the Parisians worst starued then all the rest.
We see our great Suburbs turned topsie turuy, which before could compare with
the greatest Towns and Cities of France: We see our noble Colleges
(sometime Nurses of all nobility in Europe) serve now for Milk-houses for
wenches, lodgings for Soldiers, and stalls or Cattle. That great house of
Loure, the ancient place of aboade of our Kings, to have served for the prison
and execution place: infinite Cities to be enoblised with the ruin of ours,
which now is now no more then a carcass: the greater part of the Lords of the
Parliament, Chamber of Accounts, and Generals of justice, to keep prison in
their houses, yea, and to carry their prisons with them: although to please you
they seem not to do so. We see a multitude of Brothels and Stews almost at
every door: and that amongst the greater. ( O the good and holy Religion.) If
in the Court of the King of Navarre such a thing should be, they should know
and hear of it. In this mean season the poor people die for hunger and
thirst.

The gladdest of the Bourgesses, is happy to become a Cow-heard to get his
living, other to live by the sight of a little Rabbit, as if this great and
royal City were become altogether Desert. All the plain Country remains
desolate and barren. You have promised even from the beginning of these
troubles, utterly to confound the part of the professors: and under these
promises, both you and my Lords your Brothers have set all France on fire.
We see not so much as one poor Cottage where the religion was exercised,
which you have brought under obedience to the Church. It is now a year since
you made us promise, to make us Masters of Saint Denis, Pont de Gournay,
Corbeil, and Melun, which stop the passage of our Conuoyes; Where is the
execution of your promise? For consolation of all our ils, you have taken one
poor Town of Noyon, and is not that a fair piece of work? But what fruit
have we of it in Paris? What Town have you taken, in which we poor
Catholics have not endured more ils then they of the Religion? Have we not
then great cause of coffeehouse against you, that to maintain your greatness,
the poor man has neither food nor peace. When I say your greatness, I most
humbly beseech you (my good L.) to be pleased, only to open your eyes, and but
see what are the instruments thereof. You are entitled Lieu-tenaunt general
of the Crown of France, that Crown which without a King is but a thing
imaginary.

You shine outwardly, but inwardly you conceive a thousand sorrows that
oppress your mind; For notwithstanding all the Lieutenantshippe general that
you bear, neither Mounsier de Nemoux your Brother, nor Mounsier de Guyse your
Nephew, nor Mounsier de Mercliel your Cousin, will scarce hold you for such in
those places which they hold. As concerning Towns, how many are there which
acknowledge not you but from the teeth outward? and withal, would never
receive garrison? and at a need, are ready enough to deny you their gates?
These are populer estates in regard of the King of Spain; you nourish the one
against the other an inward malice among your selves. He aids you, under a
sure purpose which he has to impatronise himself of our Realm, and to play
you such a trick, as he did the Duke De Horn, and the County De Aeiguemont,
after that (according to your authority and guiding) the King of Navarre shall be
expulst. You on the other side, call him to your succor, esteeming, that when
you are come to the height of your work, you shall have means enough to
frustrate him of his hopes. Call you that reigning, or rather to be tyrannised
in your self by your proper conscience? And after all these things, you think
to have the wind at your will; If the King of Spain live, he will be weary of
that, if he die, where are you? If he be not weary of it, the people will be
weary of him and his: for there is nothing so incompetible as the nature of the
French with the Spanish. And to separate the will of the people from you, (to
speak in good and true English) is to cast you away. Consider you not the
cheer and joy that was generally conceived, whilst yet there was nothing but
even a little speech of peace? with what good will it has gathered together the
refuges, which under the public faith of this conference are entered into
this Town? Did you not see them at the first present themselves before our
Deputies in whole swarms, beseeching them (in all humbleness) to have pity
on them, and to be Mediators for this so much desired peace? You now hinder
them by deaf means. Did I say deaf? nay, rather most open: and truly this
joy, these sightes, the prayers and vows of the poor for peace, are but even
so many instruments of the extraordinary process of your fortune. We mourn
most heartily for the breach of peace, and are sorry for it in our souls: you
by your presence make us shed our tears; God grant that the patience of the
Parisians cease not, even as the headlong downfall of some River which we would
stop. I fear, I believe, and see, that by the same progression which the King
used, by the same you will cast away your self. He assembled estates at Bloys,
to ruin our house, and that was his own: you assemble the Estates at Paris,
thinking to strike the last blow at the fortune of the King of Navarre, God
grant it may be the last to your self.

I hold opinion, that the Parisians of force must accord to your pleasure,
indeed there wants but two or three Towns, which should band themselves on
your side, to serve for example to all other: even so as when we forsook the
late King of France. Well, I make no doubt, that if to oppose themselves
against a King that was their lawful and undoubted heir, they would make
Barracades against him, they end not like your tragedy, that gourmandize in
devouring them. Against you (I say) who from henceforth shall be accounted a
most notable usurper of that greatness you hold. You have been the rod of God
to chastise our Kings, which I trust he will at last throw into the fire of his
indignation; and if he do it not, the most excellent victory which ever you
can obtain, is that against Sampson, to remain amidst all the ruins of
France.

It is there where I will end my remonstrance, which I most humbly beseech you
(my most excellent good Lord) to read, and examine in your self, which having
done, I shall have attained the furthest of my desires: but if your leisure be
not such, yet at the least wise, let them be imparted to the people.
Conditionally, that if any of ours think that I have failed in any point, I
will not be sorry that they make me answer, promising them to show that I
have left more behind then I have spoken.

FINIS.

