THE GARDEN of Prudence. Wherein is contained, A patheticall Discourse, and
godly meditation, most briefly touching the vanities of the world, the
calamities of hell, and the felicities of heaven. You shall also find planted in
the same, diverse sweet and pleasant Flowers, most necessary and comfortable
both for body and soul.

Printed at London, by Richard Iohnes, at the sign of the Rose and Crown next
above S. Andrews Church in Holborne. 1595.

To the Right HonoRABLE, THE MOST VERTVous and renowned Lady, Anne, Countess
of Warwick, B. C. wishes in this life all prosperity, and in the life to come
sempiternall felicity in the blessed kingdom of God.
AS amongst all humane things (right Honorable and most renowned Lady) virtue
and learning are most excellent, even so (in mine opinion) the daintiest
Diamond set in the purest gold of this world is not any way co^parable to the
worthy graces which spring of either of them. Wherefore, having made trial of
the most honorable affection and godly zeal you bear to them both, and
knowing how wonderfully and laudablie the rare flowers of the same, deck and
adorn you on every side, I thought good by your singular and most splendent
virtues thereunto moved and persuaded, so much to imbolden my self as humbly to
beseech your honor, to vouchsafe the patronizing of this slender pamphlet; and
to take upon you the keeping of this little sweet Garden, that neither the
wild Boar destroy it, neither carping Knights, or any of Momus wightes
devour it, but that it may have free passage (by your Honorable assistance)
amongst all godly Christians. And they viewing the same, may the easier see
the abominable vices, and vain vanities of this loathsome Laborinth, and the
better perceive the most miserable calamities and endless tortures and
torments of hell, that fiery lake and kingdom of Satan. And also beholding the
unspeakable felicities and most gladsome joys of heaven, may so run their
course in this life, that they may eschew the vanities of the one, and after
death escape the dangers of the other, and with the holy Angels and saints of
God eternally enjoy all happy and most comfortable felicities in the blessed
kingdom of heaven. The premises therefore duly considered, and my good meaning
discreetly pondered, I doubt not but that you will according to your accustomed
courtesy toward all men, pardon my presumption, and of your woonted zeal to
godliness, accept of my triuiall travel which in my idle hours I bestowed
herein, and think me rather unable then any way unwilling to discharge my
duty, whereof as I ought, so I have been ever most careful, and pleasing
God) will during life, so remain. Thus referring my labors to your godly
censure, I beseech the Almighty to grant you, whilst you live in this
troublesome soil, most prosperous health, and perfect strength of body to gods
glory, and your hearts desire, and after this life ended, most happy arriual
unto the blessed haven of eternal felicities, and that your soul may there
with the holy Angels and Saints of God, for ever have the pefect fruition of
all joys.

Your Honors most humble in alll duty to command* Bartholmew Chapel.

To the Reader, health and peace in Jesus Christ.
XErxes, that mighty Monarch and Emperor of the Persians, (gentle Reader)
beholding from an high the hugeness of his Army, which was in strength
invincible, in quality diverse, in number infinite, and in every degree
surmounting all that ever were before or since, yea covering the whole face of
the earth: in whose courage, force, and ^ight, he reposed the strength of his
kingdom the safeguard of his person, and the glory of his Empire, could not
but gush out most bitter tears, con^idering that of all the wonderful
multitude that he saw, after one hundred years there should not a man be left.
And shall not we that be Christians at least wise in name, viewing from the
depth of our conceits, our selves, our pomp, our honor, our glory, our
magnificencie and renown, our wealth, our substance, our beauty our friends,
our strength, our great possessiont, and territories, our knowledge, our wit,
our bravery and politic dealinges, wherein we repose all our felicity and
happiness, be nothing moved with due consideration, that this world and all
things therein contained, are but fickle and vain, and that our bodies, ^e they
never so fair, be they never so high, be they never so strong and valiant, can
not escape the dart of death, but must be resolved to earth, whereof they were
framed, and know not when, how soon or how suddenly, for this is the indgment
of all flesh, thou shall die the death, and the covenant of the grave is not
revealed to any, for our life appeare^ as a bubble of water, and suddenly
passes, it vanishes into the air, as smoke, it slideth as a ship, that
s^yleth with a full wind, or as a bird swift of flight, yea swifter then an
arrow, mightily shott^ out of a strong bow: for as soon as we are borne,
forthwith we decay, our first entrance into this life, is our first step to
death, and draws us toward an end, showing nothing, but the frailty and
fickleness of our estate the weakness and wickedness of our flesh, whose
impiety daily draws us from virtue to vice, from carefulnes to carelesnes
from the chair of godly study, to the cradle of vain security: but the
reward hereof is nothing but death and damnation in utter darkness for ever,
where our drink shall be turned to sharp vinigr^, and our bread to bitter
gall: Wherefore view and with all diligence mark (most courteous reader) the
sweet and comfortable flowers which thou shall find to adorn this little
Garden, and regard not the slender workmanship of the unskillful Gardener, but
weigh in the balance of thy deep discretion the singular virtues, and most
divine operations both of the plants, herbs and flowers inserted in the same,
for so may thou eschew the vain vanities of this wicked world, so shall thou
escape the miserable calamities of that fyerie lake, the kingdom of Satan, and
finally, most happily attain the joyful felicity of most gladsome Paradise
in the blessed kingdom of God. Thus desiring ^nelie thy love for my labors, I
bid thee heartily farewell.

Thine in the Lord. B. C.

Of the Vanities of the WORLD.
What wilful rage? what furious fit?
what madness pearste the worlds brain?
To serve in thrall, once for to sit,
in Chair of pomp, that is so vain:
Whose glittering glee is decked with woe,
whose fickle weal we all do see:
As flitting stream from thee does go,
and can no time remain with thee.
For all thy pleasures sorrows bring,
all thy delights most bitter pain:
All thy conceiptes turn thee a ring,
wherein to run: but all in vain:
For when thou do thy self assure,
that thou do sit in state most strong,
When thou do think still to endure,
then suddenly thou lie along.
When thou in Center of thy bliss,
with Solomon have thee enthroand:
When joy and peace thou do possess,
when Croesus wealth to thee is bound:
When all things else that world can yield,
at thy command and beck do stand:
Then comes Death like Mars in field,
and pluckes thy life into his hand.
Thy lands, thy rentes, thy wife most grave,
thy daughters clad with Venus hoe:
Thy sons ado^n'd with virtues brave,
thou art compeld to bid adue.
Thy houses high, thy castles strong,
thy gardens square in each degree:
Thy pleasant courts and towers long,
all to forsake thou forced must be.
Thy lambs, thy goats, thy fatlings all,
which feed themselves in pastutes green
Thine Oxen eke within thy stall.
thou will then wish had never seen.
Thy horses which in stable stand,
and praunce most stately in their kind:
Thine oxen eke that plow thy land,
thou art full loath to leave behind:
Thy Dear which raunge thy forest wild,
and brouse on boughs, in winter cold:
And such as rome abroad the field,
do please thee well, though thou be old.
Thy tender youths and servants grave,
which on thee wayt in comely glee:
No longer with thee must thou have,
but leave them al, thus must it be.
Thy brothers kind, and sisters dear,
thy kindred all that loved thee best:
Hereafter may not keep thee here,
but trudge thou must among the rest.
Contemn therefore all worldly wealth,
and crave no more then may su^fise:
So God will bless thy soul with health,
which still shall dure without surmise.
But if with want thou be oppressed,
if pinched eke with poverty,
Let all by sufferance be redrest,
when it shall please our God on hie,
For Job by patience wan great praise,
cruel Pharaoh could not David daunt,
By patient hope they both had ease,
and al their foes could not once vaunt,
Or say, lo here we have preuaild,
lo here is he, whom we subdude:
But Peacocke like they al were quaild,
and forste to fly in sort most rude.
Let these examples move thy heart,
al woes, al pains for to endure:
For heavens bliss without great smart,
none can atchieue, I thee assure.
All crosses who so does embrace,
all miseries who does sustain:
Adorned is he with divine grace,
with Angels eke shall he remain.
But he that lives wantonlie,
he wicked Mammon that does love,
He that desires to climb on hie,
forgetting God that sits above.
And he whose mind is pu^t with pride,
whose heart with malice great does swell:
With Lucifer still shall abide,
and with the Furies must he dwell.
Wherefore O man, O wretched wight,
this wicked vale seek thou to scorn:
Thy latter end have still in sight.
least soul and corpse be both forlorn,
For what can it thee ought avail, What can it avail thee to win althe world
and loose thine own soul,

if all the world thou do possess?
Since grie^ly grave is thy reraile,
where worms thee gnaw without redres
Yet worse then that does it remain,
when Spirits thy silly soul shall rent:
In fiery flame, with hellish pain,
Which never stays, nor will be spent.
In dungion deep when thou shall lie,
a place from God, that is farthest cast:
Where damned souls both houle and cry,
where fiery chains do hold them fast.
Wherefore with Solomon I cry,
O son remember thou thine end:
Then will thou wicked sin defy,
then will thou never God offend.
Now since tha^ we compassed be,
with dreadful death on every side:
And that the same all creatures see,
what of us all shall now betide.
May not we call this wretched life, This life is a miserable vale

a vale whose corn is bitter woe:
The crop whereof we reap with strife
in age, which lusty years did sow.
The worms which vex our minds be cares
most griping grief our body press:
And sickness takes us in his snares,
whereof we hardly get redress.
Our bodies are a cursed ground,
our skin is like to withered hay:
Our humors weak and watrish found,
which filthy worms shall suck away.
Behold now, mark you what we are,
Behold, but dust and brittle glass:
Behold, a stream that falls like star,
behold a wind that soon does pass,
Behold, here are we turnde and cast,
Behold, we often times do change,
Behold, from pillar to the post,
both to and fro are forced to range.
The sands in sea, the grass we see, The sands o^ the sea and the grass of
the field are sooner numbered then our woes.

in ^ertile lands and fields most fair,
With all the stars may reckoned be,
that glister in the healthsome air:
Much sooner, I do tell thee right,
then all the woes and pinching pain,
Which still on men do fall and light,
that in this loathsome vale remain.
Amongst mankind was never one,
that ever here on earth did dwell,
Of miseries that taste had none,
or once could say, all things run well:
Although he were in glorious state,
although he lived in high degree,
Yet forced was he to blame his fate, No man was ever happy in this life.

and say, I see it will not be.
But if both poor and indigent,
thou be, and can not wealth attain:
Thy life thy breath thou do repent,
and still in sorrow do remain.
If that a suckling babe thou be,
but even now if thou were borne:
Thy life is death, we all do see,
thou art a silly wretch forlorn.
And when a t^nder child thou art,
thine age is chiefest spring of woe:
Ten thousand griefs oppress thy heart, All estates ^ this world most miserable

and still on every side they floe.
If that by years thou be a man,
most great mishaps on thee will fall.
And dangers will sare now and than,
cast thee and thine int'wofull thrall.
When crooked age comes stealing ou,
then have we lost all worldly bliss,
With pinching pain and sickness strong,
then all our body troubled is,
If that a wedded man thou be,
then art thou tide to block of pain:
Then art thou bound, which once were fre
and so for ay thou must remain.
If thou a single life do lead,
then sunk thou art in all annoyes,
And drowned in grie^e, although indeed
thou think to swim in sea of joys.
Although thy body thou adorn,
with glittering gold and pearl bright.
Yet is thy mind with care forlorn,
because in sorrows thou art pight.
What life thou will, do thou prosesse,
of want and woe thou shall have store:
Be what thou will thy cares to cease,
thy dolors yet are as before.
Unconstant is the state of man,
his life as brittle as the clay:
And is compared to a spanne,
for in short time it fades away.
It to a bubble likened is, ^^e frailty ^t this life,

which to our sight appears hie:
And in the time thou can say this,
flat with the water does it lie.
The man that late in wealth did flow,
in poverty is now, and thrall,
And is constrained to lie full low,
which lately was the prince of all.
Whom God in mercy has extold,
and set in golden chair of bliss:
Death plucketh down in sort most bold,
and unto him least partial is.
He lives to day quite void of pain,
no grief has he nor yrksome care,
Passing the time in pleasures vain,
with iolitie and dainty fare.
To morrow dead and turnde to dust,
to morrow put in mournful tomb:
And to the earth his corpse he must
commit: till doleful day of dombe.
Such is the state which we enjoy,
such is the end all does betide:
That in this vale of all annoy,
among mortal men do once abide.
Though Nestar's years we can attain,
though thousand ages yet we have:
The worms to feed we must be feign, The certenty of death,

and fill we must the gaping grave.
Not Hercules, not Sampson strong,
not Pompey stout, nor Caesar brave,
But forced were to lie along,
and take the blow which Death them gave.
Not Cato that in wit did flow,
not Solomon that did excel
All mortal wights from high to low,
in wisedoms court that bare the bell,
The tyranny of death could daunt,
or make his griesly face to blush:
For he does boast, yea brag and vaunt,
and holds our force not worth a rush*
Behold rich Croesus with his wealth,
could not the dart of death defend:
Behold, great Monarks want their health,
and all do trudge with death in end.
He spares none, he takes all,
both young and old of each degree:
Both rich and poor both free and thrall,
he paies to every one his fee.
The Calamities of hell.
HE throws the wicked headlong down
to Lymbo lake, where is no rest:
Where damned souls look grim, and frown,
and are with endless pain oppressed.
This is the place that darkened is,
this is the place of bitter pain:
This is the place void of all bliss,
this is the place where devils reign.
This is the place of chillest cold,
this is the place of endless fire:
Whose forces great none can unfold,
both tongue and pen though he do tire.
If monsters fell thou would see,
which in this place make their abode:
Thy heart then daunted so would be,
that none thy fear could then unload.
If to thine ears their hellish sound,
should once be brought I thee assure*
Thy senses all it would confound.
but oh, none can the same endure:
These grie^ly ghosts such tortures have,
such pinching pain does them oppress
That some relief still do they crave,
but never can they get redress.
They weep, they ^ry, they wring their hands
their m^series they do bewail:
They gnash their teeth in woeful bands,
this is the gain of their retaile.
They roar like Lions in their dens, The noise of damned souls,

like dogs they howl in kennels staide,
Like filthy Swine they lie in fennes,
and thus all reprobates are paid.
Their filthy place no tongue can tell,
no pen can well the same descrie.
The stincke is such where they do dwell, The lothsomnes of hell,

that all it slaies that pass thereby.
Their entry is of chillest y^e,
their doors and gates of fiery brass,
Their house more hot then Etna thrice,
that's full of fire, and ever was.
Their walk on fiery serpents is,
which pluck the marrow from the bone
So is their comfort and their bliss,
to mourn, to weep, and make great moan
O wretched soul, what is thy state,
what shall at last become of thee?
Of greater grief who can delate,
what greater woe or pain can be?
Yet worse there is I tell thee plain,
thy body must to judgment rise:
And with thy soul it must sustain
more torments then can heart devise: The tor^ents of ^ody and ^oule together.

Because in earth both did offend,
because the laws of God they brake
Together, therefore without end
must both be drowned in fiery lake*
All sinners would this day eschew,
all sinners wish their peril past:
All sinners hearts the same must rue,
all sinners must it find at last:
Behold it comes now with speed, ^okens of the second ^omming ^f the lord

behold the sun that shined bright,
Is darkened over all in deed,
Behold all things appear as night.
Behold the stars as withered leaves,
in windy Autumn down do fall;
Behold the Moon God eke bereaues,
of light and shining brightness all.
Behold the hearts of men do faint,
behold, their wits are scant their own:
Behold, with fear they make complaint,
be hold, with griping grief they groan.
Behold their faces are but pale,
behold, their bodies weakened be:
Behold, their doubt of endless thralle,
behold their flesh consumes we see.
Behold, what grief does men oppress,
behold, they cast their heads on hie:
But to lament, they can no less,
mark well, all men do seem to die.
Mark how both trees and branches all,
do sweat forth blood against their kind:
Mark, all things are oppressed with thrall,
mark nothing has a quiet mind.
The roaring sea does fret and fume,
her waves she flings above the land:
She shows all things are out of tune,
she cries, Gods day is nigh at hand:
The earth of late has shakt her self,
as weary of her sinful burn:
Which is our selves, with worldly pelf,
but oh! thereby we are forlorn.
Of late she svvallowed in her gulf,
twelve thousand out of London town: The last great plague in London,

By sudden plague like ravening Wolf,
yet are our hearts not once plucked down.
Her wrath yet is not it appeasde,
our friends from us she takes still:
Our sins so much have God displeasd,
that she revenge does use, and will.
Her fruits also she does detain,
and has done forty months and more:
Yet few of us in heart complain,
nor for our sins are pricked wit woe.
The skies also with misty clouds,
are over cast and gush out tears:
Whereby the earth has had great floods, The hardness of our ^eares.

and with their noise have filled our ears,
The blustering winds do puff and blow,
they sob, they sigh in raging sort:
They force high tres to lie full low,
they tempests stir in every port.
They range with fury East and West,
from North to South they also run,
They know not where to take their rest,
But beat the air, as Cannon gun.
The stoutest hearts their faces hide,
both rich and poor are much dismayed:
No flesh Gods judgment can abide,
but seek where they may find some aid.
All living things for help do cry,
both sauadge beasts and birds also.
The worms which in the earth do lie,
do wish for legs with speed to go,
The earth does quake and mountains all,
both herbs and roots their virtues lose,
Great toures long flat down do fall,
and odours sweet do leave the Rose.
Dame Nature in her fury strong,
receives a curse and gins to quail,
Her forces all do lie along,
whereby all things their virtues fail.
The Angels all, The Angels wait the coming of the ^^rd,
with Saints most blessed,
the Cherub and the Seraphin,
All sinners that have life possessed,
both quick and dead that erst have bin.
Assembled are, and dreadfully,
with terror great our Lord expect:
And wait his coming from on hie,
for then each thing shall be perfect.
Behold both heaven and earth do bow,
behold thev down and prostrate fall:
Behold Jehovah comes now,
all flesh before him for to call.
In glory comes he and state,
his trumpets through the earth do sound*
All sinners suddenly t'awake,
in cuery coast that may be found.
In air most fiery floods appear,
wherein he comes most gloriously:
Which sight the mountains great do fear,
and melt down flat, which were on hie.
The seas eke tremble at his sight,
and dried are, most strange to see:
Whose waves did seem in sand most bright
but now bare sands there only be:
The craggie rocks are turnde to dust,
his furious wrath none can abide,
God still will favor all the just,
but sinners seek themselves to hide:
Ocursed soul how art thou vexed?
how art thou chok'd with woeful care?
How do thou quake when as the text,
of sin does will thee to beware.
When all these dreadful sights appear,
before thine eyes, and are at hand:
How does thine heart then shake and fear,
how do thou care to fly the land:
Thy body now does rise also,
like gri^sly ghost from out the grave,
And in the same thy soul must go.
and with the same due pains must have.
Before thee sits a Judge severe, The Lord sits in judgment,

whose vvrathfull rage thou must abide*
Behind thee Sprites they soul to tear,
accusers eke on every side.
Above thee hangs a dread^ull sword,
to cut thy body to the pot:
Which is of God the mighty word,
but woe to thee that has this lot.
Below the fiery pot does stand,
which filled is with boiling lead:
And will consume both heart and hand,
and every limme from foot to head.
Most filthy brimstone is the fuel,
that makes the lead like burning fire:
Of wicked men this is the jewel,
of damned souls the perfect hire. The reward for the wicked.

Yet worse then this remains behind,
their hope is past of all redress:
For dying still thems^lues they find,
yet live they must a time endless.
Behold, thou can no mercy win,
behold thy foes have thee beset:
Behold, thy soul condemnd for sin,
in St^gian lake must pay thy debt.
O doleful doom, of sin the meed,
O wretched soul, that do repent:
But too too late, thus do we read,
for time of grace is past and spent.
Wherefore in vain, thou now do cry,
with Dives that is vexed in hell:
Thy birth, thy life thou do defy,
because with devils thou must dwell.
Which rave with rage, which firebra^ds cast,
which rome, which run, still in their kind,
Which only fiery trumpets blast,
this is the joy which sinners find.
Of the felicities of heaven.
But come, behold the joyful place,
behold the comfort of the same:
Behold, where Saints, and souls of grace,
all joy possess, quite void of blame.
Behold, who can conceive in heart,
behold, what tongue can else express:
What pen can well discrie in part,
the woondrous joys of heaven bless,
Where Angels bright with Christ do reign
where honors hie do flourish still, The comfort of the Godly.

Where darkness all is banished clean,
where all things have their wished will,
Where heat nor cold do once oppress,
where thirst and hunger have no place:
Where pain and sorrow always cease,
where love and peace have all their grace.
Where heaviness is turned to joy,
where all conceits do comfort bring,
Where nothing is that breeds annoy,
where perfect bliss does always spring.
O caitiffe wight this place behold,
which does surmount the reach of thought
Whose gates are framed of finest gold,
whose walls of diamo^ds clear are wrought.
Behold the city, where it stands,
whose pauements are of pearl fine,
Whose springs brings comfort to all lands,
for still they run with oil and wine.
There all things bath in joyful bless.
There milk and honey do abound:
There all men have chief happiness,
there music has her sweetest sound:
The lamb of God is there inthroand,
in chair of state shining most bright:
Which all the wicked does confound,
and brings the godly to his light.
The light is such, as would obscure,
both Sun and Moon, if they were there:
And so for ever will endure,
most happy he that is his heir:
There flows a pleasant silver stream,
wherein the life of man does run.
Which glittereth as fair Tytans beam,
yea much more bright then is the Sun.
There grows a tree on either side,
which saving health and comfort brings:
Whereby in peace we always bide,
and from the same all mercy springs.
The ^ap thereof does justice nurse,
the leaves as relics left behind:
Do still maintain each Christians purse,
whose souls in fine our Lord does find.
The blos^oms of the same do cease
all worldly strife, even in one hour:
The seeds thereof bring heavens bless,
the fruits do show Gods mighty power*
No time can well consume the bark,
it stronger is, then time can wast,
The substance eke appears so sta^ke,
that death it does subdue at last.
The Song of the Angels, and of all the Saints of God.
A Famous Quire there is also,
whose godly songs do sound most sweet,
Sanctus, Sanctus, and Lans Deo,
thus in their harmony they meet.
The ^ingers Angels, are most bright,
the Cherub and the Seraphin:
The holy Saints are eke in sight,
and all consent in well tuning.
Most happy he yea ten times blessed,
amongst these Saints that bears a part:
In heavens high sure is his rest,
and has all joy placed in his heart,
There is also a pleas^nt field,
wherein all virtues flourish still,
Their humbleness, which often does yield
and patience that gets good will.
Fideli^y there eke does reign,
with her is ioin'd Dame Prudence grave,
Good government for to maintain,
whereby at last good rest we have.
There Sapience sage, with Modesty,
there faithful Love does come in place:
There Friendship dear with courtesy,
which favor wins without disgrace.
There Probity her self does stay,
a virtue rare I you assure*
There Piety remains always,
which brings blisle which will endure*
There Summum bonum shall we find,
the strongest Anchor of our hope:
There chiefest treasures for mankind,
there of all bliss the only scope,
This summum bonum is the well,
whence godly virtues al do spring,
Wherein each faithful seeks to dwell,
and there with gladsome joy to sing:
O Fountain clear! O blessed spring,
whereby all virtues flourish still:
Most happy he in every thing,
that virtue loves and ever will.
By virtue honors here we have,
By virtue, faithful hearts we win:
By virtue clean we are and brave,
by virtue purged of all our sin:
Wherefore lets all with might and maine,
Embrace the course of Virtues lore:
That we in bliss with Christ may reign,
where virtues spring for evermore.
O famous place that does excel,
that does al earthly bliss surmount:
Where Saints and Angels only dwell,
whose pleasant ioies no man can count.
Each saint is higher in his place,
and brighter also in our sight:
Then Sun or Moon, whose glittering grace
our eyes refuse, they are so bright.
What glory there, where glory is*
and does in highest state abound:
Thrice happy he that can see this,
most blessed they that have it found.
Here Patriarchs and Prophets all,
here godly martyrs wear the crown:
Here Virgins pure are freed from thrall,
here sacred Saints have all renown.
Here senses all are fully fed.
with their delights in highest degree:
1. Here music seeks to fill thy head,
with sound as sweet, as sweet may be.
2. Most fragrant smells here eke abound,
to please thy nostrels in their kind:
3. Here tastes most sweet are also found,
to please thy palate: yet behind
4. Surpassing sightes here are also,
as obiectes for thy Crystal eyes:
5. More perfect feeling then we know,
here eke remains by destinies.
O glorious God that have assigned,
these pleasures all, us to content!
Inspire our hearts, that thou may find
our souls with thee still to consent.
What greater joys can be expressed,
what sweeter bliss, what pleasure more:
Can be conceived in human breast,
then here have been rehearst before,
Yet more then all is ouer^ast,
which one is all I dare well say:
For fa^e to face we shall at ^^st,
Our Savior sweet, see night and day,
And joy in him with perfect bl^sse:
and live with him, that death has s^aine,
In love and peace which are endless
and never touched with woe or pain,
No goo^ can be but there is found:
no good without him is possessed:
All best delights do there abound,
each fight does yield a perfect rest.
The Angels there most glorious are,
then human eyes can well behold:
More bright they shine then any star,
and still Gods mercies they unfold: ^he An^els show ^he mercies ^f God,

What place more stately can there be,
for greatest Princes to enjoy:
Then follow heirs with him to be,
that grants all bliss without annoy,
Behold the time, which once has bin,
behold the time, which present is:
Behold also each future thing,
most plain are there with God in bliss.
O knowledge deep, O heavenly light,
O sense most clear, that so can reach,
That so can bring all things in sight,
and so all saints and Angels teach,
O blessed state, where malice sleeps,
no one is here of base degree:
O glorious Lord, that Princes keeps,
his loyal servants for to be!
O seat of joy! O s^e of bliss!
O happy house of all ple^sures!
O state which never does amiss,
O blessed place, which so endures!
O place which yields all contents,
O place which never wrack sustaines!
O place which need ne lands, ne rents!
O place which still in bliss remains!
O woondrous place of all the best!
O place which endless comfort brings!
O place of joy and quiet rest!
O place whence chiefest goodness springs!
O place, the nurse of love and peace!
O place the fountain of all faith!
O place where strife and discord cease!
O only place of life and breath!
O glorious Lord that there does reign!
and only giver of all bliss.
O happy we, if we maintain,
and keep his laws in righteousness:
O happy we, to whom the light,
and knowledge of his word is brought*
O happy we, that live in sight,
of such a Lord in word and thought.
O happy all that do embrace
this famous Lord in word and deed:
For they shall comfort get, and grace,
and on his Manna shall they feed.
O Manna sent from God above!
O, Manna sweet that brings bliss!
O only food of godly love,
that mends all things that are amiss.
O heavenly jewel of all the best!
O pearl passing glittering gold!
Wherein all Christian souls do rest,
and with all joy the same behold.
No difference there of persons is,
Each one does live in like degree:
Each one possesses heavens bliss,
all face to face our Lord do see,
O man to thee now must I call,
the end where first I did begin,
That joys, that bliss, that pain and thrall.
may keep thy soul and mind from sin.
Thy heart will melt on them to think,
if any grace in thee remain,
And from all filthy sinful sink,
thy heart and hand thou will refrain.
Vain pleasure all, then will thou scorn,
when heavens bliss thou do behold:
For they with damned spirits are torn,
that make a treasure of their gold.
When grie^ly death does the assault,
it is too late for to amend:
Wherefore in time confess thy fault,
and God to please see thou intend.
For when this li^e is gone and past, There is no remedy for sin after death.

there is no cure for any sin:
Then as we are, so shall we last,
in joy, or pain as we begin.
Wherefore thy life see so thou frame,
that it may please our Savior sweet:
And always praise his holy name,
then thou in bliss shall Angels meet.
And with them ever shall thou be,
all peace, all joy, with them shall have,
Surpassing pleasures still shall see,
and nothing ever need to crave.
Which blessed place none can possess, The end of (...) the first entrance to
eternal bliss

till from this finfull life they go:
None to the same can have access,
unless in godliness they flow.
FINIS.
A PRAYER TO ESCHVE worldly vanities.
FOr as much (O bountiful Jesus and most sweet savior of mankind) the
frailty of our corrupted flesh is still more ready to yield to the vain
allurements of this wicked world, and fond fancies of this wretched vale, then
to the sweet and comfortable persuasions of thy constant word revealed in the
holy Gospel, the food of our souls, the bread of our lives, and the strength
of our salvation: I most humbly beseech thee, even in the bowels of thy tender
mercies, to turn thy favorable countenance toward me, and so pour in me the
dew of thy heavenly grace, that I may even hate and eschew the vain
inventions and fond pleasures of this loathsome laberynth, and walk in the
ways of the godly, according to thy holy laws and commandments. Be thou (O
merciful God) my strong castle and refuge, against the wicked assaults, and
most filthy temptations of Satan, and all his hellish host; for they secret^ly
dig pits for my soul, and seek continually to entrappe the same in the
snares of eternal damnation, and leave nothing unattempted that may work my
most miserable destruction. Wherefore, o most sweet and tender Father, so
mortify old Adam in my fond affections, that despising the uncertainty and
frailty of this momentaneous life, I may not delight my self in the joys of
any earthly pleasures, or look for any comfort of this present life, but
withdraw my mind and soul from things of fickle stay, and to fix my heart to
solace and delights, upon the hope of beholding the majesty and beauty of
they glory, wherein joy shall be full, and nothing wanting for ever. Grant, O
blessed God and most merciful Father, that art the mighty monark of heaven and
earth, and only giver of all goodness, that my soul may as a Dove speedily
fly unto the sweet bosom of thy dear son, and there with him receive the
happy rest, which he by shedding of his preeious blood has purchased and
prepared for the same, to whom with the father and the holy Ghost be all
glory, praise* dominion and power for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer to escape the calamities of hell.
BEholding with the eyes of my heart, O blessed Lord, the cruel torments, and
dreadful terrors of the pit of hell, which thou have appointed to be a just
guerdon for sin, and a fit punishment for such as forsake thee, and daily
seek by infidelity to dishonor thee; and knowing that if thou should deal
with me according to thy justice, I should receive nothing but death and
damnanation; I here prostrating my self before thy divine Majesty, most
humbly beseech thee of thy gracious favor to cast down the eyes of Mercy
upon me, to pardon my sins, to forgive mine offenses, and to renew thy holy
Spirit in me, that I may so pass my time in this life, that through thy
grace and favor, I may never wa^der in the most filthy streets of eternal
death and destruction, but for ever escape the dangerous and stinking gulf of
hellish calam^ties, and damnation, Consider (O Lord) consider I beseech thee,
the weakness and frailty of my sinful flesh, and according to the multitude of
thy mercies receive my soul into thy favor, and put all my wickedness out of
thy remembrance. Cleanse me, O sweet Savior, and so shall I be cleansed, and
made whiter than the snow in thy sight. Strengthen me, O God, stre^gthen me,
that the gates of hell preuail not against me; neither let Satan, death or hell
ever have power to triumph over me, but let me that am thine, be thine still,
and be thou mine. Grant this, O most victorious and triumphant Lord, for thy
tender mercies sake, and for thy dear sons sake, our only mediator and
Advocate, Amen.

A Prayer to attain heavenly feliciti^s.
THis world (O Lord) is a dungion of darkness, a mountain of miserable
martyrdoms, a lewd laberinth of loathsome lusts, a canckred course of choking
calamities, a place of all vanities, quite void of all virtues. Wherefore, make
me strong, O sweet Savior, to walk upright in this wretched wilderness, and
arm me blessed Lord with thy holy armor: let me have, O tender Father, thy
righteousness for my breast plate, a lively faith in thee for my target, a
firm hope of thy mercies, for my helmet; and the true knowledge of thy word for
my banner; so that I may be strong against all the fond allurements, vain
fancies, and most wicked assaults of the world, the flesh and devil, the
mortal enemies both of my body and soul; and after the end of this frail
life, I may participate with thee and thy holy Angels, the perfect joys of
heavenly felicities in eternal life, but feeling the heavy burden of my
sin, and calling to memory the grievous punishment which thou have often
time laid upon sin, as when thou did send fire upon Sodom, and Gomorrha
for sin, when thou did cast forth Adam out of Paradise for sin, when
thou did harden the heart of Pharaoh for sin, when thou did cast
Lucifer forth out of heaven into utter darkness for sin; yea, when thou did
persecute Solomon in himself and his posterity, with David thy own servant, and
many others to our example, and al for shameful sin. O Christ most merciful, I
beseech thee, that art the lamb of God, and take away the sins of the world,
to blot out al mine iniquiti^s, which I confess O Lord to be more then al
theirs; and let not mine offenses be witnesses against me in the great day, for
then I know that both death and everlasting damnation shall be my reward:
Wherefore I beseech thee, O most mighty God, and merciful Father, that the
pitiful passion of thy dear son, may be a sufficient ransom for all my sins,
and a full satisfaction for all mine offenses. Grant me, O Lord, thy holy
spirit, and of thy loving kindness turn thy favorable countenance toward me,
that I may for ever in all my thoughts, words and deeds, praise and glorify
thy holy name, and after this life attain the felicities and joys of thy
blessed kingdom, and there with thee to reign eternallly. To whom with the
father, the son, and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without
end. Amen*

Sweet and comfortable Flowers for soul and body.
Avarice.
THe chariote of Avarice is carried upon four wheels of vices, which are,
Faint courage, Inhumanitie, contempt of God, and forgetfulness of death.

The two horses that draw the same, Ba^nard
are Rauine, and Niggardship: to them both is but one Carter, which is, a
desire to have; the whip which the carter uses, has two cords and they are, a
greedy mind to get, and a fearful heart to forgo.

As hell and perdition are never filled, even so the mind of a covetous person
is never contented. Solomon,


Riches hastily gotten shall soon diminish, but that which by honest travel is
by little and little gathered, shall daily increase, and continue long.

He that makes have to be rich, and bears envy to others, little knows
how soon pinching necessity shall summon him to the base court of poverty.

Endless woe is the reward of him, that greedily does gather to maintain his
house, that his nest may stand on high, and thinks to escape the great strok
of vengeance.

The covetous person never takes rest, for in this life his mind is vexed, and
his soul shall ever burn in the fiery lake of eternal perdition.

O with what difficulty shall they that are in love with money enter into the
kingdom of heaven! Verily I say unto you, more easy is it for a Cammell to
pass through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven.

Such as be rich, or covet much wealth, sal no doubt into most wicked
temptations, and are taken in the s^ares of the devil, yea by greedy and
unlawful desires are drowned in the stinking gulf of sempiternall death and
damnation.

Poverty lacks many things, Seneca.
covetousness al things: the niggard ^o no man is good, ^ut to himself worst.

Money is a servant and drudge to a wise man, but to a fool a Lady and
Mistress.

Inordinate desire of riches and rule, Salust.
is the only fountain whence springs all mischief, for covetous appetite
subuerteth credit, honesty, humility, clemency, patience, and benignity,
with all other virtues.

Riches to a wicked man are instruments of mischief.

As the fire ever desires more fuel, that it may consume it, even so a man
that is covetous craves more wealth, that he may hoord it, the fire to his
comfort, because it is thereby maintained, but the man to his misery, bebecause
he is thereby damned.

Riches to the virtuous and godly that use them well, are a token of the sweet
mercies and favor of God, but to the wicked that abuse them, a perfect sign
of their reprobation, and loss of Gods love toward them.

Ambition.
THe Devil did fall only because he would rather be a prince, then a subject.

An aspiring mind never inioyeth quietness.

He that desires to be above others, often times falls; and is set with the
lowest.

Such as are infected with ambition, and are desirous of honor, must be
enforced to possess such treasures only as are unspotted, and clean from all
mischief, which may not of any enemy be corrupted, of any friend misliked, nor
of any man slandered.

All such as exalt themselves shall surely be daunted and set low.

Who so lives in authority, let him weigh in the upright balla^ce of his clear
conscience in what sort he came unto it, ^^egori^.
and coming well unto it, how he ought to live well in it, and to the end he may
govern wisely, let him call to remembrance his own infirmity.

Rule and authority are fit only for men that are both wise and virtuous, for
the wicked still seek to destroy, and not to maintain godly and civil
government.

Ambition is a lurking plague, Barnard
a secret poison, a subtle mischief, the mother of hypocrisy, the forger of
deceit, the nurse of envy, the w^lspring of vices, the moth of devotion; the
blinder of Arts, making diseases of remedies, and sickness of salues.

Ambition breaks the league of godly society, pincheth the purse, stirs
strife, daunteth virtues, and lays her self open to all vice and wickedness.

The ambitious man so little regards his duty, that he wishes the death of
his own father to enjoy promotion, yea seeks the subversion of a whole kingdom
in hope once to sit in the chair of pomp.

Abstinence.
ABstinence is the curer of many maladies in the body, a due corrector of
filthy lusts of the flesh and a ready directer of the soul to sempiternal
felicity.

By Abstinence thy purse is saved, Gregory.
thy body preserved, and thy soul blessed, better is a man patient then
strong, for he that can rule his affections is a great conqueror.

They that abstain from vice, glorify God and preserve their souls to
eternal bliss.

Nature is content with a li^le, Seneca.
and he that oppresses her with excess hurts himself, and displeases God.

They that drink wine in youth, double the flame of carnal desire. Solomon.


Keep thine eyes from vain sights, least it be carried from thine eyes to thine
heart.

Let not thy conceit embrace the image of lust, for thereby thy heart is
stirred to vain folly.

Yield not to the motions of the flesh, for it poysoneth thy soul, and
brings thy body to a miserable end.

Adversity.
HIde thy misfortune, Solomon.
that thine enemy rejoice not at thy fall.

As the Potters vessels are tried in the furnace, even so good men are known in
adversity.

Virtuous men find some solace in greatest sorrows. Seneca*


In all thine adversities remember these th^e things: hard things may be
mollified, strait things may be loosed, and heavy things by custom are made
little or nothing troublesome, to such as bear them hansomly.

Trouble is cause of patience, patience makes proof, Paul
proof brings hope, and hope is never rebuked.

Coals being in the fire do burn and consume, Augustine.
but the gold is tried, the one is turned to ashes, and the other is fined: the
forge is the world, good men are the gold, adversities the fire, and God the
workman.

Despair not in adversity, for he that cast thee down, can raise thee up
again,

As our sins provoke the wrath of God whereby we are forced to sustain all
calamities, so repentance with amendment of life, restore us to our former
prosperities.

I judge him most miserable that never knew misery: Seneca
for good men are tried like fi^^ gold, but the wicked are left like dy^tie
drosle.

By many tribulations we shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that
has not taken up his cross and followed Christ, shall not inherit the
kingdom of Christ.

Afflictions and crosses are as necessary for the soul as warm clothes and
dainty fare for the body. Paul^.


My child neglect not the punishment of God, because it brings thy soul to
all eternity

Blessed is he that patiently takes that corrections which God lays upon
him. Salamon


Adversities cause good men to be better, make wicked men worse.

He that never felt adversity is not worthy of prosperity.

It is better to suffer adversity in this life, and hereafter to enjoy eternal
life, then here once to seem to be blessed, and hereafter to be ever cursed.

Troubles in this life being patiently taken increase solace to life eternal,
but being stubburnlie borne, and taken as a wrong at the hands of the
Almighty, bring all heaviness and sorrow to eternal death.

Alms deed.
Alms delivers thee from sin, David
and from death, and will not suffer thy soul to enter into darkness.

Blessed is he that considers the poor and needy, Salamon.
for the Lord will deliver him in the day of trouble.

He that stops his ears at the cry of the poor, he shall cry, and God
will not hear him

He that uses alms, offers sacrifice to the Lord.

Charity is not perfect, when craving exhorts it.

Perfect compassion is to prevent the hungry, before the beggar desire.

The Alms of the heart is much better then the Alms of the body, for God
loves a chear^u^l giver.

As the fiery lake is provided for the niggard, Salomo^
even so the joys of heaven are prepared for such as delight in charitable
giving.

The Alms of charity without worldly substance suffices, but that which is
corporally given without a merciful heart is not sufficient but worse then
nothing.

He that uses Alms does offer sacrisice to the Lord, ^^^lesiast


Charity is not perfect when craving exhorts it.

Accusation.
HE that accuses not the wicked, is condemned with him. Augustin^


It is better that an evil man be accused, then to be suffered to go
unpunished. Idem,


The wicked accuse no man because they would go free.

Arrogancy.
PRide is the mother of many mischiefs, Augustine*
for it nourishes theft, it maintains adultery, it brings forth disdain,
and causes men to forget God.

Pride breeds idleness, provoke lust, and leaves the soul in the filthy
puddle of eternal damnation.

The congregation of proud men shall never prosper.

He is an arrogant person, and still counted most dissolute, that sets little
by that which good men deem of him.

An arrogant man hears not the wholesome counsel of such as are grave, wise
and virtuous.

Apparel.
THe apparel, laughter, and gate of a man do show to the world what he is.
Virtuous conditons are the only brave and laudable ornaments that can set
forth any Christian.

She is not well apparelled that is not well manered.

She that painteth her face with material colors, puts out the true
picture of god.

Foul manners are worse then dyrtie apparel, (...)
but fair conditions surpass vestures of gold.

As too much sluttishnesse, and exquisite nicenes are detestable vices, so a
decent comeliness is a laudable virtue.

Babbling.
IN much babbling lacks no sin, Solomon,
but he is wise that can temper his language.

A babbling enemy shall less annoie thee, then he that is secret.

One thing often times spoken troubles the hearer. Aristotle,


So talk with men, as if God did hear thee and so talk with God, as if men did
hear thee.

Battle.
War ought only to be taken in hand that peace may ensue.

Such as are oppressed, are forced to use war for their own defense.

Octauian the Emperor was wont to say, that war should not be stirred
without surety, Salus^
that the gain should be more then the charges.

Victory rests not only in a great army, for the strength of battle
comes from heaven.

Soberness in a Captain is no less commendable then strength and hardiness.

A careful soldier is never idle, but always busied in his attemptes.

Boasting.
LEt a stranger commend thee, and not thine own lips.

Nothing does more diminish a man's commendation, Solom^n
then much vaunting the success of his acts.

Benificence.
Benefit the godly and thou shall find recompenee, Augustine.
and if they cannot requite thee, yet God will remember thee.

Those benefits are most thankful, which a man finds ready and are bestowed
with out tarrying, Seneca.
but only the shame fastness of him that shall take them.

Charity.
CHarity is patient and gentle, and enuyeth no man* If I had faith, in so much,
as that I could carry away mountains, Paul
yet were I nothing if I lacked Charity.

If I should distribute all my goods and give them to the poor; and although I
gave my body to be burned, having no charity, it nothing avails me.

Charity does nothing amiss, it is not puffed with pride, it is not
ambitious, she seeks not her profit, she is not moved, she thinks no
evil, she rejoices not in miss chief, she suffers all things, she
ioyeth in truth, she believes all things, she hops well of al things,
Charity never fails.

Chastity.
Chastity is the beauty of the soul, Augustin^
or of the Kings daughter that is abroad.

Chastity without Charity is like a Lamp without oil.

Where necessity is laid unto Chastity, where authority is given to Lechery,
there virtue is put to exile.

The absence of women, causes chastity amongst men.

A chaste eye shows an honest mind.

Constancy.
Constancy does surely perform the thing determined.

He that is constant, ^eeleth neither trouble nor heaviness.

Constancy keeps and still preserves things well gotten, but goods evil
gotten never continue long.

Carnal Appetite.
Carnal appetie leaves behind her more cause of repentance, then of
remembrance. ^^lthy lust will have no affinity with virtue.

The fleshly mind is never satisfied.

A carnal woman ever wishes without contentment.

Carnal appetite dulleth the wit, dimmeth the eyes, lets good counsel,
spoileth the mind, and with virtue will have no meddling.

Heshly lust consumes the body, and damneth the soul.

Confession
COnfession is the only remedy for sin. ^ugustine,
The vengeance of God cease, where man's confession timely preuenteth.

Confession is the life of a sinner, the glory of good men, to all offenders
necessary, and not inconvenient to the godly.

Confession is the confounder of vices, the cleanser of souls, Augustine.
the restorer of virtues, the vanquisher of devils: what will you more? It
stops hels mouth, and sets wide open the gates of Parad^ce*

Discord.
IF they which make peace, Hierome.
be called the children of God, without doubt the disturbors of peace be the
children of Satan.

Discord is the root of all confusion, ^regorie,
and the spring of desolation.

Discord is an enemy to nature, and a shorte^er of the life of man.

They that sustain one part of the city, Cicero
and neglect the other, low the wicked seeds of sedition and discord.

By concord small things are made great, but by discord the most greatest are
brought to nothing.

War is soon made, but not quickly discussed, for he is not sure to finish
it, Salust,
that first took in hand to begin it.

Dignity.
HE is most honorable that disdaineth to erue, or be subject to vices.

True Nobility consists no^ of great patrimonies and rich possessions, but of
godly and virtuous actions.

If thou will esteem a man truly, and know him plainly, view him naked, and
let him lay aside authority, possessions and other fortunes: finally respect
not his body, but behold his soul, then shall thou see what he is of
himself, and what he has of others

Dolours.
THere is no sorrow, but the length of time does diminish, and make more
easy. As a mo^h consumes a garment, Solomon
even so heaviness hurts the heart of man.

It is to be considered in all grief and heaviness, that nothing be done
unadvisedly, nothing rashly, nothing fearful^ie, nothing desperately, nothing
wretchedlie, or any thing foolishly.

Over much sorrow breaks the heart, and kills the body.

Sorrows bring solace to the godly, Augustine,
but they utterly overthrow and daunt the wicked Sorrows are most necessary to
all sinners for they bring amendment of life.

Doctrine.
DOctrine is an ornament to the rich and Noble, Solomen
but to men without wealth, a happy refuge and succor.

As fair legs be in vain to a Cripple, so unseemly is Doctrine in the
mouths of fools.

Learning is a treasure which water cannot drown, fire burn, thieves steal,
nor dice lose.

As learning in good men is the armor of virtue, Seneca
so in wicked and corrupted persons it is a spur to do mishciefe.

We teach our children liberal Sciences, no because these Sciences may give
any virtue, but because they make the mind apt to receive virtue.

As the right use of learning adorneth the soul, Hieronim*
even so the abuse thereof spoyleth both body and soul.

Diet.
IN diverse meats is occasion of sickness, Galen
and greedy feeding is a token of choler. When the sickness is in his force,
then sparest diet is best.

V^cleane bodies, and they which be not well p^rged of supe^fluous humors,
Hipocrat
the more you nourish them, the more you hinder them.

Overmuch euacuation or over much filling of the body is dangerous, for too
much of any thing is enemy to Nature.

To him that is fallen into a distemperance in heat or cold, Galen
it is expedient to give him things of contrary qualities.

Stomachs in winter and spring time be hottest, Hipocrat,
and sleep then is longest, wherefore in those times, meat should be taken in
greatest abundance.

You must not only remember that contrary things be cured by their
contraries, but also consider in every contrary the true dose and quantity.

V^e moderate exercise, for so shall thou help Nature.

Over much ease makes Nature feeble, that she cannot resolve that which by
Ar^e was not purged.

Drunkenness^.
Drunkenness makes men seem as beasts, ^o^ it depriueth them of reason, and
stirs them to all filthiness.

The drunken man shall never be rich.

The Drunkard conso^ndeth Nature, loses both grace and honor, and runs
headlong into ^uerlasting damnation.

E^uie.
THe envious man pineth to see the prosperity of his neighbor.

Envy seeks daily to subvert the state of the god^ie.

Envy is blind, and can do nothing but dispraise virtue.

Envy is an excreme^t of Satan, which poisoneth the hearts of all such as once
touch it.

Envy cannot endure the virtuous, but seeks their confusion.

The envious man wishes well to no man, but worst to himself, for his filthy
conceits drown his soul in the filthy puddle of eternal damnation.

Faith.
AS the bodies is dead, wherein is no spirit, even so that faith is dead which
brings forth no good works.

By faith we see God, by faith we believe in God, and by faith we have our
salvation from God.

A lively faith is the badge of a perfect christian.

Let all godly believers, endeavor to excel in good works.

True Faith confirms thy words with works. (...).


Not the hearers of the Law, be righteous in the sight of God, but the doers of
the law shall be justified.

The Faith of a Chtistian is joined with charity, Augustine
and without Charity is the Faith of the Devil.

Flattery.
TAle bearers, Hierome.
rioters, glozers, and flatterers ar more to be aba^doned the^ open enemies.

Better is the stroke of a faithful friend, then the false kisses of them that
flatter thee.

The best natures soonest believe, and by flattering persons are soonest
destroyed.

God.
IN the heart of man be many devises, Solomon*
but the will of God never alters.

They that fear God will believe his word and such as love him will keep his
commandementes.

The eyes of God are more bright then the Sun, for he sees the secrets of
the heart and searches the raines.

Grace.
GRace is given for three causes, that the ^aw be fulfilled, that nature be
restored, and that we by sin be not subdued. Augustine.


By grace we are freed from the bondage, Barnard,
of sin.

Grace brings us to the haven of eternal happiness.

Without the grace of God no flesh can be saved.

Humility.
hVmblenes banisheth pride, wins love, and brings us into the favor of
God. Augustine.


As pride pride is the root of all destruction, so humility is the welspring
of etern^ll bliss.

Pride cast Lucifer into the gulf of damnation, Barnard
but by humility we shall attain salvation.

Suffer not pride to rule thy wit, for then will it spoil thy senses.

God hates the proud, but the humble he exalts.

Honor.
Honors over great, ^lutarch
wherein is pride, or over much statelines, be sudde^ly thrown down like high
trees in a great ^empest.

Honour-nourisheth cunning, ^ully,
and with praise men's wits be kindled to study.

Ignorance.
IGnorance excuses not sin.

The only enemy to knowledge is Ignorance.

By Ignorance al absurdities are nourished.

Ignorance is the image of blindness, ^gustine
the mother of errors, and the Nurse of all folly.

Ingratitude.
Evil shall never depart from the house o^ him that renders an evil turn for
a good. Sal^mon,


He that does all things well cannot be unkind. Seneca.


The hope of a person unthankful shall relent like winter ice, and vanish
away, as a sudden flood.

Idleness.
Idleness weakneth, strength, but exercise encreseth the same.

As ruste consumes iron, Seneca*
even so idleness wearieth strength.

Idleness without learning is death, and the grave of a quick man. Hieronim,


Idleness brings beggerie, and causes men with hatred to fall into misery.

Idleness teacheeth all unhappiness.

Where Idleness bears ^way, all virtues decay.

Love.
Love couer^th the multitude of sins. Solomon,
Love pleases God, and wins the hearts of men.

Liberality.
LIberality consists not in the quantity of the thing that is given, (...)*
but the manner of the giver, for he gives according to his abilititie and
substance.

He gives late, that gives not till he be asked. (...).


Liberality is the only means, Plutarch
for a prince to advance his honor, and to keep the faithful hearts of his
true subjects.

As the Adamant draws iron, so liberality wins the hearts of men.

Lechery.
Lechery is an enemy to God, and subuerteth all good virtues. A^gustine.


He that delights in Lechery, wearieth his body, consumes his ability, and
damneth his soul.

If we consider the excellent work of God in us, we shall easily perceive how
foul and filthy a thing it is to be resolved in lechery, and to live
wantonlie.

Lechery hasteneth old age, and withers the body.

Malice.
BY malice a man slays his own soul: Malice hurts them most that do
retain it.

Malice is compassed with no limmites of reason.

Nobiliti^.
THe chiefest Nobility before god is, to excel in all virtues. Hieroni^^*


True Nobilitity scorneth to do service to sin

He that boasts of his ancestors, Chrisosto^
declares himself not worthy of praise.

Iphicrates a valiant Captain, Salust.
but the son of a shoemaker, being there with imbrayded of Hermodius a Noble
man borne, answered in this wise: My blood begins at me and thy blood of
Generosity ends in thee. The only welspring of true honor is virtue. Osoriu^*


Obedience.
IT is a general decree made by mankind to be obedient to kings, Augustine,
how much more unto god, which governs all creatures.

Better is obedience then Sacrifice.

If thou will be wise, Salomo^
be thou ever obedience for it is written, desire thou wisdom, then keep the
commandments, and God will give her unto thee.

The contempt of superiors is the original fountain of mischief in every
publik weal. Barnard,


That country is ever well governed, where people well know how to obey.

Faithful obedience in subjects, makes loving and kind hearts in Princes.

Patience.
BY patience Job overcame his woonderous miseries, Ambrose,
and afterward enjoyed all wished prosperities.

He that patiently suffers the troubles and crosses of this life, Augustine.
shall after be endued with all felicity.

Patience comfort the heart, quieteth the mind, and best pleases God.

Most happy is he, who^ no misery troubles Patience causes much peace, and
breeds quietness twixt man and wife.

Poverty.
BEtter is a little in the fear of God, Solom^n
then great treasures with a troubled Spirit.

The patience of poor men shall surely be rewarded.

The life of man is not in abundance of wealth, great riches, and high pomp,
but in virtue and faith, for he is only rich, that to Godward is rich.

Be poor in spirit so shall thou see God, so shall thou praise God, Augustine,
when thou do good, so shall thou lay the fault upon thy self when thou
do evil.

Poverty plucketh down the hearts of the proud, and often times brings them
home to God.

He that lives after his own opinion will never be rich: but God will bless
him that with his riches praises the Lord in doing alms, Barnard
and maintaining virtue and godliness.

Prayer.
With fasting corporal passions are to be cured, Hieronim,
with prayer the pestilence of man's mind is to be healed.

Thy prayer is thy speech unto God, when thou read, God talks with thee,
and when thou prayest, thou talkest with God.

By prayer the Niniuits were preserved.

By prayer Jonas was delivered out of the Whales belly.

Earnest and fervent prayer does oftentimes pacify the wrath of God.

The froward nature of men is by humble pe^ition and prayer rectified.

Prosperity.
THe world is more dangerous laughing then lowering.

Live so in prosperity, as though thou should fall into misery.

Let not prosperity make thee proud, least God for saking thee, thou be plucked
into the narrow straites of pinching necessity. A^gustine


When God suffers evil men to have great prosperity, the^ his indignation is
much more grievous.

If thou had the wisdom of Solomon, Hieronim,
the beauty of Absalon, the strengh of Sampson the long life of Enoch, the
riches of Croesus, the power of Octauia^, what can all this auail thee? when
finally thy body is given to worms, thy soul unto devils to be with the rich
man in pain everlasting.

Perfect prosperity is the use of virtue. Aristotle,


Promise.
AL honest promises are to be performed, ^ully,
but these are not to be kept which are either compelled by fear, or By craft
deceived.

O the shameful confession of fraud, and the common mischief of man: Senec^
more credit is given to men's signets, then to their souls.

The honesty of men consists in the true performance of their promises.

Quietness.
THe paeient man enjoys most quietness, plutarch,
and a quiet mind keeps the body in temperance.

It is better to live with a little quietly, then with abundance troublesomlie.

Quietness makes a merry heart, Seneca,
and a fat body.

Remembrance.
IT is good to remember our faults, that we may first repent us of them, plato,
and then specdil^ amend them.

There is nothing more comfortable to the heart of man, then the remembrance of
sorrows past, in prosperity present. ^ully


Reason.
Nothing in a man is better then reason, for by that he goes before beasts,
^ully
and follows the gods.

A perfect reason is that good, which properly belongs to man, all other
things are to him common with beasts: For if he be strong, so is the Lion: if
fair, so is the Peacocke: if swift, so is the horse.

Reason makes a man full of felicity: Man by reason kills the wild Boar,
stays, yea slays the light footed Stagge.

By reason one man governs another, for the subject by reason is brought to
obey the Prince, and the Prince with cleme^cie through reason rules the
subject and long reigns over them.

Riches.
RIches make place for loss, for such as possess much, must loose much.

Not Riches, but good deeds shall deliuer^a man from damnation. Salomo^


Riches are the ^ause of sin, Paul^
and sin of death. Riches draw men to hurt^ull desires, an^ drown their souls
in the gulf of perdition*

Sapience.
THe root of wisdom is to fear God, (...)
and the branches thereof be of long life, The ardent desire of wisdom
brings a man to the everlasting kingdom.

A wise heart will abstain from evil deeds, and he shall prosper in the works
of justice:

The thoughts of a wise man can not be depraved.

A wise man is never troubled with the tempests of heaviness.

Wisdom excels strength, and the prudent person, is preferred before the
puissant.

Wisdom is the Nurse of peace, and the mother of all other virtues.

Sickness.
Sickness patiently taken, Augustine.
is a perfect token of the love and favor of God, for thereby we see our
frailty and weakness, and also the omnipotent power of the highest.

Sickness causes great men to remember God, and poor men to acknowledge
their offenses.

Sickness is more necessary then meat for by the one the body only is
maintained, but by the other both body and soul are comforted.

Silence.
SIlence to folly is great wisdom:
Use few words and much wit: Pithag.

Offend rather in silence then in babbling.
Silence hurts none, but many words are hated of all men.

An evil man is sooner vanquished by silence then with answers, Chrisostom
and malice sooner stirred with words then reformed.

A man which cannot keep silence, is like a city whose gates stand wide open,
wherein the aduuersarie enters at his pleasure.

Tru^th.
Many words commonly scatter truth to nothing. H^eronim.


Truth seeks not corners. D^uid


All the ways of God are mercy and truth. Time tries truth, and truth
pleases God. Let thy tongue ^ee ignorant of lying and swearing, Hierome.
and so well see thou love truth, that what soever thou speak, think that
thou swearest the same.

Truth surmounteth all earthly things, for God himself is very truth.
Augustine


Truth flows from God, as from the only fountain of the same.

Truth cannot hide it self, for it shines in darkness, and banisheth the
dim clouds of ignorance.

As Satan is the father of lies, Barnard
so is God the author of truth.

Truth flourishes amongst the godly, but all such as bear lying lips are
banished from that society.

Let all thy talk be mixed with modesty and truth.

Virtue.
V^rtue is godly inclination of the mind to eschew evil, plato,
and embrace godliness.

Virtue is to restrain anger, Paul
to mittigate desire, and to refrain carnal pleasures.

The fruits of the Spirit are, charity, chastity, humility, ioyfulnesse,
peace, patience, Chrysostom,
bountifulness, goodness, long sufferance, says, temperance, continence and
meeknes.

Virtue adorneth thy mind, decketh thy thy soul, ^ully
and wins love to thy ^ody.

Virtue is ever one, with most deep roo^s perfectly planted, and can with no
violent means be destroyed.

It beseems virtue to be free from dread, and subject to no servitude.

Virtue cannot serve, Aristotle,
because she is free.

Virginity.
VIrginity flourishes as the green laurel and can by no tempestuous blastes
of adversity be quailed. Cyptian


Virginity is sister of Angels, vanquisher of lusts, Princess of Virtue, and
possessour of all good things.

Virginity be^^tifieth the body, Augustine
preserves strength, and leads the soul to eternal happiness.

The woman unmarried, and the Maiden uncorrupted, Paul.
think on things pertaining to God, to the intent to be holy in body and
soul.

The servants of Virginity, A^brose,
are sobriety, modesty, continency, silence, and lenity.

Virginity scorneth Pride, banisheth malice, daunteth enui^, and imbraceth all
virtues.

Virginity is the garland of al Virtues, Cyprian
the garden of comfort, and the court of all praise: For there is no godly
motion, but she affects, no flower of comfort but she possesses, no
earthly praise, but she deserves.

Wit.
A Wise man does all things by counsel, Salomen.
and a fool soon discovers his folly.

Wit consists in the knowledge of things good and evil. ^ully.


Separate them from thee that do craftily flatter thee, and embrace them with
kindness that faithfully love thee, Socrates.
least ill men have most profit by thee.

The help of god is not only gotten with wishing, and praying, but by vigilant
study, diligent executing, Salust
and wise counselling, all things come to pass.

Prevent as a wise man the dangers that may fall upon thee. plato,


A wise man foreseeth future mishaps, and suffers none to afflict him.

A wise man wins wealth, Democrit,
both to comfort himself, and his posterity, but a fool loses his
patrimony, and can get nothing.

Wit refuses hastines and wrath, Socrates,
because they be enemies of counsel.

Wit governs affections, and puts all vices to flight.

Wit is the gift of God, Solomon,
and the brightness thereof banisheth all the dark clouds of ignorance.

Wit adorneth her self with th the sweet and pleasant flowers of all virtues,
Salust,
she refraineth from sin, and imbraceth all godliness, she prepares us to
hansomnes, and teaches us to eschew the filthy way of beastliness.

Wit is the mother of patience, the daughter of wisdom, the sister or
modesty and temperance, and the care^ull Nurse of well doing. Ambrose,


FINIS.

