AL FOOLS A Comody, Presented at the Black Friars, And lately before his
Majesty. Written by George Chapman.

AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Thorpe. 1605.

Actors.
Gostanzo. Knights. Mar. Antonio. Knights. Valerio, son to Gostanzo.
Fortunio, elder son to Marc. Antonio. Rynaldo, the younger. Dariotto.
Courtiers. Claudio. Courtiers. Cornelio, A start-vp Gentleman. Curio, a Page.
Ky^, a Scriuener. Fraunces Pock, a Surgeon. Gazetta, wife to Cor: Bellonora,
daughter to Gostanzo. Gratiana Stolen wife to Valerio.
Prologus.
THe fortune of a Stage (like Fortunes: self)
Amazeth greatest judgments: And none knows
The hidden causes of those strange effects,
That rise from this Hell, or fall from this Heaven:
Who can show cause, why your wits, that in-ayme
At higher Objects, scorn to compose Plays;
(Though we are sure they could, would they vouchsafe it?)
Should (without means to make) judge better far,
Then those that make, and yet ye see they can;
For without your applause, wretched is he
That undertakes the Stage, and he is more blessed,
That with your glorious favors can contest.
Who can show cause, why the ancient Comic vain
Of Eupolis and Cratinus (now reuin'd,
Subject to personal application)
Should be exploded by some bitter splenes?
Yet merely Comicall, and harmless iestes
(Though nere so witty) be esteemed but toys,
If void of th other satyrismes sauce?
Who can show cause why quick Uenerian iestes,
Should sometimes ravish? sometimes fall far short,
Of the just length and pleasure of your ears?
When our pure Dames, think them much less obscene,
Then those that win your Panegyric spleen?
But our poor doomes (alas) you know are nothing;
To your inspired censure, ever we
Must needs submit, and there is the mystery.
Great are the gifts given to united heads,
To gifts, attire, to fair attire, the stage
Helps much, for if our other audience see
You on the stage depart before we end,
Our wits go with you all, and we are fools;
So Fortune gouernes in these stage events,
That merit bears least sway in most contents.
Auriculas Asini quis non habet?
How we shall then appear, we must refer
To Magic of your doomes, that never err.
All Fools.
Actus primi.
Scaena prima.
Enter Rynaldo, Fortunio, Valerio. Ryn. CAn one self cause, in subjects so a
like
As you two are, produce effect so unlike?
One like the Tu^le, all in mournesull strains,
Wailing his fortunes? The Other like the Lark
Mounting the sky in shrill and cheerful notes,
Chaunting his joys aspired, and both for love:
In one, love rayseth by his violent heat,
Moist vapors from the heart into the eyes,
From whence they drown his breast in daily showers;
In the other, his divided power infuseth
Only a temperate and most kindly warmth,
That gives life to those fruits of wit and virtue,
Which the unkind hand of an uncivil father,
Had almost nipt in the delightsome blossom.

For. O brother love rewards our services
With a most partial and injurious hand,
If you consider well our different fortunes:
Valerio loves, and joys the dame he loves:
I love, and never can enjoy the sight
Of her I love, so far from conquering
In my desires assault, that I can come
To lay no battry to the Fort I seek;
All passages to it, so strongly kept,
By strait guard of her Father.

Ryn. I dare swear,
If just desert in love measured reward,
Your fortune should exceed Valerios far:
For I am witness (being your Bed fellow)
Both to the daily and the nightly service,
You do unto the d^ty of love,
In vows, sighs, tears, and solitary watches,
He never serves him with such sacrifice,
Yet has his Bow and shaftes at his command:
Loves service is much like our humorous Lords;
Where Minions carry more then S^ruitors,
The bold and careless servant still obtaines:
The modest and respective, nothing gains;
You never see your love, unless in dreams,
He, Hymen puts in whole possession:
What different stars reigned when your loves were borne,
He forced to wear the Willow, you the horn?
But brother, are you not ashamed to make
Your self a slave to the base Lord of love,
Be got of Fancy, and of Beauty borne?
And what is Beauty? a mere Quintessence,
Whose life is not in being, but in seeming;
And therefore is not to all eyes the same,
But like a cousoning picture, which one way
Shows like a Crow, another like a Swanne:
And upon what ground is this Beauty drawn?
Upon a Woman, a most brittle creature,
And would to God (for my part) that were all.

Fort. But tell me brother, did you never love?


Ryn. You know I did, and was beloved again,
And that of such a Dame, as all men deemed
Honored, and made me happy in her favors,
Exceeding fair she was not; and yet fair
In that she never studied to be say^r
Then Nature made her; Beauty cost her nothing,
Her virtues were so rare, they would have made
An Aethyop beautiful: At least, so thought
By such as stood aloof, and did observe her
With credulous eyes? But what they were indeed
I Will spare to blaze, because I loved her once,
Only I found her s^, (...) for her sake
I vow eternal wars against their whole sex,
Inconstant shuttle-cocks, loving fools, and (...);
Men rich in dirt, and tytles sooner woone
With the most vile, then the most virtuous:
Found true to none: if one amongst whole hundred^
Chance to be chaste, she is so proud withal,
Way ward and rude, that one of unchaste life,
Is ostentimes approved, a worthier wife:
Undressed, sl^ish, nasty, to their husbands,
Spung'd up, adorned, and painted to their lovers:
All day in cesse less uproar with their housholdes,
If all the night their husbands have not pleased them,
Like hounds, most kind, being beaten and abused,
Like wolves, most cruel, being kindelyest used.

For. Fie, thou prophan'st the deity of their sex.


Ry. Brother I read, that Aegipt heretofore,
Had Temples of the riches frame on earth;
Much like this goodly edifice of women,
With Alablaster pillars were those Temples,
Vphelde and beautified, and so are women:
Most curiously glazed, and so are women;
Cunningly painted too, and so are women;
In outside wondrous heavenly, so are women:
But when a stranger viewed those phanes within,
In stead of Gods and Goddesses, he should find
A painted foul, a fury, or a serpent,
And such celestial inner parts have women.

Val. Rynaldo, the poor Fox that lost his tail,
Persuaded others also to loose theirs:
Thy self, for one perhaps that for desert
Or some defect in thy attempts refused thee,
Reuil'st the whole sex, beauty, love and all:
I tell thee, Love, is Natures second son,
Causing a spring of virtues where he shines,
And as without the Sun, the Worlds great eye,
All colors, beauties, both of Art and Nature,
Are given in vain to men, so without love
All beauties bred in women are in vain;
All virtues borne in men lie buried,
For love informs them as the Sun does colors,
And as the Sun reflecting his warm ^eames
Against the earth, begets all fruits and flowers:
So love, fair shining in the inward man,
Brings forth in him the honorable fruits
Of valor, wit, virtue, and haughty thoughts,
Brave resolution, and divine discourse:
O it is the Paradise, the heaven of earth,
And did thou know the comfort of two hearts,
In one delicious harmony united?
As to joy one joy, and think both one thought,
Live both one life, and therein double life:
To see their souls met at an enter-view
In their bright eyes, at parle in their lips,
Their language kisses: And t'obserue the rest,
Touches, embraces, and each circumstance
Of all loves most unmatched ceremonies:
Thou would abhor thy tongue for blasphemy,
O who can comprehend how sweet love tastes,
But he that has been present at his feasts?

Ryn. Are you in that vain too Valerio?
Twere fitter you should be about your charge,
How Plow and Cart goes fo^ward: I have known
Your joys were all imployde in husbandry,
Your study was how many loades of hay
A meadow of so many acres yielded;
How many Oxen such a close would ^at?
And is your rural service now converted
From Pan to Cupid? and from beasts to women?
O if your father knew this, what a lecture
Of bitter castigation he would read you?

Val. My father? why my father? does he think
To rob me of my self? I hope I know
I am a Gentleman, though his covetous humor
And education has transformed me Bailey,
And made me ou^rseer of his pastures,
I Will be my self, in spite of husbandry.
Enter Gratiana. And see bright heaven here comes my husbandry, (...) eam.

Here shall my cattle graze, here Nectar drink,
Here will I hedge and ditch, here hide my treasure,
O poor Fortunio, how would thou triumph,
If thou enioy'dst this happiness with my Sister?

For. I were in heaven if once twere come to that.


Ryn. And me thinks it is my heaven that I am past it,
And should the wretched Macheuilian,
The covetous knight your father see this sight
Lusty Valerio.

Val. Sfoote Sir if he should,
He shall perceive ere long my skill extends
To something more, then sweaty husbandry.

Ryn. I Will bear thee witness, thou can skill o^ dice,
Cards, tennis, wenching, dancing, and what not?
And this is something more then husbandry:
Thou Art known in Ordinaries, and Tobacco shops,
Trusted in Tauernes and in vaulting houses,
And this is something more then husbandry:
Yet all this while, thy father apprehends thee
For the most tame and thriftie Groom in Europe.

For. Well, he has venter'd on a marriage
Would quite undo him, did his father know it.

Ryn. Know it? alas Sir where can he bestow
This poor Gentlewoman he has made his wife,
But his inquisitiue father will hear of it?
Who, like the dragon to th'esperean fruit,
Is to his haunts? slight hence, the old knight comes.

Ghost. Rynaldo.

Intrat Gostanzo. Omnes aufugiunt.
Ry. Whose that calls? what Sir Gostanzo?
How fares your Knighthood Sir?

Ghost. Say who was that
Shrunk at my entry here? was it not your brother?

Ryn. He shrunk not sir, his business called him hence.


Ghost. And was it not my son that went out with him?


Ryn. I saw not him, I was in serious speech
About a secret business with my brother.

Ghost. Sure it was my son, what made he here? I sent him
About affairs to be dispacht in have.

Ryn. Well sir, lest silence breed unjust suspect,
I Will tell a secret I am sworn to keep,
And crave your honored assistance in it.

Ghost. What is it Rynaldo?


Ryn. This sir, it was your son.


Ghost. And what young gentlewoman grac'st their company?


Ryn. Thereon depends the secret I must utter:
That gentle woman has my brother married.

Ghost. Married? what is she?


Ryn. Faith sir, a gentlewoman:
But her vnusering dowry must be told
Out of her beauty.

Ghost. Is it true Rynaldo?
And does your father understand so much?

Ryn. That was the motion sir, I was entreating
Your son to make to him, because I know
He is well spoken, and may much prevail
In satisfying my father, who much loves him,
Both for his wisdom and his husbandry.

Ghost. Indeed he is one can tell his tale I tell you,
And for his husbandry.

Ryn. O sir, had you heard,
What thrifty discipline he gave my brother,
For making choice without my fathers knowledge,
And without riches, you would have admyr'd him.

Ghost. Nay, nay, I know him well, but what was it?


Ryn. That in the choice of wives men must respect
The chief wife, riches, that in every course
A man's chief Load-starre should shine out of riches,
Love nothing heartily in this world but riches;
Cast off all friends, all studies, all delights,
All honesty, and religion for riches:
And many such, which wisdom sure he learned
Of his experient father; yet my brother,
So soothes his rash affection, and presumes
So highly on my fathers gentle nature,
That he is resolved to bring her home to him,
And like enough he will.

Ghost. And like enough.
Your silly father too, will put it up,
An honest knight, but much too much indulgent
To his presuming children.

Ryn. What a difference
Does (...) it self, twixt him and you?
Had your son used you thus?

Ghost. My son? alas
I hope to bring him up in other fashion,
Follows my husbandry, sets early foot
Into the world; he comes not at the city,
Nor knows the city Arts.

Ryn. But dice and wenching.

(...).
Ghost. Acquaints himself with no delight but getting,
A perfect pattern of sobriety,
Temperance and husbandry to all my household,
And what is his company I pray? not wenches.

Ryn. Wenches? I (...) besworne he never smelt a wenches breath
Yet, but me thinks twere fit you sought him out a wife.

Ghost. A wife Rynaldo?
He dares not lookee a woman in the face.

Ryn. Sfoote hold him to one, your son such a sheep?


Ghost. It Is strange in earnest.


Ryn. Well sir, though for my thriftlesse brothers sake,
I little care how my wronged (...) takes it,
Yet for my fathers quiet, if your self
Would join hands with your wife and toward Son,
I should deserve it some way.

Ghost. Good Rynaldo,
I love you and your father, but this matter
Is not for me to deal in: And it is needless,
You say your brother is resolved, presuming
Your father will allow it.
Enter Marcantonio.
Ryn. See my father, since you are resolute not to move him Sir,
In any case conceal the secret Absconditse,
By way of an atonement let me pray you will.

Ghost. Upon mine honor.


Ryn. Thanks Sir.


Mar. God save thee honorable Knight Gostanzo.


Ghost. Friend Marc. Antonio? welcome, and I think
I have good news to welcome you withal.

Ryn. He cannot hold.


Mar. What news I pray you Sir?


Ghost. You have a forward, valiant eldest Son,
But wherein is his forwardnes, and valor?

Mar. I know not where in you intend him so.


Ghost. Forward before, valiant behind, his duty,
That he has dared before your due consent
To take a wife.

Mar. A wife sir? what is she?


Ghost. One that is rich enough, her hair pure Amber,
Her forehead mother of pearl, her fair eyes
Two wealthy diamants: her lips, mines of Rubies:
Her t^th, are orient pearl; her neck, pure Iuory.

Mar. Jest not good Sir, in an affayre so serious,
I love my son, and if his youth reward me
With his contempt of my consent in marriage*
T^ to be feared that his presumption buildes not
Of his good choice, that will bear out it self,
And being bad, the news is worse then bad.

Ghost. What call you bad? is it bad to be poor?


Mar. The world accounts it so; but if my soon
Have in her birth and virtues held his choice,
Without disparagement, the sault is less.

Ghost. Sits the wind there* blows there so calm a gale
From a contemned and deserved anger?
A^e you so easy to be disobay'd?

Mar. What should I do? if my enamou^'d son
Have been so forward; I assure my self
He did it more to satisfy his love,
Then to incense my hate, or to neglect me.

Ghost. A passing kind construction; suffer this,
You open him doors to any villainy,
He Will dare to sell, to pawn, run ever riot,
Despise your love in all, and laugh at you:
And that knights competency you have gotten
With care and labor; he with lust and idleness
Will bring into the ^ypend of a beggar;
All to maintain a wanton whirly*gig,
Worth nothing more then she brings on her back,
Yet all your wealth too little for that back:
By heaven I p^y your declining state,
For be assu^'d your son has set his foot,
In the right pathway to consumption:
Up to the heart in love; and for that love,
Nothing can be too dear his love desires:
And how i^satiate and vnlymited,
Is the ambition and the beggarly pride
Of a dame hoysed from a beggars state,
To a state competent and plentiful,
You cannot be so simple not to know.

Mar. I must con^esse the mischief: But alas
Where is in me the power of remedy?

Ghost. Where? in your just displeasure: cast him off,
Receive him not, let him endure the use
Of their en^orced kindness that must trust him
For meat and money, for apparel, house,
And every thing belongs to that estate,
Which he must learn with want of misery,
Since pleasure and a full estate has blinded
His dissolute desires.

Mar. What should I do?
If I should banish him my house and sight,
What desperate resolution might it breed?
To run into the wars, and there to live
In want of competencie and p^rhaps
Taste th'vnrecouerable loss of his chief limbs,
Which while he has in peace, at home with me,
May with his spirit, ransom his estate
From any loss his marriage can procure.

Ghost. Is It true? Ne let him ^nne into the war,
And lose what limbs he can: better one branch
Be lopt away, then all the whole tree should perish:
And for his wants, better young want then old,
You have a younger son at Padoa,
I like his learning well, make him your heir,
And let your other walk: let him buy wit
Att's own charge, not at's fathers, if you loose him,
You loose no more then that was lost before,
If you recover him, you find a son.

Mar. I cannot part with him.


Ghost. If it be so, and that your love to him be so extreme,
In needful dangers, ever choose the least:
If he should be in mind to pass the Seas,
Your son Rynaldo (who told me all this)
Will tell me that, and so we shall prevent it:
If by no stern course you will venture that,
Let him come home to me with his fair wife:
And if you chance to see him, shake him up,
As if your wrath were hard to be reflected,
That he may fear hereafter to offend
In other dissolute courses: At my house
With my advice and my sons good example,
Who shall serve as a glass for him to see
His faults, and mend them to his president:
I make no doubt but of a dissolut Son
And disobedient, to send him home
Both dutiful and thriftie,

M^r. O Go^ (...)!
Could you do this, you should pres^rue your self,
A perfect friend of me, and me a Son.

Ghost. Remember you your part, and fear not mine:
Rate him, reu^le him, and renounce him too:
Speak, can you do it man?

Mar. I Will do all I can.

Exit Mar.
Ghost. Ahlas good man, how Nature ouer-wayes him.


Rynaldo comes forth. Ryn. God save you Sir.


Ghost. Rynaldo, All the News
You told me as a secret, I ^ceiue
Is passing common; for your Father knows it,
The first thing he related, was the Marriage.

Ryn. And was extremely moved*


Ghost. Beyond all measure:
But I did all I could to quench his fury:
Told him how easy it was for a young man
To run that Amorous course: and though his choice
Were nothing rich, yet she was gently borne,
Well quallified and beautiful: But he still
Was quite relentles, and would needs renounce him.

Ryn. My Brother knows it well, and is resolud
To trayle a Pyke in Field, rather then bide
The more feared push of my vexed Fathers fury.

Ghost. Indeed that is one way: but are no more means
Left to his fine wits, then t'incence his Father
With a moreviolent rage, and to redeem
A great offense with greater?

Ryn. So I told him*
But to a desperate mind all breath ^s lost,

Ghost. Go to, let him be wise, and use his friends,
Amongst whom, I Will be foremost to his Father:
Without this desperate error he intends
Joined to the other* I Will not doubt to make hi^
Easy return into his Fathers favor:
So he submit himself, as duty binds him*
For Fathers will be known to be them selu^,
And often when their angers are not deep,
Will paint an outward Rage upon their looks.

Rin. All this I told him Sir * but what says he*
I know my Father will not be reclaymde,
Heel think that if he wi^ke at this offense,
It Will open doors to any villainy:
I Will dare to sell to pawn, and run all riot,
To laugh at all his patience, and consume
All he has purchased to an honored purpose,
In maintenance of a wenton Whirligigg,
Worth nothing more then she wears on her back.

Ghost. The very words I vsd t'incense his Father,
But good Rinoldo l^ him be aduisde*
How would his Father grieve, should he be maynd,
Or quite miscarie in the ruthles war?

Rin. I told him so; but better far (said he)
One branch should utterly be lopt away,
Then the whole Tree of all his race should perish:
And for his wants, better young want, then eld.

Ghost. By heaven the same words still I used to his Father.
Why comes this about? Well, good Rinaldo,
If he dare not endure his Fathers looks,
Let him and his ^aire wife come home to me,
Till I have quallified his Fathers passion,
He shall be kindly welcome, and be sure
Of all the intercession I can use.

Rin. I thank you sir, I Will try what I can do,
Although I fear ^e I shall strive in vain.

Ghost. Well, try him, try him.

Exit.
Rin. Thanks ^r, so I will*
See, this old politic dissembling Knight,
Now he perceiu^s ^y Father so affectionate,
And that my brother may herea^ live
By him and his, with equal use of either,
He will put on a face of hollow friendship.
But this will prove an excellent ground to so^
The seed of o^ amongst v^; (...) go seek
Valerio and my brother, and tell them
Such news of their affairs, as they will admire.
Exit.
Enter Gazetta, Bellonora, Grat^na* Gaze. How happy are your fortunes above
mine*
Both still being wood and courted^ still so feeding*
On the delights of love, that still you find
An appetite to more* where I am cloyde,
And being bound to love sportes, care not for them.

Bell. That is your fault Gazetta, we have Lou^
And wish continual company with the^.
In honored marriage rites, which you enjoy.
But seld or never can we get a look
Of those we love, F^rtunio my dear (...)
Dare not be known to love me, nor come near
My Fathers house, where I as in a prison
Consume my lost days, and the tedious nights,
My Father guarding me for one I (...)*
And Gratiana here my brothers love,
Joys him by so much (...), that vehement fear
Drinks up the sweetness of their stolen deligh^*
Where you enloye a husband, and may freely
Perform all obsequies you d^e to love.

Gaze. Indeed I hane a husband, and his (...)
Is more then I desire, being vainly jealous:
Extremes, though contrary, have the like effects,
Extremes heat mortifies like extreme cold:
Extreme love breeds (...) as well
As extreme Hatred: and too violent rigor,
Tempts Chastetie as much, as too much License:
There Is no man's eye fixed on me but does pierce
My Husbands soul: If any ^ke my welfare?
He straight doubts Treason pra^ to his bed:
Fancies but to himself all likelihoods
Of my wrong to him, and ^ayes all on me
For certain trueths* yet se^ he with his best,
To put Disguise on all his Ielosie,
Fearing perhaps, least it may teach me that,
Which otherwis^ I should not dream upon:
Yet lives he still abroad, at great expense,
Turns merely Gallant from his Farmers state,
Uses all Games and recreations*
Runs Races with the (...) of the Court,
Feasts them at home, and entertaines them costly,
And then vpbraydes me with their company:
Enter (...). See see, we shall be troubled with him now.


Cor. Now La^* what plots have we now in hand?
They say, when only one Dame is alone,
She plots some mischief; but if three together,
They plot three hundred: Wife, the Air is sharp,
Y'ad best to take the house least you take cold.

Gaz. Ahlas this time of year yeeldes no such danger,


Cor. Go, in I say; a friend of yours attends you.


Gaz. He is of your bringing, and may stay.


Cor. Nay stand not chopping Logic; in I pray.


Gaz. Ye see, Gentle women, what my happiness is,
These humors reign in mar^age; humors, humors.
Exit, he follow^h.
(...). Now by my Sooth I am no fortune teller,
And would be loath to prove so; yet pronounce
This at adventure, that it were indecorum
This Heffer should want horns.

^ll. Fie on this Love,
I rather wish to want, then purchase so.

Gra. In deed such Love is like a Smokie fire
In a cold morning; though the Fire be cheerful,
Yet is the Smoke so sour and combersome,
It Were better lose the Fire, then find the Smoke:
Such an attendant then as Smoke to Fire,
Is Ielo^ to Love: Better want both,
Then have both.

Enter Ualerio and Fortunio. Ual. Come Fortunio, now take hold
On this occ^* as my self on this:
One couple more would make a Barly-breake.

For. I fear Valerio, we shall break too soon,
Your Fathers Ielosie Spy-all, will displease (...)*

Val. Well Wench, the day will come his Argus eyes
Will shut, and thou shall open: Sfoote, I think
Dame Natures memory begins to fail her*
If I write but my Name in Mercers Books,
I am as sure to have at six months end
A Rascole at my elbow with his Mace,
As I am sure my Fathers not far hence:
My Father yet has ought Dame Nature debt
These threescore years and ten, yet cal^ not on him:
But if she turn her Debt-booke over once,
And finding him her debtor, do but send
Her Serg^ant John Death to arrest his body,
Our Souls shall rest Wench then, And the free Light
Shall triumph in our faces; where now Night,
In imitation of my Fathers frowns,
Lowres at our meeting:
Enter Rinald. See where the Scholar comes.


Rin. Down on your (...); poor lovers reverence learning


For. I pray thee why Rinaldo?


Rin. Mark what cause
Flows from my depth of knowledge to your lou^,
To make you ^neele and bl^e me while you live.

Ual. I pray thee good Scholards give us cause.


Rin. Mark then, ^ect your ears: you know what horror
Would fly on your love from your fathers frowns,
If he should know it. And your sister here*
(My brothers sweet heart) knows as well what (...)
Would sease his powers for her, if he should know*
My brother wooed her, or that she loved him,
Is not this true? speak all.

Omn. All this is true.


Rin. It is as true that now you meet by stelth
In depth of midnight, kissing out at grates,
Clime over walls. And all this (...) reform.

Vale. By Lo^.


Rin. Well sir, you shall have all means
To live in one house, eat and drink together,
Meet and kiss your fills.

Ual. All this by learning*


Rin. I, and your frowning father know all this.


Val. I marry, small learning may prove that.


Rin. Nay he shall know it, and desire it too,
W^lcome my Brother to him, and your wife,
Entreating both to come and dwell with him.
Is not this strange*

For. I too strange to be true.


Rin. It Is in this head shall work it: Therefore hear;
Brother this Lady you must call your wife,
For I have told her sweet hearts Father here
That ^e is your wife; and because my Father
(Who now b^ues it) must b^ quieted
Before you see him, you must live a while
As husband to her, in his Fathers house*
Ualerio here is a simple mean for you
To ly^ at rack and manger with your wedlock
And brother, for your self to meet as freely.
With this your long desired and barred love.

For. You make us wonder.


Rin. Peace, be ruld by me,
And you shall see to what a perfect shape
^e bring this rude Plo^, which blind Chance (the Ape
Of Cou^ ^d advice) has brought forth blind.
Ualerio, can your heat of love forbear
Before your Father, and allow my Brother
To use some kindness to your wife before him*

Ual. I before him, I do not greatly care,
Nor any where in deed; my Sister here
Shall be my spie^ if she will wrong her self,
And give her right to my wife, I am pleased.

For. My dearest life I know, will never fear
Any such will or thought in all my powers*
When I court her then, think I think it is the*
When I ^brace her, hold thee in mine Arms:
Come, let us practice against we see your Father.

Ual. Soft Sir, I hope you need not do it yet,
Let me take this time.

Rin. Come, you must not touch her.


Ual. No not before my Father?


Rin. No nor now,
Because you are so soon to practice it*
For I must bring them to him presently.
Take her Fortunio; go, hence man and wife,
We will attend you rarely with fixed faces.
Valerio keep your co^aunce, and conseaue
Your Father in your forged sheepishnes,
Who thinks thou dare not look upon a Wench,
Nor know at which end to begin to kiss her.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus Prima.
Actus secundi,
Scaena prima.
Gostan^o, Marcantonio. Ghost. It is your own too simple lenity,
And doting indulgence shown to him still
That thus has taught your Son to be no Son,
As you have used him, therefore so you have him:
Durst my Son thus turn rebel to his duty,
Steal up a match vnshuting his estate
Without all knowledge of or friend or father;
And to make that good with a worse offense
resolve to run beyond Sea to the wars.
Durst my Son serve me thus? well, I have stayed him,
Though much against my disposition,
And this hour I have set for his repair,
With his young mistress and concealed wife,
And in my house here they shall soiourne both
Till your black angers storm be ouer-blowne.

Mar. My angers storm? Ah poor Fortunio,
One gentle word from the would soon resolve
The storm of my rage to a shower of tears*

Ghost. In that vain still? well Marcantonio,
Gur old acquaintance and long neighborhood
Ties my affection to you, and the good
Of your whole house* in kind regard whereof
I have aduisde you for your credit sake,
And for the tender welfare of your son,
To frown on him a little; if you do not
But at ^rst parle take him to your favor,
I protest utterly to renownce all care
Of you and yours, and all your amities.
They say he is wretched that out of himself
Cannot draw counsel to his propper weal,
But h^'s thrice wretched that has neither counsel
Within himself, nor apprehension
Of counsel for his own good, from another.

M^r. Well, I will arm my self against this weakness
The best I can; I long to see this Hellene
That has enchaunted my young Paris thus,
And's like to set all our poor Trop^ on fire.

Enter Valerio with a Page. Mar^. retyres himself. Ghost. Here comes my Son;
withdraw, take up your stand,
You shall hear odds betwixt your Son and ^ine.

Val. Tell him I can not do it: Shall I be made
A foolish Nouice, my Purse set a broch
By every cheating come you seven? to lend
My Money and be laughed at? tell him plain
I profess Husbandry, and will not play
The Prodigal like him, against my profession.

Ghost. Here Is a Son.


Mar. An admi^able spark.


Page. Well sir, I Will tell him so.

Exit Page.
Ual. Sfoote, let him lead
A better Husbands life, and live not idly,
Spending his time, his coin, and self on Wenches.

Ghost. Why what is the matter Son?


Ual. Cry mercy Sir; why there comes messengers
From this and that brave Gallant* and such Gallants,
As I protest I saw but through a Grate.

Ghost. And what is this Message?


Val. Faith Sir, h^'s disappoynted
Of payments* and disfurnisht of means present*
If I would do him the kind office therefore
To trust him but some seuen-night with the keeping*
Of forty Crowns for m^e, h^ deeply swear*
As he is a Gentleman, to discharge his trust,
And that I shall eternally endeare him
To my wished service, he protestes and contestes.

Ghost. Good words Ualerio; but thou art too (...)
To be decein'd by breath: I Will turn thee loose
To the most cunning Cheater of them all.

Ual. Sfoote, He Is not ashamde besides to charge me
With a late Promise: I must yield in deed,
I did (to shift him with some contentment)
Make such a friuall promise.

Ghost. I, well done,
Promises are no Fetters: with that tongue
Thy promise past, vnpromise it again.
Wherefore has Man a Tongue, of power to speak,
But to speak still to his own private purpose?
Beasts utter but one sound; but Men have change
Of speech and Reason, even by Nature given them:
Now to say one thing, and an other now,
As best may serve their profitable ends.

Mar. Ber-Ladie sound instructions to a Son.


Ual. Nay Sir, he makes his claim by debt of friendship.


Ghost. Tush, Friendship's but a Term boy: the fond world
Like to a doting Mother glases over
Her Childrens imperfections with fine terms:
What she calls Frindship and true humane kindness,
Is only want of true Experience:
Honesty is but a defect of Wit,
Respect but mere Rusticitie and Clownerie.

Mar. Better and better.
Soft, here comes my Son.

Enter Fortunion, Rinaldo, and Gratiana. Rin. Fortunio, keep your countenance:
See sir here
The poor young married couple, which you pleased
To send for to your house.

Ghost. Fortunio welcome,
And in that welcome I employ your wives,
Who I am sure you count your second self.

He kisses her. For. Sir, your right noble favors do exceed
All power of worthy gratitude by words,
That in your care supply my Fathers place.

Ghost. Fortunio, I can not choose but love you,
Being Son to him who long time I have loved:
From whose just anger, my house shall protect you,
Till I have made a calm way to your meetings.

For. I little thought Sir, that my Fathers love
Would take so ill, so slight a fault as this.

Ghost. Call you it slight? Nay though his spirit take it
In higher manner then for your loved sake,
I would have wished him; yet I make a doubt,
Had my Son done the like, if my affection
Would not have turned to more spleen, then your Fathers:
And yet I quallifie him, all I can,
And doubt not but that time and my persuasion,
Will work out your excuse: since youth and love
Were th'vnresisted organies to seduce you:
But you must give him leave, for Fathers must
Be won by penitence and submission*
And not by force or opposition.

For. Ahlas Sir, what advise you me to do?
I know my Father to be highly moved,
And am not able to endure the breath
Of his expressed displeasure, whose hot flames
I think my absence soonest would have quenched.

Ghost. True Sir, as fire with oil, or else like them
That quench the sire with pulling down the house,
You shall remain here in my house concealed
Till I have won your Father to conceive
Kinder opinion of your oversight.
Ualerio entertain Fortunio
And his (...) (...), and give them conduct in.

Val. You Are welcome sir.


Ghost. What (...) (...) that all*
No entertainment to the Gentlewoman?

Ual. Forsooth you are welcome by my Fathers leave.


Ghost. What no more complement?
Kiss her you sheepes-head,
Why when? Go go Sir, call your Sister hither. Exit Ual.
Lady, you will pardon our gross bringing up?
We dwell far off from Court you may perceive:
The sight of such a blazing Star as you,
Dazles my rude Sons wits.

Great. Not so good Sir,
The better husband, the more courtly ever.

Rin. In deed a Courtier makes his lips go far,
As he does all things else.

Enter U^lerio, Bell. Ghost. Daughter reciue
This Gentlewoman home, and use her kindly.
She kisses her
Bell. My Father bids you kindly welcome Lady,
And therefore you must needs come well to me.

Great. Thank you for-soth.


Ghost. Go Dame, conduct-am in.

Exeunt Rinaldo, Fortunio, Bell. Great. Ah errant Sheepes-head, have thou lived
thus long,
And dare not look a Woman in the face?
Though I desire especially to see
My Son a Husband, Shall I therefore have him
Turn absolute Cullion? Lets see, kiss thy hand.
Thou kiss thy hand? thou wip'st thy mouth by th'masse.
Fie on thee Clown; They say the world's grown finer,
But I for my p^rt, never saw Youngmen
Worse fashin'd and brought up then now adays.
Sfoote, when my self was young, was not I kept
As far from Court as you? I think I was:
And ye^ my Father on a time invited
The Duchess of his hou^e; I be^ing then
About some five and twenty years of age,
Was thought the only man to entertain her:
I had my Conge; plant my self of one leg,
Draw back the the other with a deep fetched honor:
Then with a Bell regard aduant mine eye
With boldness on her very visnomie.
Your Dauncers all were counterfets to me:
And for discourse in my fair Mistress presence,
I did not as you barraine Gallants do,
Fill my discourses up drinking Tobacco;
But on the present furnished ever more
With tales and practisde speeches; as some times
What is it a clock? What stuff's this Petticoate?
What cost the making? What the Frindge and all?
And what she had under her Petticoate?
And such like witty complements: and for need,
I could have written as good Prose and Verse,
As the most beggarly Poet of am all,
Either accrostique, Exordion,
Epithalamious, S^^yres, Epigrams,
Sonnets in Doozens, or your Quatorzanies,
In any Rhyme Masculine, Feminine,
Or Sdrnciolla, or cooplets, Blancke Verse,
You Are but bench-whistlers now a days to them
That were in our times* well, about your Husbandry,
Go, for I'fayth thou art fit for nothing else.
Exit Val. prodit Mar.
Mar. B^^-Ladie you have plaide the Courtier rarely.


Ghost. But did you ever see so blanck a Fool,
When he should kiss a Wench, as my Son is?

Mar. Ahlas it is but a little bashfulnes,
You let him keep no company, nor allow him
Money to spend at Fence and Dauncing-scholes,
You Are too seueere in faith.

Ghost. And you too supple.
Well Sir, for your sake I have staide your Son
From flying to the wars: now see you rate him,
To stay him yet from more expencefull courses,
Wherein your lenity will encourage him.

Mar. Let me alone, I thank you for this kindness.

Exeunt.
Enter Ualerio and Rinaldo. Rin. So, are they gone? Now tell me brave Ualerio
Have I not won the wreath from all your wits,
Brought thee t'enioy the most desired presence
Of thy dear love at home? and with one labor
My brother t'enioy thy sister, where
It had been her undoing to have him seen,
And make thy father crave what he abhorres:
T'entreate my brother home t'enioy his daughter,
Command thee kiss thy wench, chide for not kissing,
And wo^ke all this out of a Macheuil*
A miserable Politician?
I think the like was never played before*

Vale. Indeed I must commend thy wit of force,
And yet I know not whose deserves most praise
Of thi^e, or my wit: thine for plotting well,
Mi^, that durst undertake and carry it
With such true form.

Rin. Well, th'euening crowns the day,
Persevere to the end, my wit has put
Blind Fortunne in a string into your hand,
Use it discreetlie, keep it from your Father,
Or you may bid all your good days good night.

Ual. Let me alone boy.


Rin. Well sir, now to vary
The pleasures o^ our wits, thou know Valerio
Here is the new turned Gentleman's fair wife,
That keeps thy wife and sister company;
With whom the amorous Courtier Do^to
Is far^e in love, and of whom her sour husband
Is passing (...), puts on Eagles eyes
To (...) into her carriage. Shall we see.
If he be now from home, and visit her.
Enter Gazetta sowing, Cornelio following. See, see, the prisoner comes.


Ual. But soft Sir, see
Her ielous Iaylor follows at her heels*
Come, we will watch some fitter time to board her,
And in the mean time seek out our mad crew.
My spirit (...) to swagger.

Rin. Go^ too youth, walk not too boldly, if the Sergeants meet you;
You may have swaggering work your belly full.

Val. No better Copesmates,

Gazetto s^s and singes sowing. I Will go seek im out with this light in my hand,
The slaves grow proud with seeking out of us.
Exeunt.
Cor. A pretty work, I pray what flowers are these*


Gaze. The Pancie this.


Cor. O that's for lovers thoughts.
What Is that, a Columbine?

Gaze. No, that thankles Flower fitts not my Garden.


Cor. Him? yet it may mine*
This were a pretrie present for some friend,
Some gallant Courtier, as for Doriotto,
One that ado^ you in his soul I know.

Gaz. Me? why me more then your self I pray*


Cor. O ye^, h^ adores you, and adhornes me*
Y faith deal plainly, Do not his kisses relish
Much better then such Pessants as I am?

Gaz. Whose kisses?


Cor. Doriottoes; does he not?
The thing you wot on?

Gaz. What thing good Lord?


Cor. Why Lady, lie with you?


Gaz. Lie with me?


Cor. I with you.


Gaz. You with me indeed.


Cor. Nay I am told that he lies with you too,
And that he is the only Whore-maister
About the City.

Gaz. If he be so only,
It Is a good hearing that there are no more,

Cor. Well Mistress well, I will not be abusde,
Think not you dance in Netts; for though you do not
Make broad profession of your love to him,
Y et do I understand your darkest language,
Your treads ath'toe, your secret iogges and wringes:
Your enter course of glaunces: every tittle
Of your close Amorous rites I understand,
They speak as loud to me, as if you said,
My dearest Dariotto, I am thine.

Gaz. Jesus what moodes are these? did ever Husband
Follow his Wife with Ielosie so vniu^?
That once I loved you, you your self will swear.
And if I did, where did you lose my Love*
In deed this strang^ and undeserved usage,
Has power to shake a heart were nere so s^led:
But I protest all your unkindness, never
Had strength to make me wrong you, but in thought.

Cor. No, not with Doriotto?


Gaz. No by heaven.


Cor. No Letters past, nor no designs for meeting?


Gaz. No by my hope of heaven.


Cor. Well, no time past,
Go go; go in and sow*

Gaz. Well, be it so.

Exit Gaz.
Cor. Suspicion is (they say) the ^st degree
Of deepest wisdom: and how ever others
^ygh against this mood of Ielousy,
For my part I suppose it the best curb,
To check the ranging appetites that reign
In this weak sex: my neighbors point at me
For this my ielousy; but should I do
As most of them do; let my wife fly out
To feasts and revels, and in^te home Gallants,
Play Menelaus, give them time and place,
While (...) ^t like a well-taught wayting-woman,
Turning her eyes upon some work or picture,
Read in a Book, or take a feigned nap,
While her ^ind Lady takes one to her lap?
No, let me still be poynted at, and thought
A jealous Ass, and not a wittally Knave.
I have a show of Courtyers haunt my house,
In show my friends, and ^or my profit too:
But I perceive vm, and will mock their aims,
With looking to their mark, I warrant vm:
I am content to ride abroad with them,
To revel, dice, and fit their other sports;
But by their leaves i will have a vigilant eye
To the main chance still. See my brave Comrades.

Enter Dariotto, Claudio and Valerio: Valerio putting up his Sword. Dar. Well,
wag, well, will thou still deceive thy father,
And being so simple a poor soul before him,
Turn swaggerer in all companies besides?

Clau. Had thou bin rested, all would have come forth.


Val. Soft, (...), there lies the point; I do not doubt,
But to have my penny worths of these Rascals one day:
I Will smoke the buzzing Hornets from their nests,
Or else i will make their lether ^kins stay.
The whoreson hungry Horse-flyes; Foot, a man
Cannot so soon, for want of Almanacks,
Forget his day but three or four bare months,
But strait he fees a sort of Corporals,
To lie in Ambuscado to surprise him.

Dar. Well, thou had happy fortune to escape v^.


Val. But they thought (...) was happier to escape me.
I walking in the place, where men's law suites
Are heard and pleaded, not so much as dreaming
Of any such encounter, steps me forth
Their va^ant foreman, with the word, I rest you.
I made no more ado, but laid these paws
Close on his shoulders, tumbling him to earth;
And there sat he on his posteriors,
Like a Baboone; and turning me about,
I (...) ^pyed the whole troop issuing on me.
I stepped me back, and drawing my old friend here,
Made to the midst of them, and all unable
To Endure the shock, all rudely sell ^n rout,
And down the stayres they ran with such a fury,
As meeting with a troop o^ Lawyers there,
Manned by their Clyents: some with ten, some with twenty,
Some five, some three; he that had least, had one:
Upon the stayres they bore them down before them:
But such a rattling then was there amongst them
Of (...) Declarations, Replications,
Reioynders and Petitions; all their books
And writings torn and trod on, and ^ome lost,
That the poor Lawyers coming to the Bar,
Could say naught to the matter, but instead,
Were feign to rail and talk besides their books
Without all order.

Clau. Faith, that same vain of railing became
Now most applausiue; your best Poct, is
He that rayles gro^st.

Dar. True, and your best fool
Is your broad railing fool.

Val. And why not, sir?
For by the gods, to tell the naked truth,
What objects see men in this world, but such
As would yield matter to a railing humor?
When he that last year ca^yed after one
An empty Buckram bag, now fills a Coach,
And crowds the Senate with such troops of Clyents,
And servile followers, as would put a mad spleen
Into a Pigeon.

Dar. Come, pray leave these cross capers,
Let Us make some better use of precious time.
See, here is Cornelio: come, Lad, shall we to dice?

Cor. Any thing I.


Clau. Well said, how does thy wife?


Cor. In health, God save her.


Val. But where is she, man?


Cor. Abroad about her business.


Val. Why, not at home?
Foot, my (...), take her to the Court,
And this rare Lad her husband: and do hear?
Play me no more the ^rable Farmer,
But be a^de by friends, sell all ^h country,
Be a flat Co^r, follow some great man,
Or bring thy (...) there, and she will make thee great.

Cor. What, to the Court? then take me for a Gull.


Val. Nay, never shun it to be called a Gull:
For I see all the world is but a Gull:
One man Gull to another in all kinds:
A Merchant to a Courtyer is a Gull:
A Clyent to a Lawyer is a Gull:
A married man to a Bacheler, a Gull:
A Bacheler to a Cuckold is a Gull:
All to a Poct, or a Poct to himsel^e.

Cor. Ha^ (...), shall we gull this Guller?


Dar. He gulls his father, man, we cannot gull him.


Cor. Let me alone. Of all men's (...) alive,
I most admyre Valerioes, that has stolen,
By his mere industry, and that by spurts,
Such qualities, as no wit else can match,
With plodding at perfection every hour;
Which, if his father knew each gift he has,
Were like enough to make him give all from him:
I mean besides his dyeing and his wenching,
He has stolen languages, the Italian, Spanish,
And some spice of the French, besides his dancing,
Singing, playing on choice Instruments:
These has he got, almost against the hair.

Clau. But have thou stolen all these, Valerio?


Val. Toys, toys, a pox; and yet they be such toys,
As every Gentleman would not be without.

Cor. Vain glory makes ye judge on lyte yfayth.


Dar. A fore heaven I was much deceyu'd in him:
But he is the man indeed that hides his gifts,
And sets them not to sale in every presence.
I would have sworn, his soul were far from music;
And that all his choice music was to hear
His fat beasts bellow.

Cor. Sir, your ignorance
Shall est soon be confuted. Prithee Val,
Take thy Theorbo for my sake a little.

Val. By heaven, this month I touched not a Theorbo.


Cor. Touched a Theorbo? mark the very word.
Sir, go fetch.
Exit Page.
Val. If you will have it, I must needs confess,
I am no husband of my qualityes.

He vntrusses and capers. Cor. See what a Caper there was!


Clau. See again.


Cor. The best that ever; and how it becomes him!


Dar. O that his father saw these qualityes!


Enter a Page with an Instrument. Cor. Nay, that is the very wonder of his wit,
To carry all without his fathers knowledge.

Dar. Why, we might tell him now.


Cor. No but we could not,
Although we think we could: his wit does charm us.
Come sweet Val, touch and sing.

Dar. Foot, will you hear
The worst voice in Italy?
Enter Rinaldo.
Cor. O God, sir. He sings. Courtiers, how like you this?


Dar. Believe it excellent.


Cor. Is it not natural?


Val. If my father heard me,
Foot, he would renounce me for his natural son.

Dar. By heaven, Valerio, and I were thy father,
And loved good qualities as I do my life,
I Would disinherit thee: for I never heard
Dog howl with worse grace.

Cor. Go to, Signeur Courtier,
You deal not courtly now to be so plain,
Nor nobly, to discourage a young Gentleman,
In virtuous qualityes, that has but stolen vm.

Clau. Call you this touching a Theorbo? Omn. ha, ha, ha.


Exeunt all but Val. and Rin. Val. How now, what is here?


Rin. Zoones, a plot laid to gull thee.
Could thy wit think the voice was worth the hearing?
This was the Courtiers and the Cuckolds project.

Val. And is it ^ene so? it is very well, mast Courtier, and Dan Cornuto, i will cry
quit with both: And first, i will cast a jar betwixt them both, with firing the
poor cuckolds ielousy.

I have a tale will make him mad,
And turn his wife divorced loose amongst us*
But first let us home, and entertayne my wife.
O father, pardon, I was borne to gull thee.
Exeunt.
Finis Actus secundi.
ACTVS III.
SCENA I.
Enter Fort^io, Bella^ora, Gratiana, (...) following closely. Fort. How happy
am I, that by this sweet means
I gain accesle to your ^ost loved sight,
And there withal to vtt^r my full love,
Which but for vent would burn my entrayles up!

G^ll. Byth masle they talk too so^ly.


Bell. Little thinks
The (...) mind my thrifty father bears,
That I am vo^d to you, and so am bound
From him: who for more riches he would force
On my disl^king fancy.

Fort. It Is no fault,
With ^st d^ds to defraud an injury.

Ghost. My daughter is persuading him to yield
In dutiful (...) to his (...).
^nter Valeri^.
Val. Do I not dream? do I be hold this sight
With waking eyes? or from the J^ory gate
Has Morpheus sent a vision to delude me?
(...) possible that I a mortal man,
Should shrine within mine arms so bright a Goddess,
The fair Gratiana, beautyes little world!

Ghost. What have we he^re?


Val. My dearest Mine of Gold,
All this that thy white arms enfold,
Account it as thine own freehold.

Ghost. Gods my dear soul, what sudd^ change is here!
I (...) ^ll how this gear will fall out ^yth.

Val. F^rtunio, sist^r; come, l^t's to the garden.

Exe^nt.
Ghost. Sits the wind there yfayth? s^e what ^xample
Will work upon the ^ullest appetite.
My son last day so bas^ull, that he d^st not
Look on a wench, now courts her; and by^lady,
Will make his friend Fortuni^ wear his head
Of the right mod^rne fashion. What R^naldo.
Enter Ri^.
Rin. I fear I interrupt your priuacy.


Ghost. Welco^e, Rinaldo, would 'thad bin your hap
To come a little sooner, that you might
Have seen a handsome sight. but let that pass,
The short is, that your sister Gratiana
Shall stay no longer here.

Rin. No longer, sir?
Repent yo^ then so soon your favor to her,
And to my brother?

Ghost. No^ so, good Rinaldo;
But to prevent a mischief that I see
H^ngs over your abused brothers head.
In brief, my son has learned b^t too much courtship.
It was my chance even now to cast mine eye
Into a place whereto your sister entered:
My (...) ^onne: I must conce^le
What I saw there: but to be play^e, I saw
More then I would see: I had thought to make
My house a kind receypt for your kind brother;
But i would be l^th his (...) should find more kindness,
Then ^he had cause to like of.

Rin. What Is the matter?
Perhaps a little comple^ent or so.

Ghost. W^l, sir, such complement perhaps may cost
Married For^nio the se^ting on:
Nor can I keep my knowledge; He that lately
Before my face I could not get to look
Upon your sister; by this light, now kissed her,
Embraced and courted with as good a grace,
As any Courtyer could: and I can tell you
(Not to disgrace her) I perc^yu'd the Dame
Was as far forward as himself, byth mass.

Rin. You should have schoold him for'^.


Ghost. No, I Will not se^'t:
For shame once found, is lost; I Will have him think
That my opinion of him is the same
That it was ever; it will be a mean,
To bridle this fresh humor bred in him.

Rin. Let me then school him; foot, i will rattle him up*


Ghost. No, no, Rinaldo, the only remedy,
I^ to remove the cause; carry the object
From his late tempted eyes.

Rin. Alas, sir, whither?
You know, my father is incenst so much,
Heel not receive her.

Ghost. Place her with some friend
But for a time, till I reclayme your father:
Mean time your brother shall remain with me.

Rin. The care's the less then, he has still his longing, To himself.

To be with this Gulls daughter.

Ghost. What resolve you?
I am resolved she lodges here no more:
My friends son shall not be abusde by mine.

Rin. T'roth, sir, i will tell you what a sudden toy comes in my head; what think
you if I brought her home to my fathers house?


Ghost. I mary, sir;
Would he receive her?

Rin. Nay, you hear not all:
I mean, with use of some device or other.

Ghost. As how, Rinaldo?


Rin. Mary sir, to say,
She is your sons wife, married past your knowledge.

Ghost. I doubt, last day he saw her, and will know her to be Fortunioes wife*


Rin. Nay, as for that
I will pretend she was even then your sons wife,
But faynde by me to be Fortunioes,
Only to try how he would take the matter.

Ghost. Before heaven 'twere pretty.


Rin. Would it not do well?


Ghost. Exceeding well in sadness.


Rin. Nay, good sir,
Tell me unfeignedly, do ye liked indeed.

Ghost. The best that ere I heard.


Rin. And do you think
Heel swallow down the Gudgion?

Ghost. A my life
It were a gross gob would not down with him,
An honest knight, but simple, not acquainted
With the fine slights and policies of the world,
As I my self am.

Ri^. I Will go fetch her strait:
And this iestthriue, 'twill make us princely sport:
But you must keep our counsel, second all,
Which to make likely, you must needs sometimes
Give your son leave (as if you knew it not)
To steal and see her at my fathers house.

Ghost. I, but see you then that you keep good guard
Over his forward new begun affections:
For by the Lord, heel teach your brother else,
To sing the Cuckooes note: spirit will break out,
Though never so suppressed and pinioned.

Rin. Especially your sons: what would he be,
If you should not restrain him by good connsell*

Ghost. I Will have an eye on him, I warrant thee.
I Will in and warn the Gentlewoman to make ready.

Rin. Well, sir, and i will not be long after you. Exit Ghost.
Heaven, heaven, I see these Politicians
(Out of blind Fortunes hands) are our most fools.
It Is she that gives the luster to their wits,
Still plodding at traditionall devices:
But take vm out of them to present actions,
A man may grope and tickle vm like a Trowt,
And take vm from their close dear holes, as fat
As a Phisician; and as giddy-headed,
As if be miracle heaven had taken from them,
Even that which commonly belongs to fools.
Well, now let us note what black ball of debate,
Valerio^s wit has cast betwixt Cornelio,
And the inamoured Courtyer; I believe
His wife and he will part: his ielousy
Has ever watched occasion of divorce,
And now Valerioes villainy will present it.
See, here comes the twyn-Courtier his companion.
Enter Claud.
Clau. Rinaldo, well encountered.


Rin. Why? what news?


Clau. Most sudden and unfortunate, Rinaldo:
Cornelio is incenst so against his wife,
That no man can procure her quiet with him.
I have assayd him, and made Marc Antonio,
With all his gentle Rethorike second me,
Yet all I fear me will be cast away.
See, see, they come: join thy wit, good Rinaldo,
And help to pacify his yellow fury.

Rin. With all my heart, I consecrate my wit
To the wished comfort of distressed Ladies.

Enter Cornelio, Marc Ant. Valerio, Page. Cor. Will any man assure me of her
good behavior?


Val. Who can assure a ielous spirit? you may be afraid of the shadow of your
ears, and imagine the^ to be horns: if you will assure your self, appoint
keepers to watch her.


Cor. And who shall watch the keepers?


Mar. To be sure of that, be you her keeper.


Val. Well said, and share the horns your self:
For that is the keepers fee.

Cor. But say I am gone out of town, and must trust others; how shall I know if
those I trust be trusty to me?


Rin. Mary, sir, by a singular instinct, given naturally to all you married men,
that if your wives play legerdeheele, though you be a hundred miles off, yet
you shall be sure instantly to find it in your forheads.


Cor. Sound doctrine I warrant you: I am resolved in faith.


Page Then give me leave to speak, sir, that has all this while been silent: I
have heard you with extreme patience, now therefore prick up your (...), and
vouchsafe me audience.


Clau. Go^ boy, a mine honor.


Cor. Pray what are you, sir?


Page I am here, for default of better, of counsel with the fair Gazetta, and
though her self had been best able to defend her self, if she had bin here,
and would have pleased to put forth the Buckler, which Nature has given all
women, I mean her tongue.


Val. Excellent good boy.


Page Yet since ^he either vouchsafes it not, or thinks her innocence a
sufficient shield against your ielous accusations, I will presume to undertake
the defense of that absent and honorable Lady, whose sworn Knight I am; and
(...) her of all that name (for Lady is grown a common name to their whole
sex) which sex I have ever loved from my youth, and shall never cease to love,
till I want wit to admire.


Mar. An excellent spoken boy.


Val. Give ^re, Cornel^o, heer^ is a young (...) sent to persuade thee.


Cor. Well, sir, let him say on.


Page It is a hea^y case, to see how this light sex is tu^bled and tossed from
post to pillar, under the vn^uory breath of every humourous Peasant: Gaz^, you
said, is unchaste, distoyall, and I wot not what; Alas, is it her fault? is
she not a woman* did she not suck it (as others of her sex do) from her
mothers breast? and will you condemn that, as her fault, which is her Nature?
Alas, sir, you must consider, a woman is an vnfinisht Creature, delivered
hastyly to the world, before Nature had set to that (...) which should have
made them per^ct. Faults they have (no doubt) but are we free? Turn your eye
into your self (good Signeur Cor^) and weygh your own imperfection^ with
hers: If she be wanton abroad, are not you wanting at home? if she be (...),
are not you (...)? If she be high set, are not you taken down? If she b^ a
Courtizan, are not you a Cuckold?


Cor. Out you rogue.


Rin. On with thy speech boy.


Marc. You do not well, Cornelio, to dis^urage the bashful youth.


Clau. Forth, boy, I warrant thee.


Page But if our own imperfections will not teach us to bear with theirs; yet
let their virtues persuade us: let us endure their bad qualities for their
good; allow the prickle for the Rose; the bracke for the Velvet; the paring for
the cheese, and so forth: if you say they range abroad, consider it is nothing
but to avoid idleness at home: their nature is still to be doing: keep vm a
doing at home; let them practice one good quality or other, either sowing,
singing, playing, chiding, dancing or so, and these will put such idle toys
out of their heads into yours: but if you cannot find them variety of business
within doors, yet at least imitate the ancient wise Citizens of this City, who
used carefully to provide their wives gardens near the town, to plant, to
graft in, as occasion served, only to keep vm from idleness.


Val. Everlasting good boy.


Cor. I (...) your knavery, sir, and will yet have patience.


Rin. Forth, my brave Curio.


Page As to her unquietness (which some have rudely termed shrewishness)
though the fault be in her, yet the cause is in you. What so cal^e as the sea
of it own nature? Art was never able to equal it: your dycing tables, nor
your bowling alleys are not comparable to it; yet if a blast of wind do but
cross it, not so turbulent and violent an element in the world: So (nature in
lieu of women's scarcity of wit, having endued them with a large portion of
will) if they may (without impeach) enjoy their wills, no quieter creatures
under heaven: but if the breath of their husbands mouths once cross their
wills, nothing more tempestuous. Why the^, sir, should you husbands cross your
wives wills thus, considering the law al^owes the^ no wills at all at their
deaths, because it intended they should have their wills while they lived?


Val. Answer him but that, Cornelio.


Cor. All shall not serve her turn, I am thinking of other matters.


Mar. Thou have half won him, Wag; ply him yet a little further.


Page Now (s^r) for these Cuckooish songs of yours, of Cuckolds, horns,
grafting, and such like; what are they, but mere imaginary toys, bred out of
your own heads, as your own, and so by tradition delivered from man to man,
like Scar-crowes, to terrify fools from this earthly paradise of wedlock,
coyn*d at first by some spent Poets, superannated Bachelors, or some that were
scarce men of their hands; who, like the Fox, having lost his tail, would
persuade others to lose theirs for company? Again, for your Cuckold, what is
it but a mere fiction? show me any such creature in nature; if there be, I
could never see it, neither could I ever find any sensible difference betwixt a
Cuckold and a Christen creature. To conclude, let Poets coin, or fools credit
what they list; for mine own part, I am clear of this opinion, that your
Cuckold is a mere Chym^ra, and that there are no Cuckoldes in the world, but
those that have wives: and so I will leave them.


Cor. It Is excellent good, sir; I do take you, sir, do you see? to be, as it were
bastard to the saucy Courtier, that would have me father more of your
fraternity, do you see? and so are instructed (as we hear) to second that
villayne with your tongue, which he has acted with his Tenure piece, do you see?


Page No such matter, a my credit, sir.


Cor. Well, sir, be as be may, I scorn to set my head against yours, do you see?
when in the mean time I will fircke your father, whether you see or no.

Exit drawing (...) (...).
Rin. Gods my life, Corn^.

Exit.
Val. H^ at your father in faith, boy, if he can find him.


Mar. See, he comes here, he has mist him.

E^ Dar^ot.
Dar. How now, my hearts, what, not a wench amongst you?
It Is a sign you are not in the grace of wenches,
That they will let you be thus long alone.

Val. Well, Dariotto, glory not too much,
That for thy brisk attire and lips perfumde,
Thou play est the Stally on ever where thou come;
And like the husband of the flock, runn'st through
The whole town heard, and no man's bed secure:
No woman's honor unattempted by thee.
Think not to be thus fortunate for ever:
But in thy amorous conquests at the last
Some wound will slice your mazer: Mars himself
Fell into (...) ^are, and so may you.

Dar. Alas, alas, faith I have but the name:
I love to court and win; and the consent,
Without the act obtayn'd, is all I seek.
I love the victory that draws no blood.

Cl^u. O, it is a high desert in any man
To be a secret Lecher; I know some,
That (like thy self) are true in nothing else.

Mar. And, me thinks, it is nothing, if not told;
At least the joy is never full before.

Val. Well, Dariotto, th'had^ as good confess,
The Sun shines broad upon your practices.
Vulcan will wake and intercept you one day.

Dar. Why, the more ielous knave and coxcombe he.
What, shall the shaking of his bed a little
Put him in motion? It becomes him not;
Let him be duld and stald, and then be quiet.
The way to draw my costome to his house,
Is to be mad and ielous; it is the sauce
That whets my appetite.

Val. Or any (...):
Sine p^culo (...) ^sus.
They that are ielous, use it still of purpose
To draw you to their houses.

Dar. I, by heaven,
I am of that opinion. Who would steal
Out of a common Orchard? Let me gain
My love with labor, and inioy't with fear,
Or I am gone.
En^r Rinaldo.
Rin. What, Dariotto here?
Foot, dare thou come near C^oes house?

Dar. Why? is the Bull run mad? what ails h^, trow?


Rin. I know not what he ails; but I would wish you
To keep out of the reach of his sharp horns:
For by this hand heel gore you.

Dar. And why me,
More then thy self, or these two other when?
You all have basted him as well as I.
I wonder what is the cause.

Rin. Nay, that he knows,
And swears withal, that wheresoere he meets you,
Heel mark you for a marker of men's wines.

Val. Pray heaven he be not ielous by some tal^
That have bin told him lately: did you never
Attempt his wife? has no Loves Harbenger,
No looks, no letters past twixt you and her?

Dar. For look I cannot answer; I bestow them
At large, and carelessly, much like the Sun:
If any be so foolish to apply them
To any private fancy of their own,
(As many do) it is not my fault, thou know.

Val. Well, Dariotto, this set face of thine
(If thou be guilty of offense to him)
Comes out of very want of wit and feeling
What danger haunts thee: for Cor^
(...) a tall man, I tell you; and 'twere best
You shund his sight awhile, till we might get
His patience, or his pardon: for past doubt
Thou dyest if he but see thee.
Enter Corn^
Rin. Foot, he comes.


Dar. Is this the Cockatrice that kills with (...)?
How do thou boy? ha?

Cor. Well.


Dar. What, lingering still
About this paltry town? had thou bin ruld^
By my advice, thou had by this time b^
A gallant Courtyer, and at least a Knight:
I would have got thee dubd by this time ^ertayne.

Cor. And why then did you not your self that honor*


Dar. Tush, it is more honor still to make a Knight,
Then it is to be a Knight: to make a Cuckold,
Then it is to be a Cuckold.

Cor. You Are a villayne.


Dar. God shield man: villayne?


Cor. I, i will prove thee one.


Dar. What, will thou prove a villayne?
By this light thou dec^yu'st me then.

Cor. Well, sir, thus I prove it.

Dr^.
O^n. Hold, hold, raise the streets.


Clau. Corne^o.


Rin. Hold, Darioto, hold.


Val. What, a^ thou hurt?


Dar. A scratch, a scratch.


Val. Go sir, fetch a Surgeon.


Cor. You Will set a badge on the ielous fools head, sir;
Now set a Coxcombe on your own.

Val. What Is the cause of these wars, D^?


Dar. Foot, I know not.


Cor. Well, si^, know and spare not; I will presently be diuorst, and then
take her amongst ye.


Rin. Diuorst^ nay good Cor^.


Cor. By this sword I will, the world shall not dissuade me.

Exit.
Val. Why this has bin your fault now Darioto,
You youths have fashions when you have obtei'nd:
A Ladies favor, straight your hat must we^ it,
Like a Iacke-daw that when he lights upon
A dainty morsel ^aas and makes his brags,
And then some kite does scoope it from him straight,
Where if he fed without his dawish noise,
He might fare better, and have less disturbance:
Forbear it in this case; and when you prove,
Victorious over fair Gazettas Forte,
Do not for pity sound your trumpe for joy,
But keep your valor close, and (...) your honor.

Enter Page and Pock. Poc. God save you Signior Darioto,


Dar. I know you not Sir, your name I pray?


Poc. My name is Pock Sir; a practitioner in Surg^,


Dar. Pock the Surgeon, you are welcome Sir, I know a Doctor of your name master
Pocke.


Poc. My name has made many Doctors Sir.


Rinal. Indeed it is a worshipful name.


Val. Mary is it, and of an ancient descent.


Poc. Faith Sir I could fetch my pedigree far, if I were so disposed.


Rin. Out of France at least.


Poc. And if I stood on my arms as others do,


Dar. No do not Pock, let other stand a their arms, and thou a thy legs as
long as thou can.


Poc. Though I live by my bare practice, yet I could show good cards for my
Gentilitie.


Val. Tush thou can not shake off thy gentry Pock, it is bred in the bone; but to
the maine Pock; what think thou of this gentleman's wound, Pock can thou
cure it Pock.


Poc. The incision is not deep, nor the Orifice exorbitant, the Pericranion is
not dislocated, I warrant his life for forty crowns, without perishing of any
(...).


Dar. Faith Pock, it is a joint I would be loath to loose, for the best joint of
Mutton in Italy.


Rin. Would such a scratch as this hazards a man's head?


Foc. I Byr-lady Sir, I have known some have lost there heads for a less
matter I can tell you, therefore sir you must keep good diet: if you please to
come home to my house till you be perfectly cured, I shall have the more care
on you.


Val. That's your only course to have it well quickly.


Poc. By what time would he have it well sir.


Dari. A very necessary question, can thou limit the time.


Pock. O sir, cures are like causes in law, which may be lengthned or shortened
at the discretion of the Lawyer, he can either keep it green with
replications or reioinders, or sometimes skin it fair a'th outside for
fashion sake, but so he may be sure 'twill break out again by a writ of
error, and then has he his suite new to begin, but I will covenant with you,
that by such a time I Will make your head as sound as a Bell, I will bring it to
suppuration, and after I will make it coagulate and grow to a perfect
Cycatrice, and all within these ten days, ^o you keep a good diet.


Dar. Well come Pock, we will talk farther on it within, it draws near dinner
time; what is a clock boy?


Page. By your clock sir it should be almost one, for your head rung noone some
half hour ago.


Dar. Is It true sir?


Val. Away let him alone, though he came in at the window he sets the gates of
your honor open I can tell you.


Dar. Come in Pock, come, apply; and for this deed
I Will give the Knave a wound shall never bleed:
So sir I think this knock rings loud acquittance,
For my ridiculouse.
Exeunt all but Rinal. and Valor.
Ryn. Well sir to turn our heads to salve your license,
Since you have vsd the matter so unwisely,
That now your father has discerned your humor,
In your too careless usage in his house,
Your wife must come from his house to Antonio^,
And he, to entertain her must be told
She is not wife to his son, but to you:
Which news will make his simple wit triumph
Over your father; and your father thinking
He still is guld, will still account him simple:
Come sir, prepare your villainous wit to feign
A kind submission to your fathers fury,
And we shall see what hearty policy,
He will discover, in his fained Anger,
To blind Antonios eyes, and make him think,
He thinks her heartily to be your wife.

Val. O I will gull him rarely with my wench,
Low kneeling at my heels before his fury,
And injury shall be salu'd with injury.

Finis Actus 3.
ACTVS 4.
SCENA 1.
Marc-Ant: Gostanz^. Marc-Ant. You see how too much wisdom (...),
Out-shootes the truth: you were so forwards still,
To tax my ignorance, my green experience
In these gray hairs, for giving such ad^ntage,
To my sons spirit, that he durst undertake
A secret match, so far short of his worth:
Your son so seasoned with obedience,
Even from his youth, that all his actions relish
Nothing but duty, and your angers fear,
What shall I say to you, if it fall out
That this most precious son of yours, has plaide
A part as bad as this, and as rebellious:
Nay more has grosely guld your wit withal.
What if my son has undergone the blame
That appertained to yours? and that this wench
With which my son is charged, may call you father:
Shall I then say you want experience?
Y'ar^ green, y'ar^ credulous; easy to be blinded.

Ghost. Ha, ha, ha, good Marc-Antonio,
When It comes to that; laugh at me, call me fool, proclai^ me so,
Let all the world take knowledge I am an Ass.

Marc. O the good God of Gods,
How blind is Pride? what Eagles we are still,
In matters that belong to other men?
What Beetles in our own? I tell you Knight,
It is consest to be as I have told you;
And Gratiana, is by young Rinaldo,
And your white son, brought to me as his wife:
How think you now Sir?

Ghost. Even just as before,
And have more cause to think honest Credulity,
Is a true Loadstone to draw on Decrepity:
You have a heart to open to embrace,
All that your ear receives: alas good man,
All this is but a plot for entertainment
Within your house, for your poor sons young wife
My house without huge danger cannot hold:

Mar. Is It possible, what danger Sir I pray?


Ghost. (...) tell you Sir, it was time to take her thence:
My son that last day you saw could not frame,
His looks to entertain her, now bir-lady
Is groan a Courtier: for my self unseen,
Saw when he courted her, embraced and kissed her,
And I can tell you left not much undone,
That was the proper office of your son.

Mar. What world is this?


Ghost, I told this to Rinaldo,
Aduising him to fetch her from my house,
And his young wit not knowing where to lodge her
Unless with you: and saw that could not be,
Without some wyle: I presently suggested
This queint devise, to say she was my sons:
And all this plot, good Marc-Antonio,
Flowed from this fount, only to blind our eyes.

Mar. Out of how sweet a dream have you awak't me?
By heaven, I durst have laid my part in heaven
All had bin true; it was so lively handled,
And drawn with such a seeming face of truth:
Your son had cast a perfect veil of grie^
Over his face, for his so rash offense,
To seal his love with act of marriage,
Before his father had subscribed his choice:
My son (my circumstance lessening the fact)
Entreating me to break the matter to you,
And joining my effectual persuasions,
With yoursonnes penitent submission,
Appease your ^ury; I at first assented,
And now expect their coming to that purpose.

Ghost. It Was well* it was well, see me to believe it still,
Let Art end what Credulity began,
When they come, suire your words and looks to theirs,
Second my sad Sons feigned submission,
And see in all points how my brain will answer,
His disguisde grie^* with a set countenance
Ofrage and choler; now observe and learn
To school your son by me.
Intrant Rynaldo Val: Great:
Mar. On with your mask; here come the other ma^kers sir,


Rinal. Come on I say,
Your Father with submission will be calmed; come on; down a your knees:

Ghost. Villain durst thou
Presume to gull thy Father? do thou not
Tremble to see my bent and cloudy brows
Ready to thunder on thy graceless head,
And with the bolt of my displeasure cut
The thread of all my living from thy life,
For taking thus a beggar to thy wife?

Val. Father, if that part I have in your blood,
If tears, which so abundantly distill
Out of my inward eyes: and for a need,
Can drown these outward (lend me thy hand-kercher)
And being indeed as many drops of blood,
Issuing from the Creator of my heart,
Be able to beget so much compassion,
Not on my life, but on this lovely Dam^*
Whom I hold dearer?

Ghost. Out upon thee villain.


Marc. Nay good Gostanzo, think you are a Father.


Ghost. I will not hear a word; out, out upon thee:
Wed without my advise, my love, my knowledge,
I, and a beggar too, a trull, a blowse?

Rinal. You thought not so last day, when you offered he^
A twelve months board for one nights lodging with her.

Ghost. Go too, no more of that, peace good Rinaldo,
It is a fault that only she and you know.

Rein. Well sir, go on I pray.


Ghost. Have I fond wretch,
With utmost care and labor brought thee up,
Ever instructing thee, omitting never
The office of a kind and careful Father,
To make thee wise and virtuous like thy father:
And have thou in one act euerted all?
Proclaimed thy self to all the world a fool?
To wedde a beggar?

Val. Father, say not so,
Nay she is thy own, here, rise fool, take her to thee,
Live with her still, I know thou countst thy self
Happy in soul, only in winning her:
Be happy still, here, take her hand enjoy her,
Would not a son hazard his Fathers wrath,
His reputation in the world? his birthright,
To have but such a mess of broth as this?

Marc. Be not so violent, I pray you good Gostanzo,
Take truce with passion, license your sad son,
To speak in his excuse.

Ghost. What? what excuse?
Can any orator in this case excuse him?
What can he say? what can be said of any?

Val. Ahlas sir, hear me, all that I can say
In my excuse, is but to show loves warrant.

Ghost. Notable wagge.


Val. I know I have committed
A great impiety, not to move you first
Before the dame, I meant to make my wi^
Consider what I am, yet young, and green,
Behold what she is, is there not in her
I, m her very eye, a power to conquer,
Even age it self and wisdom, call to mind
Sweet Father, what your self being young have bin,
Think what you may be, for I do not think
The world so far spent with you, but you may
Look back on such a beauty, and I hope
To see you young again* and to live long
With young affections, wisdom makes a man
Live young for ever: and where is this wisdom
If not in you? ahlas I know not what
Rests in your wisdom to subdue affections,
But I protest it wrought with me so strongly,
That I had quite bin drowned in seas of tears
Had I not taken hold in happy time
Of this sweet hand, my heart had been consum'de
T'a heap of Ashes with the flames of love,
Had it not sweetly bin asswag'd and cooled,
With the moist kisses of these sugared lips.

Ghost. O puisant wag, what huge large thongs he cuts
Out of his friend Fortunios stretching leather.

Marc. He knows he does it but to blind my eyes.


Ghost. O excellent, these men will put up any thing.


Ual. Had I not had her, I had lost my life,
Which life indeed I would have lost before,
I had displeasd you, had I not received it
From such a kind, a wise, and honored Father.

Ghost. Notable Boy.


Val. Yet do I here renounce
Love, life and all, rather then one hour longer
Endure to have your love eclipsed from me.

Gra. O I can hold no longer, if thy words
Be used in earnest my Valerio,
Thou woundst my heart, but I know tist in lest.

Ghost. No i will be sworn she has her lyripoope too.


Great. Did thou not swear to love me, spite of Father, and all the world
That naught should sever us but death it self.

Ual. I did, but if my father
Will have his son foresworne, upon his soul,
The blood of my black perjury shall lie,
For I will seek his favor though I dye.

Ghost. No, no, live still my son, thou well shall know,
I have a fathers heart, come join your hands,
Still keep thy vows, and live together still*
Till cruel death set foot betwixt you both.

Val. O speak you this in earnest?


Ghost. I by heaven.


Val. And never to recall it?


Ghost. Not till death.


Rinal. Excellent sir, you have done like your self:
What would you more Valerio?

Ual. Worshipful Father.


Rinal. Come sir, come you in, and celebrate your joys.

Exeunt all save the old men.
Ghost. O Marc-Antonio,
Had I not armd you with an expectation,
Would not this make you pawn your very soul,
The wench had bin my sons wife?

Marc. Yes by heaven:
A knauerie thus effected might deceive
A wiser man then I, for I ah las,
Am noe good politician, plain believing
Simple honesty, is my policy still.

Ghost, The visible matkes of folly, honesty, and quick Credulity his younger
brother.
I tell you Marc-Antonio there is mutch
In that young boy my Son.

Marc. Not much honesty, if I may speak without offense to his father.


Ghost. O God you cannot please me better sir,
H'as honesty enough to serve his turn,
The less honesty ever the more wit,
But go you home, and use your daughter kindly,
Mean time I Will school^ your son: and do you still
Dissemble what you know, keep off your son,
The wench at home must still be my sons wife,
Remember that, and be you blinded still.

Marc. You must remember too, to let your son
Use his accustomed visitations,
Only to blind my eyes.

Ghost. He shall not fail:
But still take you heed, have a vigilant eye,
On that sl^ child of mine, for by this light,
Heel be too bold with your sons forhead else.

Marc. Well sir let me alone, I Will bear a brain.

Exeunt.
Enter Ualerio, Rynaldo. Val. Come they are gone.


Ryn. Gone, they were far gone here.


Val. Guld I my father, or guld he himself?
Thou toldst him Gratiana was my wife,
I have confessed it, he has pardoned it.

Ryn. Nothing more true, enough can witness it.
And therefore when he comes to learn the truth,
(As certainly for all these sly disguises,
Time will strip Truth into her nakedness)
Thou have good plea against him to confess,
The honored Action, and to claim his pardon.

Val. It Is true, for all was done he deeply swore
Out of his heart.

Ryn. He has much faith the whiles,
That swore a thing, so quite against his heart:

Val. Why this is policy.


Ryn. Well see you repair,
To Gratiana daily, and enjoy her
In her true kind; and now we must expect
The resolute, and ridiculous divorce,
Cornelio has sued against his wedlock.

Val. I think it be not so; the Ass dotes on her.


Ryn. It is too true, and thou shall answer it,
For setting such debate twixt man and wife:
See, we shall see the solemn manner of it.

Enter Cor: Darioto. Claud. Notarie, Page, Gazetta. Bell: Gratiana. Bell. Good
Signior Cornelio let us poor Gentlewomen entreat you to forbear.


Cor. Talk no more to me, I Will not be made Cuckold in my own house: Notarie
read me the divorce.


Gazet. My dear Cornelio, examine the cause better before you condemn me.


Cor. Sing to me no more Siren, for I will hear thee no more, I will take no
compassion on thee.


Page. Good Signior Cornelio be not too mankind against your wife, say you are a
cuckold (as the best that is may be so at (...) time) will you make a trumpet
of your own horns?


Cor. Go too sir, you are a rascal, ^e give you a fee for pleading for her one
day, Notary do you your office.


Val. Go too Sighior look better to your wife, and be better advised, before
you grow to this ex^remitie.


Cor. Extremity? go too, I deal but too mercifully with her, If I should use
extremi^e with her I might hang her, and her copesmate my drud^e here, how say
you M. Notary, might I not do it by law?


Not. Not hang am, but you may bring them both to a white sheet.


Cor. Nay by the mass they have had too much of the sheet already.


Not. And besides you may set capital letters on their foreheads.


Cor. W^'s that to the capital letter that's written in mind, I say for all
your law, master Notary that I may hang am, may I not hang him that robs me of
mine honor, as well as he that robs me of my horse?


Not. No sir your horse is a chattell.


Cor. So is honor, a man may buy it with his penny, and if I may hang a man
for stealing my horse (as I say) much more for robbing me of my honor; for
why? if my horse be stolen, it may be my own fault; for why? either the
stable is not st^ong enough, or the pasture not well fenc't, or watched, or so
forth: But for your wife that keeps the stable of your honor: Let her be lo^
in a brazen tower, let Argus himself keep her, yet can you never be secure
of your honor, for why? she can run through all with her serpent nodle:
besides you may hang a lock upon your horse, and so can you not upon your wife.


Rin. But I pray you Sir what are the presumptions on which you would build
this divorce?


Cornelio. Presumption enough Sir, for besides their intercourse, or commerce
of glances that past betwixt this cockrill-drone, and her, at my table the last
Sunday night at supper, their winckes, their beckes, due guard, their treads
a'the toe (as by heaven I swear she trod once upon my toe instead of his)
This is chiefly to be no^ed, the same night she would needs lie alone; and the
same night her dog bark^, did not you hear him Ualerio?


Ual. And understand him too, I Will be sworn of a book.


Cor^lio. Why very good, if these be not mani^ presumptions now, let the wo^ld
be judge: Therefore without mo^e ceremony, Mais^er Notarie pluck out your
Instrument.


Notary. I will sir, if there be no remedy.


Corn. Have you made it strong in law Master Notary? have you put in wor^s
enough?


Notary. I hope ^o sir, it has taken me a whole skin of Parchment you see.


Corn^lio. Very good, and is Egresse and Regresse in?


Nota. I Will warrant you sir, it is form^ Iuris.


Corn. Is there no hoale to be found in the Ortography^


Not^. None in the world sir.


Corn. You have written Sunt with an S have you not?


Nota. Yes that I have.


Corn. You have done the better for quietness sake: and are none of the (...)
dashes over the head left out? if there be Master Notary an error will lie out.


Nota. Not for a dashe over head sir I warrant you, if I should ouersee; I have
s^ne that tried in Butiro and Cas^o, in Butler and Casons case, Decimo sexto of
Duke Anonimo.


Rinal. You Have gotten a learned Notarie Signior Cornelio.


Corn. He Is a shroad fellow indeed, I had as leeue have his head in a matter of
felony, or Treason, as any Notary in Florence, read out Master Notary, harken
you mistress, Gentlemen mark I beseech you.


Omnes. We will all mark you sir, I warrant you.


Nota. I think it would be something tedious to read all, and therefore
Gentlemen the sum is this: That you Signior Corn^lio Gentleman, for diverse
and sundry weighty and mature considerations, you especially moving, specifying
all the particulars of your wives enormities in a scedule here unto annexed,
the transcript whereof is in your own tenure, cu^odie, occupation, and
keeping: That for these the aforesaid premises, I say, you renounce, disclaim
and discharge Gazetta from being your leeful, or your lawful wife: And that
you eftsoons divide, disioyne, separate, remove, and finally eloigne,
sequester, and divorce her, from your bed and your board; That you forbid her
all access, repair, egresse or regresse to your person, or persons, mansion
or mansions, dwellings, habitations, remainenances or abodes, or to any shop,
sellar, Sollar, easements chamber, dormer, and so forth, now in the ^nure,
custody, occupation or keeping of the said Cornelio; notwithstanding all former
contracts, covenants, bargains, conditions, agreements, compacts.

Promises, vows, affiances, assurances, bonds, bills, indentures,
pole-deedes, deeds of gift, defesances, feoffments, endowments, vowchers,
double vowchers, privy entries, actions, declarations, explications,
reioinders, surreioinders, ^ghts, interes^, demands, claymes, or titles
whatsoever, heretofore betwixt the one and the other party, or parties, being
had, made, past, couenanted and agreed, from the beginning of the world, till
the day of the date hereof, given the 17. of November 1500. and so forth, here
Sir you must set to your hand.


Cor. What else master Notary, I am resolute in faith.


Gaz. Sweet husband forbear.


Cor. Avoid, I charge thee in name of this divorce: Thou might have looked to
it in time, yet this I will do for thee; if thou can spy out any other man
that thou would cuckolde, thou shall have my letter to him: I can do no
more: more Ink master Notary, I wright my name at large.


Not. Here is more Sir.


Cor. Ah ass that thou could not knowthy happiness till thou had lost it,
how now? my nose bleed? shall I write in blood? what only three drops? Sfoote
thi's Omninous: I will not set my hand toot now certain, master Notary I like
not this abodement: I will defer the setting too of my hand till the next
court day: keep the divorce I pray you, and the woman in your house together.


Om. Burn the divorce, burn the divorce.


Cor. Not so Sir, it shall not serve her turn M. Notary, keep it at your
peril, and gentlemen you may be gone a Gods name, what have you to do to
flock about me thus? I am neither Howlet, nor Cuckooe: gentlewomen for gods
sake meddle with your own cases, it is not fit you should haunt these public
assembles.


Om. well, farewell Corn^lio.


Val. Use the gentlewoman kindly master Notary,
As mine own wise, I assure you Sir.
Exeunt.
Clau. Signior Cornelio I cannot but in kindenes tell you that Balerio by
counsel of Rinaldo has whispered all this (...) into your ears, not that he
knew any just cause in your wise, but only to be reuengd on you, for the gull,
you put upon him, when you drew him with his glory to touch the Theorbo.


Cor. May I believe this?


Clau. As I am a gentleman: and if this accident of your nose had not fallen
out, I would have told you this before you set too your hand.


Cor. It may well be, yet have I cause enough
To perfect my divorce, but it shall rest,
Till I conclude it with a Counterbuffe,
given to these noble rascals: Claudio thanks:
What comes of this, watch but my brain a little,
And ye shall see, if like two parts in me,
I leave not both these gullers wits Imbrierd,
Now (...) perceive well where the wild wind sits,
Here Is Gull for Gull and wits at war with wits.
(Exeunt.
AGTVS QVINTI:
SCENA PRIMA.
Rinaldo solus. Fortune the great commandresse of the world*
Has diverse ways to advance her followers:
To some she gives honor without deserving,
To other some deserving without honor,
Some wit, some w^alth: and some wit without wealth:
Some wealth without wit, some, nor wit nor wealth
But good smocke-faces: or some qualities,
by nature without judgment, with the which
They live in sensual acceptance,
And make show only, without touch of substance;
My fortune is to win renown by Gulling,
Gostanzo, Darioto, and Cornelio:
All which suppose in all their different kinds,
Their wits entyre, and in themselves no piece,
All at one blow; my helmet yet vnbruisde,
I have unhorsed, laid flat on earth for Guls;
Now in what taking poor Cornelio is,
Betwixt his large divorce, and no divorce,
I long to see, and what he will resolve:
I lay my life he cannot chew his meat,
And looks much like an Ap^ had swallowed pills,
And all this comes of bootelesse jealousy:
And see where bootlesse ieal ousie appeates. Enter Cornel.
I Will bourd him straight; how now Cornelio?
Are you resolved on the divorce or no?

Cor. What Is that to you? look to your own affairs,
The time requires it; are not you engaged
In some bonds forfeit for V^lerio?

Ri^al. Yes, what of that?


Corn. Why so am I my self,
And both our dangers great, he is arrested
On a recognizance, by a usuring slave.

Rinal. Arres^ed? I am sorry with my heart,
It is a matter may import me much,
May not our bail suffize to free him think you?

Cor. I think it may, but I must not be seen in it,
Nor would I wish you, for we both are parties,
And liker (...) to bring our selves in trouble,
Then bear him out: I have already made
Mean^s to the officers to sequester him
In private for a time, till some in ^cret
Might make his Father understand his state,
Who would perhaps take present order for him,
Rather then suffer him to endure the shame
Of his imprisonment; Now, would you but go
And break the matter closely to his Father,
(As you can wisely do it) and bring him to him,
This were the only way to save his credit,
And to keep off a shroud blow from our selves.

Rinal. I know his Father will be m^ou'd past (...).


Corn. Nay if you stand on such nice ceremonics,
Fa^ewell our substance: (...) diseases
Ask extreme (...), better he should storm
Some littletime, then we be beat for ever
Under the horred shelter of a prison,

Rinal. Where is the place?


Corn. It Is at the half Moon Tavern,
Have, for the matter will abide no stay.

Rin. Heaven send my speed be equal with my have.

Exit.
Corn. Go shallow scholar, you that make all Guls,
You that can out-see cleere-ey'd icolousie,
Yet make this slight a Millstone, where your brain
Sticks in the midst amazd: This Gull to him
And to his sellow Guller, shall become
More bitter then their baiting of my humor:
Here at this Tavern shall Gostanzo find,
Fortuuio, Darioto, Claudio,
And amongst them, the ringleader his son
His husband, and his Saint Valerio,
That knows not of what fashion Dice are made,
Nor e^r yet looked toward a red Lettice,
(Thinks his blind Sire) at drinking and at Dice,
Withal their wenches, and at ^ull discover
His own gross folly, and his sons distempers,
And both shall know (although I be no scholar)
Yet I have thus much Latin, as to say
Iam sumus ergo pares.
Exit.
Enter Valerio, Fortunio, Claudio, Page, Great: Gazetta, Bellanora. A Drawer or
two, setting a Table. Val. Set me the Table here, we will shift rooms,
To see if Fortune will shift chances with us:
Sit Ladies, fit, Fortunio place thy wench,
And Claudio place you Dariotos mistress,
I wonder where that neat spruce ^aue becomes:
I think he was some Barbers son by th'masse,
It Is such a picked fellow, not a hair
About his whole Bulk, but it stands in print,
Each Pin has his due place, not any point,
But has his perfect tie, fashion, and grace,
A thing whose soul is specially imployde
In knowing where best Gloves, best Stockings, Wasecotes,
Curiously wrought are sold; sacks Milleners shop^
For all new tyres and fashions, and can tell ye
What new devices of all sorts there are:
And that there is not in the whole Rialto,
But one new-fashion'd Wast-cote, or one Nightcap,
One pa^te of Gloves, pretty or well perfumed,
And from a pair of Gloves of half a crown,
To twenty crowns: will to a very scute
Smell out the price: and for these womanly parts
He is esteemed a witty Gentleman.

Fortunio. See where he comes.

Ent^r Darioto.
Dari. God save you lovely Ladies.


Val. I well said lovely Paris, your wall eye,
Must ever first be gloting on men's wives,
You think to come upon us, being half drunk,
And so to part the freshest man amongst us,
But you shall ouer-take us, I Will be sworn.

Dario. Tush man where are your dice? lets fall to them.


Clau. We have bin at am, Drawer, call for more.


Vale. First lets have Wine, Dice have no perfect edge,
Without the liquid whetstone of the Sirrope.

Fort. True, and to welcome Darioto's latenes,
He shall (^pledg'd) carouze one crowned cup
To all these Ladies health.

Dari. I am well pl^asd.


Val. Come on, let us vary our sweet time
With sund^y excercises, Boy? Tobacco.
And Drawer, you must get us music too,
Calls in a cleanly noise, the slaves grow lowzy.

Drawer. You shall have such as we can get you sir.

Exit.
Da^iot. Let Us have some Dice: I pray thee, they are clenly*


Ual. Page, Let me see that (...)*


Page. Itis not Leaf Sir, It Is pudding cane Ta^


Val. But I mean, your ^slock sir, what lease is that I pray


Page. I pray you see sir, for I cannot read.


Ual. (...) a rank stinking Satyr: this had been
Enough to have poy^ned every man of us.

Dari. And now you sp^ake of that, my Boy o^e li^d
A pipe of Cane Tobacco with a p^ce
Of a vild B^llad, and I Will swear I had
A singing in my head a whole week after.

Ual. Well, the old verse is, A Ap^tibus incipe io-^.


Enter Drawer with Wine and a Cupp. Uall. Drawer, fill out this Gentleman's
Carowse,
And harden him for our society.

Dariot. Well Ladies here is to your honored healths.


For. What Dariotto, without hat or knee?


Ual. Well said Fortunio, O you are a rar^ Courtier,
Your knee good Signior, I beseech your knee.

Dariot. Nay pray you, lets take it by degrees Ualerio; on our feet first, for
this will bring's too soon upon our (...).


Vall. Sir, there are no degrees of order in a Taue^,
Here you must, I chargd ye run all a head,
Slight, Courtier, down;
I hope you are no Elephant, you have Joints?

Dari. Well Sir, here is to the Ladies on my knees.


Vall. I Will be their pledge.

En^r Gostanzo and Rinaldo*
Fort. Not yet Valerio,
This he must drink v^dgd.

Uall. He shall not, I will gi^ him this ad^antage.


Ghost. How now? what is h^re are these the Officers?


Rin. Slight, I would all were well.

Ent^r Cornelio.
Uall. H^ is his pl^dge:
H^re's to our common friend Corn^ health.

Clau. Health to Gazetta, Poison to her husband.

He kneeles.
Cor. Excellent Guestes: these are my daily Guestes.


Ual. Drawer make even th'impartiall skales of Justice,
Give it to C^audio, and from him fill round.
Come Dariotto, set me, let me rest,
Come in when they have done the Ladies right.

Ghost. Set me, do you know what belongs to setting?


Rin. What a dull slave was I to be thus gulled.


Cor. Why Rinald, what meant you to entrap your friend,
And bring his Father to this spectacle?
You are a friend in deed.

Rin. It Is very good Sir,
Perhaps my friend, or I, before we part,
May make even with you.

Fort. Come, lets set him round.


Uall. Do so: at all. A plague upon these Dice.
Another health, sfoote I shall have no luck,
Till I be druncke: come on, here is to the comfort,
The Caualier my Father should take in me,
If he now saw me, and would do me right.

Fort. ^e pledge it, and his health Valeri^.


Ghost. Here Is a good Husband.


Rin. I pray you have patience Sir.


Val. Now have at all, an'^were a thousand pound.


Ghost. Hold Sir, I bar the Dice.


Val. What Sir, are you there?
Fill's a fresh pottle, by this light, Sir Knight,
You shall do right.
Enter Marc. Ant.
Ghost. O thou ungracious villain,
Come, come, we shall have you now thunder forth
Some of your thriftie sentences, as gravely:
For as much V^lerius as every thing has time, and a Pudding has two: yet ought
not satisfaction to swerue so much from defalcation of well disposed people, as
that indemnitie should prejudice what security does insinuate: a try all yet
once again.


Marc. An. Here Is a good sight, you are well encountered sir,
Did not I tell you you would oreshoote your self
With too much wisdom*

V^l. Sir, your wisest do so.
Fill the old man some wine.

Ghost. Here Is a good Infant.


Marc. Why Sir: Ahlas I Will wager with your wisdom,
His consorts drew him to it, for of him self
He is both virtuous, bashful, innocent:
Comes not at City: knows no City Art,
But plies your Husbandry; dares not view a Wench.

Ual. Father, he comes upon you*


Ghost. Here Is a Son.


Marc. Whose wife is Gratiana now I pray?


Ghost. Sing your old song no more, your braine's too short
To reach into these policies.

Marc. It Is true,
Mine eyes soon blinded: and your self would say so,
If you knew all: Where lodged your Son last night?
Do you know that with all your policy?

Ghost. You Will say he lodged with you, and did not I
Foretell you: all this must for color sake
Be brought about, only to blind your eyes?

Marc. By heaven I chaunc'^ this morn, I know not why
To pass by Gra^anas bedchamber,
And whom saw I fast by her naked side,
But your Ualerio?

Ghost. Had you not warning given?
Did not I bidd you watch my Courtier well,
Or he would set a Crest a your Sons head?

Marc. That was not all, for by them on a stool,
My Son sat laughing, to see you so gulled,

Ghost. It Is too too plain*


Mar. Why Sir, do you suspect it the more for that?


Ghost. Suspect it? is there any
So gross a wittoll, as if it were his wife,
Would sit by her so tamelie?

Mar. Why not Sir, To blind my eyes?


Ghost. Well Sir, I was deceived,
But I shall make it prove a dear deceit to the deceiuer.

Rin. Nay Sir, lets not have
A new infliction, set on an old fault:
He did confess his fault upon his knees,
You pardned it, and swore it was from your heart.

Ghost. Swore; a great piece of work, the wretch shall know
I have a Daughter here to give my land too,
I Will give my Daughter all: the prodigal
Shall not have one poor House to hide his head in.

Fort. I humbly thank you Sir, and vow all duty
My life can yield you.

Ghost. Why are you so thankful?


Fort. For giving to your Daughter all your Lands,
Who is my Wife, and so you gave them me,

Ghost. Better, and better.


Fort. Pray Sir be not moved,
You drew me kindly to your house, and gave me
Access to woe your Daughter, whom I loved:
And since (by honored marriage) made my wife.

Ghost. Now all my Choler fly out in your wits:
Good tricks of Youth in faith, no Indecorum,
Knights son, Knights daughter; Marc. Antonio
Give me your hand, There is no remedy,
Marriage is ever made by Destenie.

Rin. Scilence my Masters, now here all are pleased,
Only but Cornelio: who lackes but persuasion
To reconcile himself to his fair wife:
Good Sir will you (of all men our best speaker)
Persuade him to receive her into grace?

Ghost. That I will gladly, and he shall be ruled good Cornelio: I have heard of
your wayward Ielosie, and I must tell you plain as a friend, you are an Ass:
you must pardon me, I knew your Father.


Rin. Then you must pardon him, indeed Sir.


Ghost. Understand me: put case Dariotto lo^'d your wife, whereby you would
seem to refuse her; would you desire to have such a Wife as no man could love
but your self?


Mar. Answer but that Cornelio.


Ghost. Understand me: Say Dariotto has kissed your wife, or perform'de other
offices of that nature, whereby they did converse together at bed and at
board, as friends may seem to do:


Mar. Mark but the now understand me.


Ghost. Yet if there come no proofs, but that her actions were cleanly, or
indiscreete private, why it was a sign of modesty: and will you blow (...)
Horn your self, when you may keep it to your self? Go to, you are a Fool,
understand me?


Val. Do understand him Corneli^.


Ghost. Nay Cornalio I tell you again, I knew your Father; He was a wise
Gentleman, and so was your Mother: me thinks I see her yet, a lusty stout
Woman, bore great Children, you were the very skundrell of am all; but let
that pass: As for your Mother, she was wise, a most slippant tong^e she had,
and could set out her Tail with as good grace as any she in Florence, come
cut and long-tayle; and she was honest enough too: But yet by your leave she
would tickle Dob now and then, as well as the best on am; By Jove it is true
Cornelio, I speak it not to slatter you: your Father knew it well enough, and
would he do as you do think you? set Rascalles to undermine her, or look to
her water, (as they say)? No, when he saw it was but her humor (for his own
quietness sake) h^e made a Backe-doore to his house for conuenience, got a
Bell to his fore door, and had an odd fashion in ringing, by which she and
her Maid knew him; and would stand talking to his next neighbor to prolong
time, that all things might be rid clenly out a the way before he came, for
the credit of his Wi^e: This was wisdom now, for a man's owne-quiet.


Mar. Here was a man Cornelio.


Ghost. What I say? Young men think old men are fools; but old men know young
men are fools.


Cor. Why hark you, you two Knights; Do you think I will forsake Gazetta?


Ghost. And will you not?


Cor. Why theet's your wisdom; why did I make show of Divorce think you?


Marc. Pray you why Sir?


Cor. Only to bridle her stout stomach: and how did I draw on the color for
my divorce? I did train the Woodcocke Dariotto into the net, drew him to my
house, gave him opportunity with my wife (as you say my Father dealt with his
wives friends) only to train him in: let him alone with my wife in her
bedchamber; and sometimes found him a bed with her, and went my way back
again softly, only to draw him into the Pit.


Ghost. This was well handled in deed Cornelio.


Marc. I marry Sir, now I commend your wisdom.


Corn. Why, if I had been so minded as you think, I could have flung his
Pantable down the stairs, or done him some other disgrace: but I winckt at
it, and drew on the good fool more and more, only to bring him within my
compass.


Ghost. Why, this was policy in grain.


Cor. And now shall the world see I am as wise as my father.


Ual. Is It come to this? then will I make a speech in praise of this
reconcilement, including therein the praise and honor of the most fashionable
and autenticall HORN: stand close Gentles, and be silent.

He gets into a chair.
Ghost. Come on, lets hear his wit in this potable humor.


Ualerio. THe course of the world (like the life of man) is said to be divided
into several ages: As we into Infancy, Childhood, Youth, and so forward to
Old Age: So the World into the Golden age, the Silver, the Brass, the Iron,
the Leaden, the Wooden; and now into this present age, which we term the
Hornedage: not that but former ages have inioyde this ben^ite as well as our
times; but that in ours it is more common, and nevertheless precious. It is
said, that in the Golden age of the world, the use of Gold was not then known:
an argument of the simplicity of that age, least therefore succeeding ages
should hereafter impute the same fault to us, which we lay upon the first age;
that we living in the Horned age of the world, should not understand the use,
the virtue, the honor, and the very royalty of the Horn; I will in brief
sound the praises thereof, that they who are already in possession of it, may
bear their heads alost, as being proud of such lofty a cowtrementes: And
they that are but in possibility, may be ravished with a desire to bein
possession.

A Trophey so honorable, and vnmatchably powerful, that it is able to raise
any man from a Beggar to an Emperors fellow, a Dukes fellow, a Noble-mans
fellow, Aldermans fellow; so glorious, that it deserves to be worn (by most
opinions) in the most conspicuous place about a man: For what worthier Crest
can you bear then the Horn? which if it might be seen with our mortal eyes,
what a wonderful spectacle would there be? and how highly they would ravish
the beholders? But their substance is incorporall, not falling under sense,
nor mixed of the gross concretion of Elements, but a quintessence beyond them;
a spiritual essence invisible, and everlasting.

And this has been the cause that many men have called their being in
question, whether there be such a thing in verum na^ura, or not; because they
are not to be seen: as though nothing were that were not to be seen? Who ever
saw the Wind? yet what wonderful ^ffectes are seen of it? It drives the
clouds, yet no man sees it: It rocks the House, bears down Trees, Castles,
Steeples, yet who sees it? In like sort does your Horn, it swelles the
Forehead, yet none sees it: it rocks the Cradle, yet none sees it: so that you
plainly perceive Sense, is no Judge of Essence. The Moon to any man's sense,
seems to be Horned; yet who knows not the Moon to be ever perfectly round:
So likewise your Heads seem ever to be round, when in deed they are
oftentimes Horned: for their original, it is unsearchable: Natural they are
not; for there is Beast borne with Horns, more then with Teeth: Created they
were not, for Ex nihilo nihil sit; Then will you ask me, How came they into
the world? I know not; but I am sure Women brought them into this part of the
world, howsoever some Doctors are of opinion that they came in with the Devil:
and not unlike; for, as the Devil brought Sin into the world; but the Woman
brought it to the Man: so it may very well be that the Devil brought Horns
into the world; but the Woman brought them to the man,

For their power it is general over the world, no Nation so barbarous, no
Country so proud, but does equal homage to the Horn. Europa when she was
carried through the Sea by the S^turnian Bull, was said (for fear of falling)
to have held by the Horn: and what is this but a plain showing to us, that
all Europa, which took name from that Europa, should likewise hold by the
Horn: So that I say, it is universal over the sace of the world, general over
the face of Europe, and common over the face of this Country. What City,
what Town, what Village, what Street? nay what House can quit it self of
this prerogative? I have read that the Lion once made a Proclamation through
all the Forest, that all Horned Beasts should depart forthwith upon pain of
death: If this Proclamation should be made through our Forest, Lord what
pressing, what running, what slying, would there be even from all the parts of
it? he that had but a bunch of Flesh in his head would away: and some foolishly
fearful, would imagine the shadow of his Ears to be Horns: Ahlas how desert
would this Forest be left?

To conclude for there force it is irreu^table, for were they not irreuitable,
then might either propernesse of person secure a man, or wisdom prevent am;
or greatness exempt, or riches redeem them, but present experience has
taught us, that in this case, all these stand in no stead: for we see the
properst men take part of them, the best wits cannot avoid them (for then
should Poets be no cuckolds) nor can money redeem them, for then would
rich-men fine for their horns, as they do for offices: But this is held for a
maxim, that there are more rich cuckolds then poor, lastly for continuance of
the horn it is vndeterminable till death: Neither do they determine with the
wives death, (howsoever ignorant writers hold opinion they do) For as when a
knight dies, his Lady still retains the title of Lady; when a company is
cast yet the Captain still retains the title of Captain; So though the wife
die by whom this title came to her husband, yet by the courtesy of the City, he
shall be a cuckold during life, let all ignorant asses prate what they list.


Ghost. Notable wag, come sir shake hands with him,
In whose high honor you have made this speech:

Mar Ant. And you sir come, join hands, you are one amongst the^.


Ghost. Very well done, now take your several wives,
And spread like wilde-geese, though you now grow tame:
Live merrily together and agree,
Horne^ cannot be kept off with jealousy.

FINIS.
Epilogue.
SInce all our labors are as you can like,
We all submit to you; nor dare presume,
To think there is any real worth in them:
Sometimes feasts please the Cookos, and not the guestes,
Sometimes the guestes, and curious Cooks contemn them,
Our dishes we entirely d^icate
To our kind guestes, but since ye differ so,
Some to like only mirth without taxations,
Some to count such works tri^, and such like,
We can but bring you meat, and set you stools,
And to our best cheer say, you all are welcome.

