THE MANIFEST OF The Most Illustrious, and Sovereign Prince, Charles Lodowick,
Count Palatine of the Rhine, Prince Electour of the Sacred Empire: Duke of
Bavaria, etc.

Concerning the Right of His Succession Both in the Princedome, Lands, and
Estates of the PALATINATE: As also in the Dignity, Voice, Session and Function
of the ELECTORSHIP-PALATINE thereunto annexed.

Translated, Anno. M.DC.XXXVII.

LONDON, Printed by A.G. for I.N. and R.W. And are to be sold at the sign of
the Kings Arms in Paul's Churchyard, M.DC.XXXVII.

The Preface.
THe State of Empires, Kingdoms, and all Societies, is best known, by those
Laws, Orders, Contracts, and Constitutions, which, by common consent, are, for
the time being established amongst them: for State is from standing; and that
present condition wherein a thing stands, is the State thereof. What has
been heretofore, or may be hereafter, does rather belong to their Story, than
their State. By this Line we may measure the Germane Empire; at it has long
stood, and yet stands, though like an old house nodding to the ground. J will
not describe the whole frame thereof, but only such parts as may give light to
the ensuing discourse. Look we therefore back to former times, and we shall
find, that Germany, like a vast body, was cut and mangled into diverse Nations,
Forms and Governments, till the Reign of Charles the Great about 800 and odd
years ago. Jn His days, the great Roman Empire split into two; whereof the
Western part fell to His share, which He after subdivided among His sons.
Charles had Germany, Lodowick had France, Pipin had Italy.

But Germany, is the greatest, carried away the Imperial Title from the rest;
which caused great dissentions, not only betwixt the three pretending Nations,
but also among the Princes of Germany, after Charlemaines Line was out. At last
Hugh Capet setting up a new Race in France, to secure His own posterity, was
willing to let fall the strife for the Title, and yielded it to Germany: But
Italy tossed with the furies and ambitions of the Popes, ever rebelled against
the Emperors, and inward broils fowlly defaced. Germany; Till at length the
Princes, tired and consumed with these evils, were forced to advise together
for their own preservation, and the Empires. Then was produced this form of
State, which has continued without change, many hundred years. First they
made a Law, That the Emperor, from thence forwards, should be chosen among
themselves, whereby all pretentions should be restrained. Next, they appointed
the choosers; whereof, according to those times, three were Bishops, Mentz,
Tryers and Collen; and three Princes, the Palatine, Saxe, and Brandenburg.
These six do only, and properly, constitute that College, which is called
the Supreme Council of the Emperor, and Foundation of the Empire. But
because their number was even, and in Elections it must be odd, the King of
Bohemia was added to them, that in the College might be a casting voice: for
He has only Electorall Right at times of election, and is never else admitted
into the Dyets or Councels of the College. This College was then ordained
with prepetuall elective power: Insomuch that when any was chosen by the
Chapters of Mentz, Tryer, or Collen to be Bishops, they were immediately
likewise Electours; but because they could not marry, and were always chosen,
there was no need to povide for their succession. But the case was different of
the Electours temporal: For they being great and Sovereign Princes, before
they were Electours, had no meaning to make there Estate worse by that
Addition: And therefore it was enacted as an irrevocable Law, that their
Electorall Dignities, and Temporal Princedomes should go together, and be
entayled upon their eldest Sons and Heire-males descending from them, by the
Fathers side for ever.

For they held in necessary to clear the Succession in those Houses, which had
perpetual Right to choose the Emperor, well foreseeing, that it might be no
less pernicious to the whole body, to dispute who should be Electour, than it
was before, who should be Emperor: whereas now the whole Empire might
certainly know, where the Dignity would descend, and so be always at rest;
from whence it appears, that on the certainety of the College, the Jafety of
the Empire depends. Now this Right of succession is so rooted in these
Electorall Families, and in every one of their Male offspring, that it cannot
be plucked up, nor alienated, nor forfeited, nor transferred by any
resignation, or delinquencie; but only by failing and extinction of blood; in
which sole case, both the Dignity and Inheritance revertes unto the Empire, as
a Fee thereof. The sum of all, is, that by this Policy and Constitution of
the Empire, which has bin confirmed by such continuance of time, the Emperor
is Elective, and the Electours Successive; and in the mutual oaths, which
pass betwixt them, the Emperor is bound deeper to them, and by them to the
Empire, to preserve them all in their immunities, than they to him, who only
swear homage and fealty, not as His, but as vassals of the Empire. In which
relation, if afterward any, or Electour, or of an Electorall House shall
commit the highest crime, though as great as Treason, yet they cannot be
punished, much less deposed by any power of the Emperor, who is not the Lord
of their Fee, but by a lawful trial before the Electorall College and
estates of the whole Empire, of which only they do depend. As vassals of the
Empire, they may be tried for their offense, and punished in their own
persons: but as Princes and Sovereigns in their estates, they cannot be
tainted in blood, nor by their crime prejudice the succession of their Heirs;
which is the difference betwixt the Regally of these Electorall Tenures, and
those of other Nations; for their treason does taint the blood, and disableth
the Son to succeed the Father, because the Son succeeds in the Fathers
Right; which the Father having forfeited, the Son has nothing to succeed;
but here the Son succeeds not in the Right of his Father, but of his own;
by reason of that first and Original Contract made with his Ancestors,
wherein He was invested and comprehended, as well as his Father, and cannot be
excluded from his own Right, but by his own offense. Which seems to be a
most just, and natural sanction, That if every own will look to his
Innocence, the Law will look to his Right. And this may suffice for a small
Jntroduction to the work.

CHARLES LODOWIKE By the Grace of God, Count Palatine of the Rhine:
Archidapifer, and Prince Electour of the Sacred Empire, Duke of Bavaria, etc.
To his Imperial Majesty. To all Kings, Potentates, Electors, Princes, and
Estates; within the Empire and whole Christendom. Addresseth This his ensuing
Manifest.
The Manifest.
IT has been the constant custom amongst sundry Nations of the world, from
the beginning thereof, to this present age; that in all hereditary kingdoms and
principalities, the succession should descend upon the eldest Son, or the
next males in blood to the deceased, without let or contradiction.

And as this Right of Birth and prerogative of nature is large and universal;
so in especial manner it has been confirmed, and observed most exactly in
the Electorall houses of the Germane Empire: insomuch that many hundred years
ago, when it seemed good to the preceding Emperors, Princes, and Estates of
the Empire, to found and erect the College of Electors, as well for the
settling of a good order, as for preventing of all divisions. They decreed by
common consent, and ripe deliberation, that the three Electorall houses of the
Palatinate, Saxony and Brandenburgh should from thence forwards, and for ever
after, have their certain and unquestionable successors in their Electorall
Office; and Estates and Regalities thereunto annexed. Ordaining moreover, that
whenever any of the said Electors should depart this world, then his first
borne Son and the male issue, or in default thereof, the next of that
Agnation is that Line in blood, which comprehends all the Cousins or
male-descendents on the Fathers side, ^^o in the Empire are only capable to
succeed in Electorall and princely Houses.
Agnation should be received, and acknowledged by all the States of the Empire,
for true and lawful Electours. Or if perchance they were under years, that
then they should be reputed as Successors designed, and in due time invested by
the Emperors reigning in the right of their successions. Which wise and
wholesome Ordination, whereby the Empire had so long time been peaceably
governed, was again in the year 1356 at the intervention of all the Electors,
Princes and Estates, ratified and established for a fundamental Law of the
Empire by the Golden So called from Bulla; the stamp or seal of gold, which
was appended to this imperial Charter here mentioned; wherein was contained
all the laws, forms and orders, of the Empire; both for choosing the Emperor
as Head, and preserving the Estates as Members in their several liberties,
rites and lignities.
Bull of Charles IV. then Emperor. In such sort, that all Constitutions of the
Empire, and When the Electours were agreed of the person, before they declare
Him Emperor, they required an oath of Him, to maintain the Laws of the
Empire, and preserve them, and the Estates thereof, in their several Rights
and Immunities. And this is called the Imperial Capitulation.
Capitulations of the Emperor together with the mutual bonds and unions
betwixt Electors, which have since that time been made and contracted, were
laid and founded upon this fundamental Sanction; and whatsoever has been
contrived to the prejudice thereof, held for illegal, and of no validity. The
word of the Golden Bull, whereby the right of Birth and Succession is
inviolably preserved in the Electorall Houses, follow in this form.

The Law concerning Electorall successions.
That hereafter, no dispute nor dissension arise between the Sons of the said
Electours, and Princes temporal, and that the public good and tranquillity
suffer no stop nor detriment. We, desirous to remove all such impediments, Do
by this present Act, never to be repealed, declare, will, and ordain, by Our
Imperial Authority; That when any of the said Electours shall decease, his
Right, Vote, and power Elective shall descend to his eldest Son, being
secular and begotten in lawful marriage; and by his decease to his eldest Son
without any opposition. And in case the eldest Son should depart without
lawful heirs, being secular; then the Right, Vote, and power Elective shall
be transferred by virtue of this Act to his next brother by the fathers side,
lawful and secular, and so successively unto his eldest Son. Furthermore, this
Succession in the eldest Sons and lawful heirs of Electors, and Princes,
concerning their Right, Vote, and power Elective, shall from hence forwards be
for ever precisely observed with this Declaration; That if perchance and
Electour his first borne Son, or his next eldest brother, of the first borne
Son, shall have the Tuition and Administration, till He accomplish his
Maiority, which in an Electour shall be eighteen years Complete, at the end
whereof, the Right, Vote, and Elective power, with all the appurtenances, shall
devolve upon him, which together with the Electorall Office, shall be resigned
to him by the said Tutour and Administratour.

Since therefore by the death of the most Illustrious Prince Frederick V.
Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Bavaria, and afterward chosen King of
Bohemia, Our most Honored Lord and Father of happy memory, the office of High
For more honor to the Coronation, the four temporal Electors do the
Emperor service for that Day: King of Bohemia gives him Drink, as Cupbearer:
Electour Palatine sets on the first Dish, as Sewer, which is called
Truckcesse: The Electour Saxony carries the Sword, as Marshall: and Electour
Brandenburg, bears the Key, as Chamberlain.
Truckcesse and Electourship of the Empire, together with all the Rights,
Suffrage, Dignities, Regalities, Lands, People and Subjects thereon depending,
are fallen unto Us, and that by virtue of Our proper and acquired Birthright
of the Contract and providence of our Ancestors: of all Feodall laws: of the
first and So called from Simul together: because when a Prince or Electour is
invested by the Emperor, it gathers and includes all the rest of his blood
and Agnation, and entitleth them to the same Right of Succession with himself;
whereby every one succedeth in his own Right, and can neither foresee more than
he has, nor be prejudiced by the forfeiture of another.
Simultaneous Investiture: of the Golden Bull: of Imperial Charters: of
fundamental Laws: of By these Covenants, All those in every Electorall House,
who appertain to the male blood or Agnation, are bound to observe the foresaid
order in their several successions; which is established by the ancient and
public Constitutions of the Empire: namely, which descends upon the Eldest
Son and so forward to the next male Cousin in blood by the Fathers side.
Covenants made in our Electorall House: and of the Confirmation of many
foregoing Emperors, they are inseparably intailed upon us. And since Our
dearly beloved Uncle by Our Fathers side, the Duke of Simmern has in
conformity to the Golden Bull resigned as well the Tuition of Our Person, as
Administration of Our Estates at the time prefixed: We having, as it became us,
waited the time, and now by the grace of God, attained our full age, do think
Our selves bound in honor and conscience, to take upon Us the Succession of
Our Electorall Dignity, and all things thereunto belonging, as that whereunto
God, Nature, and Our Right has called Us. To which purpose We do now present
our selves both to your Imperial Majesty, (of whom We have in due form
demanded Our Investiture) as also to have all Kings, Electours, Princes, and
Estates, in that Electorall quality, which belongs to our Birth and
Succession, hoping, that ye will not only, receive and acknowledge Us
therein, but also assist and maintain Us in Our illitigable Right.

Here at our entrance, We can easily imagine, that the Ban against Our most
honored Lord and Father, the execution of the same, together with the
translation of Our Electourship (which is still detayned by force) may be cast
into Our way by partial and cold affected people: but We entreat them all to
spare their judgments, and look a little backwards upon the Protestations,
and just Defenses, which have been made both in public writings, and
assemblies, there they shall find the complaints of the temporal Electours
against those unjust proceedings, and the nullities of the same, to be proved
incurable. And if need-full it were to enlarge those deductions, which are
already published to the world; We are to know, that our said Lord and Father,
not long before his death caused his just Apology to be drawn in writing
against those violent proceedings, with a purpose to have put it out, but that
He feared, occasion might have been taken from thence to have hindered some
treaties and mediations then a foot, since it has been suppressed by his
untimely death, which otherwise had it seen the light, would questionless
have imprinted better opinions in the minds of those, who have been choked
with blind and sinister informations. For the present We refer the clearing
of those matters to the public books before mentioned, and refer expressly
to our selves the defense and vindication of Our most dear Lord and Fathers
honor, by all lawful ways, against false and calumnious imputations, hoping
that no living soul can with reason blame this duty in a Christian and
obedient son.

But in this passage, We cannot conceal the inwardnesse of Our grief, to see
the translation of Our Electorall Rights not only usurped by force of arms,
but justified and confirmed by the late Treaty of peace made at Prague the 30
of May last, under this painted pretext, as if forsooth the whole world, and in
particular the Electorall College assembled in the year 1627 had found and
charged Our most dear Lord and Father, as chief Author of all the broils,
happened first in Bohemia, and afterward throughout the Empire: whereas the
contrary was seriously represented, and avouched to the Emperor by the whole
Electorall College and Diete at Ratisbone in the year 1623 the 30 of January,
as appears by their joint relation, as follows:

That the Palatine was a young Prince, and not being able to Counsel Himself,
was seduced by others. That He was not the Author of the troubles in Bohemia,
and that others, who had no less offended His Imperial Majesty, had been
pardoned. Wherefore they all besought His Majesty to overcome Himself by his
own magnanimity, and to turn His rigor into gentleness, whereby the
Palatine upon due deprecation might be admitted to grace, and the Empire be
refreshed and settled in peace. Otherwise, if the ways of extremity were still
continued, nothing could be looked for but effusion of blood, vastation of the
Empire with new and fearful combustions.

This was at that time the opinion of the said Electours, which notwithstanding
they strangely changed afterward in the Diete at Mulhausen, though they had
less cause than before.

Now it is Manifest enough, and might easily be further cleared, with what
zeal, and sincerity Our most honored Lord and Father labored to quench that
fire, which others had kindled, and to obtain the favor and reconciliation of
the Emperor together with his own restitution; The many Treaties, offers,
submissions, satisfactions, cautions made by Our most honored Lord and Father,
together with the frequent Ambassages, Intercessions, Remonstrances of diverse
Kings, Potentates, Electours, Princes, and Estates in this behalf, are so many
witnesses of His pains and integrity.

To pass over the friendly diligences, which Our most honored Lord and Father
used to still and appease the first ruptures of Bohemia, as also what He
propounded to the Electour of Saxony, and Landgrave of Darmstatt after the
battle of Prague touching His own reconciliation. We will only produce the
testimony of some Ambassages in this place, which were sent to the Emperor by
the Kings and Allies, and at the instance of Our most honored Lord and Father.

The first was Anno 1621. when the Lords of Rantzow and Wintersheim were
dispatched to Vienna from the King of Denmark, reiterated again Anno 1622. by
the Lord Bogwisch of Haslow, seconded with the Letters and intercession of the
Electour of Saxony. The second sort are those Ambassages which were employed to
the Emperor by the late King of Great Britain Our Grandfather of blessed
memory; namely by the Earl of Carlisle 1619. by Sir Henry Wotton 1620. by Sir
Edward Conway 1621. and Sir Richard Weston in the same year, by the Lord Digby
1621. by the said Sir Richard Weston at Bruxells, besides all those Treaties in
Spain and elsewhere, negotiated by His other Ambassadors. The third sort are
partly Letters sent to the Emperor by the said King of Great Britain, before
the translation of Our Electorall Dignity, under the date of 12. November,
1621. Wherein diverse Conditions were propounded to the advantage of the House
of Austria, and partly the conference at Colmar in July 1627 with the Dukes of
Lorraine and Wirttenberg; who were admitted as Interposers by the Emperor
himself, together with our Offers, and Declarations, which were there made
upon the four Articles, propounded in the Emperors name by the Prince of
Eggenberg. The fourth sort are those two solemn Ambassages, which the King of
Great Britain our most Royal Uncle, sent by Sir Robert Anstruther to the
Emperor, and Electors assembled at Ratisbone 1630. and to Vienna to the
Emperor apart 1631. And lastly We refer our selves to those diverse writings
and letters, which Our most honored Lord and Father sent abroad to Kings and
Princes: but especially to those two, which He wrote with his own hand unto
the Emperor. By all which (though barely recounted as passing by) it plainly
appears, that Our most honored Lord and Father omitted no possible means to
seek and sue for his reconcilement, preferring always the public peace
before His private interest, and what He could not do by himself or his
Ministers, by reason of the Ban against Him, He labored to effect by the
mediation of great Kings and Princes His Allies, ever willing to submit
himself to reason; which does not only discharge Him of those wrongful
imputations, as though He by his practices, stubbornenesse and rejection of all
equitable means had been the chief cause of these miserable wars and
ruins in the Empire, but also discover, that the fault is to be truly imputed
to them, who disdainefully waving these many offers, instances, and
intercessions of peace, have driven all things to extremities, to glut the
covetousness and ambitions of their hearts.

But who will look into the letters of his Imperial Majesty, written with his
own hand the 14 and 15. of October 1621. to Don Balthazar of Zuniga one of the
Councellers and Grandees of Spain, shall there find other reasons, and indeed
the true causes, which moved His Majesty to think it most necessary then, to
transfer our Electorall Dignity upon the Duke of Bavaria without delay. For
after many considerations alledgd, which made him resolve never to restore Our
said Lord and Father, He thus writes.

Letters of the Emperor for translation of the Electourship Palatine to the
Duke of Bavaria.
Since we have concluded with our selves, even before God gave us this great
victory, That the Palatine once proscribed could no more be restored without
manifest danger of the Catholic party, and all our house; and considering
that the Duke of Bavaria is a Zealous Defender of the Catholic cause, and
that his Country is a Bulwark for ours against the Dutch Princes; We have of
our own proper motion, but inspired, no doubt, from God, given the Palatine
Electorship unto him, as to a Prince endowed with great riches, and full of
wisdom to bear so high a Dignity. And forasmuch as his help and services
have stood us much in stead, and may be still of great use unto us, for
recovering Our Kingdoms and Estates; The time it self seems to require it
more, than he, that we hasten the performance of our promise, in transferring
the Electourship upon him, whereby we shall also ease our selves of much
trouble and cut off all hope from the Palatine and His friends, who with too
much importunity press his restitution. And because this work needs the
assistance of the King of Spain, we have thought by your means earnestly to
exhort him, not to neglect this fit occasion, to advance the establishment of
Our House, and the cause of Religion, to both which He is well inclined. For he
cannot be ignorant, that in this opinion Our Ancestors were confirmed, that
the foundations and pillars of Our House were laid and grounded in Germany,
which ought with so much the more care be defended against Our enemies, because
if the foundations be shaken, the Fabric cannot long subsist: Now among all
Adversaries against the greatness of Our House, none has been more opposite,
within the bounds of Germany, than the Count Palatins, as it appears by the
time of Maximil. I. Charles V. Ferdinand I. and Rodolph II. This being
certain, that the rebellion of the Netherlands against His grandfather Philip
II. was fomented from the Palatinate, and that He will never be able to reduce
them to His obedience, unless this Stock be first rooted out of the Empire.

In the postscript of the said Letter this motive was likewise added;

That if we had one Catholic voice more, than we have, we should also be
assured, that the Empire would remain in the Catholic hands, and by
consequence in Our House, to the advancement whereof, the Duke of Bavaria would
willingly concur in requital of this great benefit, having been exalted by
an Emperor of Our House to so High a Dignity.

In another Letter of the Emperors, written to the King of Spain, under the
(...) of May 1622 are these words;

Since it may be presumed that the English Ambassador has Commission amongst
other things to urge the restitution of the Palatine now exiled; We thought
good to acquaint you in confidence, that We have lately promised, for many
reasons, the Electorall Dignity and Prerogative fallen into Our hands, unto the
Duke of Bavaria, as to one, who during these public troubles and confusions
has well deserved of Us, of the Empire, of Religion, and of Our house, and
still cease not to undergo infinite charges, notwithout the danger of his
life and Estates, insomuch as having already granted Him our letters Patents,
nothing now remains, but what depends on time and occasion, namely to give
Him investiture, and introduce Him into the Electoral College, and so to put
Him in full possession.

If any man would know the foul and the fair of this pretended promise, and
translation of the Electourship, how it was negotiated, contrived and agreed,
by the suggestion of the Pope, and operation of certain Monks, as also how it
was secretly carried and concealed from the College of Electours, who were
afterward assembled at Ratisbone, only to approve the said translation, and
to assist the solemn Investiture with their presence, we shall send the Reader
to the Public Acts, and original letters, out of which these things
following, are extracted: First in the Emperors letter of his own hand to Don
Balthazar de Zuniga bearing date 15 of October 1621. are these words.

Moreover I cannot for bear to acquaint you, that since we have diverse times
both by word and writing promised the Duke of Bavaria (who has so much obliged
us) to transfer the Electourship Palatine upon him: We know not by what means
we can withdraw our promises without wounding our honor, and provoking Gods
anger against us.

In another letter written with the Emperous own hand to Hiacynthus a Capucin,
bearing date 15 October 1621.

Although we doubt not, but you will handle the business committed to your
charg with that wisdom, God has given you, yet for the trust we have put in
you, we will not for bear to give you this advise; That ye should not mention
in the Court of Spain, that the Duke of Bavaria has already the Investiture
in his hands, for we fear, that if they should know so much, it would
infallibly breed rather harm than good, but ye shall rather labor to rectify
those errors, which are current there, and dispose them, not only to agree
with our opinions, but also to assist us in our designs, that we may perfect
this blessed work so necessary for the preservation of our holy faith, and by
consequent, of our Family. For ye know well enough, that if the King of Spain
should abandon us, we were not able of our selves to make our promise good to
the Duke of Bavaria.

In the Emperors Resolution given in writing to the Popes Nuncio Fabritio
Verospo at Vienna, in February 1622 are these words:

Resolution of the Emperor about the translation.
His Imperial Majesty having well considered, the pregnant reasons which moved
his Holiness to persuade him, to transfer upon the Duke of Bavaria the
Electorall Dignity, Titles, Honors taken from the Palatine proforibed, does
first of all duly thank his Holiness, for showing by so grave an Embassage
his Fatherly care, to increase the Catholic Religion, and relieve the
miserable estate of the Empire, and that his Holiness might see the providence
and care of his Majesty concurring with him, in the same aim and ends, He
has already begun that Translation, which his Holiness desired, and assured
the Duke of Bavaria thereof by his Letters Patents.

The Count d'Ognate Spanish Ambassador at Vienna, caused a memorial to be
presented to the Pope by his brother Ambassador then at Rome beginning thus:

Hiacinthus the Capuchin was sent by your Holiness to the Emperor to exhort
Him, partly to continue the war against the Heretics, Enemies of our Mother
Church, and disobedient to your Holiness; partly to dispose him, to translate
the Electorall dignity upon the Duke of Bavaria, who both for his Religion, and
his assistance in the war against the Palatine has well deserved of the
Emperor, so as the desire of your Holiness is, that the Palatine should be
stripped of his Dignity and punished accorning to his desert and rebellion.

The Cardinal Ludovisius wrote from Rome the 16 of October. 1621. to the
Archbishop of Patras Popes Nuncio at Bruxels, to this purpose.

Letters of the Cardinal Ludovisius about the Translation.
Ye shall use all possible means to diswade the Infanta her Highness from
agreeing to a suspension of Arms. And concerning the Person of the Palatine,
my advise is, that since He is once deprived of his Country, He ought to
take it for a special grace if He may have leave to submit himself to the
Emperor, but notwithstanding any submission, nothing ought to be restored to
his children, unless they be brought up in the Catholic Religion. For it were
a great error to suffer the Palatinate in the hands of Heretics, which is so
near to the Low Countries. Therefore it behooveth you to be watchful there,
as well as the Nuntio is in Spain, who has order to imprint this point well
in the Kings mind: The Pope will also do his best to persuade the Emperor,
and the King of Spain, that the Palatinate be shared among the Catholics,
whereunto you shall do very well to dispose the Infanta.

Caraffa the Popes Nuntio at Vienna wrote to the forenamed Archbishop of
Patras the 20 of October 1621 to Bruxels in this manner, Letters of Caraffa the
Popes Nuntio about the Translation.


There is no doubt to be made of the Emperors intention to transfer the
Electourship Palatine upon the Duke of Bavaria: The only stop proceeds from
the Spanyard, which I should not have been bold to say, had not the Prince of
Eggenberg assured me, that the Emperor had finished the business long ago
but for the wilfulness of the Spaniards, who for want of other evasion cover
their crossenesse under the pretext of the Electour of Sax.: But to stop this
starting hole, the Archduke Charles, is lately gone to the said Electour,
though under another color, The color was to dispose the said Electour to a
suspension of arms and execution of the Ban, which at that time was promised
by word of mouth to my Lord Digby.
from whom we shortly expect answer, which if it be not a flat negative, but
neutrall and indifferent, we will go on, and urge the Emperor to dispatch the
work, and the rather, because the Count d'Ognate seems to say, that the King
his Master will be content, if the Duke of Sax. be not contrary: Nevertheless,
because we are jealous of the Counts perverseness, although the Duke of Sax.
should consent, we have without noise and under hand sent Friar Hiacynthus into
Spain to blunt the endeavors of the said Count, and of Digby the English
Ambassador designed to go thither, to which end the Emperor has written with
his own hand to the King of Spain, to Don Balthazar, and the Nun Infanta,
without the Knowledge of any. In sum, you see the state of the business, and
by discourse of the Spanish Ambassador we further find; that the Spaniard (on
whom all depends) would not much oppose this translation, if these three
points were provided for. First, that the Duke of Bavaria should restore upper
Austria; That for defraying of his costs He should have the upper Palatinate,
which is more, than his due, and would content Him: And that the Nether
Palatinate, be left to them, whereunto the Duke of Bavaria should renounce all
the pretention, which He might have in right of the Electorall Dignity.

The said Nuncio writing to Friar Hiacynthus the 16 of October 1627 says as
follows,

I besought the Emperor to keep the business secret; who told me, He had
already written with his own hand to the very cover, for the more secrecy. And
a little after, I drive on this business with earnestness, albeit I something
doubt, whether it be necessary or no, seeing our friends are minded to do
that, which the Count of Zollerne caused to be propounded by a Minister of the
Emperors to the Duke of Bavaria a part; ye understand well, what I would say:
I have given out, that ye are going into Italy, and hitherto, they know no
otherwise.

Moreover in another letter of the same Nuntio to the said Capuchin of the 20
October. 1621 are these words:

The first Pretention of the Count d'Ognate is, to have the upper Austria
restored; and that for his expenses in the war, the Duke of Bavaria have the
Electorall Dignity, and the upper Palatinate, which as the Count of Zollern
tells me does surmount his charges. And a little after: wherefore I believe, the
Count d'Ognate, nor his minister will ever assent to the Translation, unless
it be for their own interest; thereby to draw into their own clutches, the
Nether Palatinate, as a Country, which much imports the house of Austria,
both in regard of the Empire and of the Netherlands. For by that means, the
Dutch Protestants can neither assist the Hollanders, nor the Hollanders the
Dutch Protestants; and so the King of Spain would be master in the Low
Countries, and the Emperor in Germany.

It is also very remarkable, what the Duke of Bavaria promised, under his hand
and seal, in the treaty of Vlm, which He concluded by interposition of the
French King, with the Protestants then united the 5 of July 1620. where He
assured them in the word of a Prince, and in the most valuable form in law, \
That none should invade or molest the Lands, Estates, Towns, Borroughs,
villages or possessions of any of the Electours, temporal or spiritual; nor
should any ways trouble one another in their government or Religion. But that
the Evangeliks, as well as the Catholics, should live in concord together,
leaving one another to enjoy their own in peace.

And in the third Article of the said Treaty, where the Kingdom of Bohemia and
incorporated provinces are excluded; The Electorall Palatinate, together with
the hereditary lands situated in the Empire, are expressly comprehended.

Which the said Duke of Bavaria did afterward confirm, by his Letters, and
not alone to Our most honored Lord and Pather; but also to the States of the
upper Palatinate, even after He had accepted the Commission, against the
Kingdom of Bohemia and Count. Mansfelt, as the words of notification sent from
Straubing the 8 of September 1621 do testify: That for his person he had
nothing to do with the upper Palatinate, nor had ever done it any wrong.

All which agreeing with the Emperors promise made to my Lord Digby, for a
suspension of Arms the beginning of September 1621. whereby He declared; That
so long as the Treaty of peace should last with the King of Great Brittany,
He would grant no further commission to execute the Ban, against the upper
Palatinate.

Our dear Lord and Father had little reason to mistrust any violence or
hostility from the said Duke of Bavaria; who nevertheless contrary to all the
declarations shortly after, executed a new and sharp commission against the
Countries, people and subjects of Our dear Lord and Father; and whilst a peace
was treating both at Vienna and Bruxels, He usurped the whole upper Palatinate,
and part of the Nether with the Electorall Residence, pretending, that his
former Commission, was enforced by certain new commandments from the
Emperor, which it befitted not him to examine. And in his Letter to my Lord
Digby from the Camp at Schartzenfield, 2. October 1621. He says, That being
now in full march, it was not possible for Him to retire; neither could He ever
be of advice, to yield to a suspension of Arms which was so sudden and
unexpectedly required, even when His enemy was before His face, and He might
under that color, take some advantage against Him.



The Emperor also writing to the said Lord Digby from Vienna, the 12. October,
1621. makes this answer. That the Duke of Bavaria, being forced to march
against the Count of Mansfelt, could not desist from that necessary expedition,
nor allow the suspension of Arms propounded, both because his Army was levied
at such great charges, and for that, He had the victory in his hand.

Which contrary proceedings, seemed very strange, both to my Lord Digby, who
was forced to see the upper Palatinate, lost under his eyes, and to the King of
Great Britain his Master, as appears by their several complaints. From
Newburg the 5 of October. 1631. Thus my Lord Digby writes to the Emperor:

Complaints of my Lord Digby to the Emperor.
Under your Majesty's favor, I hold this hostile invasion of the Duke of
Bavaria into the Palatinate to be done against all right and reason, forasmuch
that I have been oftentimes informed, by your Majesty's Councillors, that the
said Duke, neither had order from your Majesty, to go on with the execution of
the Ban, nor should have any hereafter. But most considerable are those Letters
of King James His Master, before alleged to the Emperor, dated from Roystone
the 12. of November 1621. Wherefore we cannot enough marvel, Complaints of
King James to the Emperor.
that at the same time, whiles we are treating a peace, and propounding saving
Councels, yea, and that quite conarary to your own answer, Our Son in law,
should be spoiled of his inheritance, and the upper Palatinate taken in by the
Duke of Bavaria, at your commandment, and that upon new reasons, till now,
unheard of. Considering that in your said answer, given to Our Ambassador, the
execution of the Ban was suspended, in those parts, and no Arms to be resumed,
without notice given to Us, three months before. All which notwithstanding,
after the said answer, and by your express order, the greatest part of the
nether Palatinate, was seized on, by the Spanish troops, and all the rest
endangered, if it had not been timely prevented.

After all these things, were thus secretly plotted, and compassed, much about
the time, that my Lord Digby was soliciting the reconcilement, and restitution
of our dear Lord and Father, and was filled with fair hopes, The Emperor
called a Diet at Ratisbone, where Himself was in presence together with the
three Spiritual Electours, the Landgrave of Darmstatt, and Bishop of
Saltzburg, and although both his Majesty, and Electour of Mentz in name of all
the rest did seriously require the two temporal Electours of Saxony and
Brandenburg to repair thither in person, yet they only sent their
Ambassadors with this excuse, that since they could not approve the execution
of the Ban, nor translation of the Electorall Dignity, which was then resolved,
they were afraid to assist in presence, lest they should be forced to behold
those things, against which they had voted, as hereafter we shall see more at
large. At that time our Royal Grandfather, the King of Great Britain, though
much offended, that the treaty at Bruxells propounded by the Emperor was
broken off under show: That affairs of so great importance could be neither
treated, nor decided without the Empire, and intervention of the Electours, and
Estates; yet hearing of this Diet commanded my Lord Chichester then in the
Palatinate to repair to Ratisbone; whither also my Lord Digby residing at that
time in the Emperors Court for the affairs of the Palatinate, also resorted,
as to prepare the other Ambassadors way, But the King Our Grandfather being
assured, that the Emperor was fully resolved actually to invest the Duke of
Bavaria with the Electorall Dignity, and that the two temporal Electours upon
that reason, absented themselves, countermanded the said Lord Chichester,
supposing, that his presence there would not only be fruitless, but also
liable to dishonor, in stead whereof He wrote to the King of Spain, 22.
November. 1622. resenting this breach of promises, and unjust proceedings in
these words: Letters of King James resenting the double of the Emperor to the
King of Spain.
We are certainly advertised, that the Emperor has bound himself, by diverse
promises, to transfer upon the Duke of Bavaria the Palatinate, and
inheritance of Our Son in law, as ye shall further understand by Our
Ambassador, and that your Ministers have declared to the Emperor, that if
this be done without your approbation, He must look no more for your
assistance, which is so necessary for him: Insomuch that to put the same in
execution, nothing rests, but your consent. Of which proceedings so contrary
to all assurance given us of the Emperors good intentions, we are now no less
astonished, than at first We were in believing. For in all his own answers,
made to Our Ambassadors, he not only declared his friendship toward us, but
promised the entire restitution of Our Son in law, for a token and testimony
thereof. And in all conferences, which Our said Ambassadors have had with his
Ministers of State, they have expressly avowed, that the Emperor would never
have made us such answers, had he not been fully free and unobliged. Now
albeit our care be much increased by such a sudden change; yet it is in part
diminished, by the constant and sincere good will, which ye have always borne
us; wherefore we entreat you to finish this work, which ye have so well
begun, and not to suffer under pretense of diversity in Religion; or of
outward interests; to fill the avarice or ambitions of a few; that occasion be
given, of greater evil, and calamities, which by war, will necessarily, fall
upon all Christendom; The examples being infinite, how dangerous a thing it
is, to drive any to utter desperation.



And notwithstanding that the Ambassadors of the two Electours, Saxony and
Brandenburg, labored hard, in the said Diet, to hinder the pretended
Investiture, and directly opined against the proceedings of the hasty
proscription, and rigorous execution of the same, as also against the
translation Electorall, trailing with it many prejudicial inconveniences; yet
the Emperor ceased not to confer with all solemnity the said Investiture;
declaring and conditioning therein, as it appears by his final resolution,
taken upon the last advise of the said Electours, 23. Februar. 1623. That as he
never purposed, in the least manner whatsoever, to derogate either from the
preeminence of Electours, or from the Constitutions of the Empire, or his own
Capitulations: so he did not intend by this investiture to prejudice any in
his right; To which end He would have this clause inserted into the
investiture of the Duke of Bavaria, namely [That it should no wise wrong the
Emperor, or the Empire, or the children of the Palatine, or his brother, or
the Duke of Newburg, or any other of his Agnation, who might justly have any
pretense; All which should be expressly reserved, and withal possible speed
decided by transaction or by law.] Insomuch that upon sentence given in favor
of the Palatines brother and next of Kin, the Electorall Dignity, and what
shall be more adjudged, shall escheat and belong unto them after the death of
Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, wherein they shall be also invested by the
Emperor; And hereunto the said Duke of Bavaria upon communication had thereof,
not frustrating the good opinion of the Electours, Princes, and Ambassadors
now assembled, has accommodated himself, and is willing to provide
sufficiently for that point by his Reversall letters, wherein He has sincerely
testified his true intentions to the Emperor and Empire, and to public peace
and tranquillity.



The same was confirmed by the Emperor in his letters, to our said Royal
Grandfather, the King of Great Britany dated, from Ratisbone the 5. March,
1623. wherein are these words: Letters of the Emperor confirming the same to
King James.
Concerning your Nephews by your daughter, and those of the Palatines Agnation;
as it was never in Our thoughts to prejudice the right of any, by this Our
declaration; so it is our will, that a door of grace and equity be always
left open to their pretended succession in the Electorall Dignity.

Here we will set aside, what passed from the first beginning, at Rome, betwixt
the Pope and Cardinals, for advancing this injurious translation and
Investiture; as also. What was promised by the Duke of Bavaria, to the Sea of
Rome, in acknowledge, meant of his due obligations, all to the disadvantage of
the honor and preeminence of the Empire. But soon after that the Investiture
was dispatched, Our Electorate, Princedomes, Countries, people and Subjects,
were in a manner strange and unusual in the Empire, torn and shared into
diverse pieces. Our Princedome of the High Palatinate was conveyed
hereditarily, to the Duke of Bavaria, for the redemption of the upper Austria,
which was morgaged to him by the Emperor, for his charges in the war.
Afterward, the Governments of the Low Palatinate, on the same side of the
Rhine, were set unto him at sale, on a certain price, as appears by the
Briefes, intimated to Our Subjects. The most part of the Nether Palatinate, on
the other side, was consigned into the hands of the King of Spain by way of
compensation, for the great costs, which he pretended in the war. The
Government of Germershein fell to the Archduke Leopald, Vtzberg and Vmstat to
the Landgrave of Darmstat: The Bergstrat to the Bishop of Mentz, Barchstein and
Weiden to the Duke of Newburg. And others there were, who carried away pieces
of our Inheritance, as if it had been a common spoil. All which was flat
contrary to the Golden Bull, to the fundamental laws of the Empire, to the
Rights, Customs, Privileges, and Investitures of former Emperors, and to the
promises of this. For the Golden Bull does in many places clearly forbid the
renting and dismembring of Electorall and feudall Countries. In the 24 Chapter,
Laws against dismembring the lands of Electours.
thus it stands: We therefore will and ordain as a perpetual law, that the
High and Noble Princedomes, to wit, the Kingdom of Bohemia, the County
Palatine of the Rhine, the Dukedom of Sax. and the Marquisate of Brandenburg
together withal their lands, limits, homages and Fees thereon depending shall
in no wise be severed or divided, but shall remain whole and entire for ever.
And in the 20 chapter thus: We ordain by this our Imperial Act to endure for
ever, that every one of the said Princedomes, their several Rights, Voices,
Offices, and Dignities Electorall with their appurtenances shall inseparably
remain joined and united. And a little after: Seeing therefore these be
things inseparable, they can neither be divided in themselves, nor by judgment
of any Court, neither shall any one be heard, who soliciteth such a sentence:
or if perchance any hearing, suite, or sentence; shall be hereafter sought, or
granted, by errors or other means, against this our present act, We declare
the same, and whatsoever shall follow thereupon, to be naught in law, without
worth and validity. By all which passages, every eye may see, where this
translation, Investiture, sharing, dividing, bargain and sale of our Estates
Dignities, are to be lodged. But for all, that the Duke of Bavaria was thus
invested, and put in Possession of the Electorall Dignity, Voice, and Office;
it cost both Him, and the Emperor himself much pains and labor, and that
not without certain Articles and conditions, before they could induce the two
Electours of Saxony and Brandenburg, to receive him into their Session and
society in the College. To begin which work, the Duke of Bavaria brake the
ice, earnestly requesting the Electour of Mentz, then living, by letters dated
at Ratisbone 4 of March 1623 to do his best offices with the Duke of Saxony,
declaring reciprocally:

Declaration of the Duke of Bavaria to execute the Electourship:
That since it pleased his Imperial Majesty to think it necessary for the
common good, to confer the Electorall Dignity, then vacant, upon him, and
that in such a form, as preserved the Right of Agnation and interest therein,
He had submitted to His Imperial pleasure, and was ready by the help of God
to confirm Himself, and all his actions, to what the Golden Bull, the
Electorall Dignity, the laws of the Empire, and more particularly, the
sanction of Civil and religious peace did require.

Whereupon the Electour of Ments began to deal with the Duke of Saxony, and
many reasons to persuade Him, to acknowledge the Duke of Bavaria for Coelectour
as appears by his letters from Ratisbone the 11 of March 1623. from
Aschaffenburg 7 October 1623. Item the 3 November. and 8 December of same year,
as also from thence of the 13 February 1624. sent to the Electour of
Brandenburg. Moreover the Emperor himself pressed the said Electours by many
messages, and exhortatations, wherein He used the Marquis Ernest of Anspach,
and principally the Baron Hanniball of Dohna: yea, and to make the matter the
more easy, the Electour of Mentz took a journey to the Electour of Saxony, in
person: Insomuch that after much writing, diverse conferences, specious
arguments, and fair promises, the business was so far advanced, that the
Electour of Saxony was at last disposed to consent, yet with certain
limitations. And because the Electour of Brandenburg still withstood, the King
of Poland deceased, was set upon him, who by letters dated at Warsow 26 April
1625. exhorted him, not without some commination to allow of the said society:
And the Duke of Saxony had a meeting with him to the same end, for, so He
writes to the Emperor from Setzenvoda the 4 of November 1626.

That having often repeated unto the Marquis of Brandenburg the desire of his
Imperial Majesty, and his own; and earnestly entreated him to tell him
freely, whether He would acknowledge the Duke of Bavaria in the form
prescribed: He found Him somewhat better disposed, than before; and hoped He
had been won, but He well perceived, that He would not so easily declare his
resolution, unless His Majesty would be pleased to summon him once again.
Thereupon the Baron Hannibal of Dona was sent to the Electour of Brandenburg in
January 1627. to induce him to allow of the said reception, as appears by his
instruction dated at Vienna 26 of December, 1626.

The chief reasons, motives and promises, whereby the said Electours were
overcome are contained in the Letters of the Archbishop of Mentz deceased the 7
October. 1623. and especially of the 3 November of the year, to this purpose:
Letters of the Electour of Mentz persuading the translation.
Whereas by experience of all times, the Electorall College has been held as
a foundation whereupon the head, as well as the members, and so the whole body
of the Empire does rest, so long as there is a rupture in the College, the
General Estates cannot be united, and whiles they are in division, the
troubles of the Empire can never be appeased. It is therefore necessary before
all things, to cure and unite the College, and knit the Electours in mutual
concord and affection, for a time at least, if not for ever. To which end my
opinion is, that the expedient, which his Imperial Majesty graciously ordained
at Ratisbone about the Palatine Electorate, be approved of us all, if not
absolutely, at least with such restitutions, whereby both the Electorall houses
of the Empire, and the next of the said Palatines Agnation be fully secured
from the apprehension of any prejudice. To prevent which, if any were to be
feared, I should hope that neither His Imperial Majesty, nor if need were,
the Electour of Bavaria, would think it unfitting to grant letters of
Recognisance, thereby testifying, that the said Translation shall in no wise
derogate, to the Feodall Rights of Princely or Electorall houses, nor to the
ordinances of the Golden Bull, nor yet to those, to whom after the outlawry of
the Count Palatine, the said Electorall Dignity does of Right belong, whose
claim after the death of the Electour of Bavaria, shall remain whole and
inviolable. This would be the only remedy to save all men's pretentions to
uphold the Electorall pre-eminence, to heal the breaches of the Empire, to
quench the fire of war, and prevent the kindling of it by restless men. In
another letter of the said Archbishop of Mentz to the Electour of Brand. the 13
Feb. 1624 he averreth: That the present subsistence of the Empire depended
wholly upon the reuniting of the Electorall College, without which it was
impossible to quiet the Empire. And in the Baron of Donas foresaid Instruction,
it is alleged: That since a public peace and union in the Empire is
altogether hopeless, The Emperors Instruction to the Baron of Dona sent to the
Electour of Brandenburg about the Translation.
without it be first redintegrated in the College; ye shall therefore in Our
name, require the Electour of Brandenburg, not to separate himself any longer
from the rest of his fellows, nor to make a rent in the most supreme and
secret Council of the Roman Emperor, thereby to foment the combustions of the
Empire, which can only be assuaged by the joint Council and concurrence of
the Electorall Body. But ye shall let Him known, that by acknowledging, and
receiving the Duke of Bavaria for a Coelectour in the College, He shall show
his zeal, and affection (according to the confidence we have conceived of
Him,) not only to uphold our Imperial greatness, but also to conserve the
sacred Empire in the Bond of peace and the rather, because by this means the
amiable times of meetings and assemblies, will again be restored both in the
College of Electours, and in public Imperial Diets, to his immortal praise
and honor, having contributed so much, to the long desired weal, and
tranquillity of the Empire.

These were the most pregnant Arguments, then alleged, to the said Electours
of Saxony and Brandenburg. Since which time, common experience has manifested
to the world, whether by translating of the Electorate, or introducing the Duke
of Bavaria into the College, the peace so much pretended, has been sought,
or established, or else instead thereof infinite hatreds, mischiefs, miseries,
and bloody desolations, have not been raised to the ruin and extirpation of
the Empire. That all men may therefore know, with what zeal and solidity, the
said Electours of Saxony and Brandenburg opposed, from the first beginning,
both the Ban published without their knowledge, or assent, and also the
translation grounded thereupon; as likewise with what limits and reservations
they received the Duke of Bavaria into the Electorall Fellowship; We will first
produce the suffrages, of their Ambassadors, at the Diet of Ratisbone 1623,
upon the points of Proscription and Translation, as they were presented to the
Emperor, and recorded in the Chancery of the Electour of Mentz 18 of Feb.
1623. Thus ran the suffrage of the Saxonians: Suffrage of the Saxons, in the
Diet of Ratisbone against the Translations.
Concerning the proceedings of the Ban, and execution therein decreed, against
the Count Palatine; the Electour of Saxonies Highness leaves that apart, as a
thing done against his Council, and without due form of proceeding. Forasmuch
as the matter being of such importance touching a member of the Electorall
College, and drawing with it the destruction of the Empire, the votes and
advice of the whole College should first have been required according to the
form of Capitulations, in that case providing; That no Prince or Electour
should be outlawed without a legal hearing and just form of proceeding, and
who will look unto the examples of Magdeburg and Gotha, no more but Towns,
which were proscribed in Imperial Diets, held at Augspurg under the Emperor
Charles V. Ferdinand I. Maximillian II. in the years 1551. 1554. 1566. shall
find, that former Emperors were wont to use such te^perate Circumspection,
that they first demanded the Council not only of the Electours and Princes,
but of the whole Empire, before they proclaimed the Ban, or commanded
execution. Concerning the Translation of the Electorate, his Highness does
verily think that instead of being a means to established a public peace,
for which end, this Diet was assembled, it may prove a cause of greater
division, and a firebrand of war, to consume the Empire. Therefore Hedeemeth
the restitution of the Palatine (though upon due terms of submission) to be
above all things necessary to obtain this settled peace; for the purchasing
whereof, more regard should be had to the public, than to any other
consideration. This being certain, that the Empire can never be quieted by
rigor and extremity, but will rather be forced to keep in arms, and exposed
to daily danger. Moreover, this Translation, although it concerns a member of
the Electorall College, and be the most weighty business, can fall out in
the Empire; yet it has been done, without their knowledge, and even in this
assembly, only intimated unto them, as a thing concluded, without ever asking
their advice, or approbation: A course never taken before this day. For albeit
the examples of this kind, are so few, that only one is found; where the
Electourship was translated for delinquency; yet we may therein observe
another kind of proceeding. The case happened, in the time of Charles the fifth,
and in the person of Frederick Electour of Saxony, who renouncing his homage,
and obligation to the Emperor, his Electourship was promised and assigned to
Duke Maurice in the Camp of Suntham, the 27. October. 1546. where the formal
words declare, that the said promise was made by due course, counsel and
deliberation of the chief States of the Empire. The 19. May in the Camp at
Wittenberg 1547. the said Duke Frederick renounced the Electourship, and the
21. May passed a particular Act thereof, with Obligation. The 4. of June, of
the said year, the Electourship, and Office of high Marshall, with all the
appurtenances, was transferred upon Duke Maurice in presence of the Emperor,
Electours, Princes, and foreign Nations, with power to make use of the Right
and Title thereunto belonging. The 24. February 1548. the said Duke Maurice,
was solemnly invested at Ausburg, under the Sky, and received into the
Fellowship and Session of the College, by all the Electours, who by a special
Act, testified, that all was done, by their knowledge and approbation: by all
which circumstances, it appears, that the promise of the Translation, and the
Investiture, of the said Electorate, was publikly done, in the presence, and by
allowance of all the Electours. Besides that, it may further appear, how that
by this Translation, the public peace, whereat it aims, cannot be attained.
His Highness does profess, that although the uttermost extremities should be
used, yet neither the children of the Count Palatine, nor His Brother, and the
rest of that Agnation, cannot legally be excluded, in regard of their
innocence, from their claim and recover of the said Electorall Lands, and
Dignities; and to show, that they have no mind to be deprived of their Right so
long acquired to their House, the instances of the said Brother, of the Duke of
Newburg, and of the other Palatines, by their Ambassadors here present, made
to the Emperors Majesty, and the Electorall College, do sufficiently
testify. For this kind of Investiture, called in the Empire simultaneous, is
of another nature and condition, then the custom of common Fees, being
purchased and received in every man's proper Right, by taking an oath, and
touching of a sword, whereof no man therein comprehended, can be further
deprived, then for himself, and for his own offense: which truth is clearly
exemplified in the person, of the Duke Mauritius, a forenamed: for although the
Elector, Duke Frederick, was lawfully deposed, and His brother Duke Ernest,
excluded by the Ban for their own offenses; yet that tainted not the Duke
Mauritius, who after them was the next of blood, and by that Right, succeeded:
for it had not been necessary to have deprived Duke Ernest the brother by Ban,
if a third party innocent, could have forfeited his Right by the crime of
another: In Sum. Poenae debent tenere suos Authors; being a thing unjust, to
take from any man, his inherent Right, who by no fault of his own had
unrighted himself. This Law therefore, so long rooted, in the houses of
Electors; and temporal Princes, cannot be dissolved without infinite
prejudice, to them all; who for the crime of any one man, might be exposed, to
the uncertainty of their claims and tenures, and disappointed of their
natural Rights and Successions, although they were inculpable; which is a thing
unfit to be councelled, and unanswerable to posterity. In another suffrage, of
the said Saxonian Ambassadors, this is added. The reasons alleged by His
Highness, the Electour of of Saxe, upon the point of proscription, are founded
upon the groundary Laws, whereupon the welfare of the Empire reposeth, and
which are left as certain, stable, and immutable rules: from whence the
Arguments, which are likewise drawn, are confirmed with examples; which
plainly show, what great wariness the Emperors, Charles the V. Ferdinand the
I. and Maximilian II. deceased, used in publication of a Ban.

Suffrage of the Brande^burgers against the same.
The Ambassadors of the Electour of Brandenburg opined in this manner;

They could not but repeat their former suffrage concerning the proposition,
not being yet able to conceive, by what reason the Electours can be excluded
from a business of such moment, that the good or bad Estate of the whole
Empire depends thereupon. The Capitulation solemnly made, and sworn,
requires, that in all important cases, the Counsels of the Electours should
be taken; and expressly prescribes the manner of proceeding in any business,
which might happily fall out between the Emperor, and Electours, or
Imperial Estates. But although there had been no such public Capitulation,
yet the affair of it self, is of such consequence, concerning an Electour and
his Dignity; that it ought not, to be sequestered from their cognizance and
advice; and the rather, because, it chiefly touching the Emperors house; the
remission thereof to the Electours, would have cut off all occasion of
jealousy or complaint; that His Majesty had been too hasty in His own cause.
Besides, seeing that the form of a suite and sentence, is a part of justice;
and that justice can be no wise better administered, than according to the
Laws, enacted and established, it had been very just and necessary, not to
have condemned, the Count Palatine, before His cause had been duly heard,
after the custom of the Imperial Chamber. If it be replied, That the crime of
the Palatine, was so notorious, as it needed not a formal suite; That will
hardly hold water: for in the Capitulation (which, without all question, is a
fundamental Law, and of strict observance) there is no such distinction found;
and where it does not distinguish, our part is, to be ruled. Albeit, the
writings, which are abroad, seem to prove, that this, which is called
notorious, is a particular case, and the proceedings therein, do contradict
the Royal Capitulation. Again, before such a sentence had been published,
many considerations should have been had, and circumstances examined, specially
those, which concerned the children of the Palatine, His Brother, and the next
of that Agnation; all of whom, are, as yet, unaccused, and therefore much less
convinced of any crime: And a little after: The Translation being of no less
moment then the Ban, did questionless, alike belong to their deliberation; for
as they were Electours, and States of the Emperor, so were they also of the
Empire, and were therefore called, the props and pillars of the Empire; and if
the Emperor cannot, by His own power, bestow any Fee, nor any Town, fallen in
reversion, without the knowledge of the Electours, and Estates, how much more
is their assent necessary, in transferring of so supreme a Tenure of the
Empire, as is an Electorall Dignity. This would be too grievous and great a
wrong to the temporal Electours, Princes, and Estates, to their children and
blood; if without hearing of their cause, or privity of the College
Electorall, they should be dispossessed of their Estates and Dignities, and
deprived of their simultaneous and undeprivable Succession: Their Lord and
Master hoped, that the rest of his Electorall Fellows, would never approve of
such proceedings, nor be a cause, that the condition of an Electour, which has
always been of such sway, in the Empire, should become worse, than a
Gentleman's in Poland; who cannot be proscribed, but in a Diet of the Kingdom.

In the answer, which the Electours and Princes, assembled at Ratisbone,
together with the Ambassadors of such as were absent, made unto the Emperors
Proposition, exhibited to them, the 30 of January 1623. This was represented in
the name of the two Electors, of Saxe and Brandenburg. Answers made to the
Emperor touching the Translation.
That, not to speak of the Count Palatines defense, these things ought to be
duly considered, in the point of the Translation. First, whether those of His
children, who before His Outlawry, were included, by the providence of their
Ancestors, in the Electorall Right and Succession, can afterward be excluded.
Next, whether His Brother, guiltless of any transgression, who neither has,
nor could, by reason of his nonage, offend the Emperor? or whether the
kindred, and next of His Agnation, that not only testified their innocence,
but likewise their service, and fidelity, to His Majesty in these occasions,
can be justly debarred from their pretentions.

It was further represented, in the report of the Electours, and Princes, made
upon certain points, of the Emperors Proposition, the 15. February of the
said year: The Suffrages sufficiently declared, what the opinion was, of the
two Electours, of Saxe and Brandenburg, about the point of Translation. And
albeit, these words (Without ought prescribing.) were inserted in the last
relation, yet their Highnesses have thought good, to retract them, forasmuch as
the said words cannot stand with the Capitulation, by which His Majesty is so
far, and formally bound, that this matter cannot be left to the freedom of
His will. For it is expressly ordained, That no business of importance should
pass, without the knowledge, and approbation of the Electours; and that no
Estate of the Empire, should be Outlawed, without a due and formal hearing;
Which Capitulation, being a fundamental, and unrepealed law, in the Empire,
ought no more to be brought in question; but rather obeyed, than disputed. And
because their Dignities, as Electours temporal, descended to their posterity
by inheritance; They took themselves, to have the greater interest, and so the
more obliged, to preserve the said Authority.

Furthermore, to confirm the votes aforesaid, the Electour of Saxe wrote to
the Archbishop of Mentz, during the said Diet, 23 February 1623. to this
purpose:

We hoped, that our good and wholesome exhortations, grounded, not upon
opinions, but upon the laws and examples of the Empire, would have found more
credit than they have done; then, these ways, had not been taken, which must
needs lead, to bitterness and trouble; of which, as we cannot approve, for
the Reasons which ye know; so the mischiefs which may follow thereupon, will
justify our innocence, though increase our grief. Sorry we are, to see such
proceedings in our days, and so hopeless of remedy: which makes us the more
constant to our former suffrages, that are registered in your Chancery; desiring
nothing more, than that our sound and sincere remonstrances, may hereafter be
remembered, when the events perhaps, will not answer to the designs. And a
little after: What? if in the proscribing an Electour, and placing another in
his room, the advice of Electours be not taken, we see not, wherein consists
that Authority, nor how it can be secured, not what it differs from any
other Estate. To allege necessity, or that the College shall incur no
harm, is but a slight excuse. For Capitulations are stricti juris, and admit
no exceptions; or if any, the interpretations thereof belong to the College in
Body, without which, all is in vain whatsoever is at the present promised. As
for the Translation it self, we never thought it a way to peace, but rather
to war, and could not therefore assent unto it. In which opinion, We are
still the more confirmed, for as much, that since the establishment of the
Golden Bull, the like example, has not been found; and if we take that of
Duke Maurice abovesaid, it declares quite the contrary. Besides that clause,
inserted into his Majesty's resolution, touching the Children and Agnation of
Electours, in very umbragious, and may rather exasperate, than still the cause:
for there is decided, that a third person innocent, may be deprived of his
simultaneous Investiture, and lose that inherent Right, which is proper to
himself, for the crime, which is proper to another. Where, hence will follow,
that the Children and Agnation must settle their Right by arbitrament, and
composition, and that, which was before clear and legal, will now become
disputable and uncertain: but because this does not alone import, the Palatine
House, but all the rest of Electors and Princes, who have obtained the same
Investiture by propriety, taking an oath, and kissing the sword; We must be so
much the more careful, not to approve of such a fact, which may endamage the
whole Empire.

In another letter to the said Archbishop of Mentz, dated from Dresden the 10.
of October 1623. the Electour of Saxe gives this Council: It was our true and
sincere affection, first to his Majesty, as Head of the Empire, and then to
all the members, which made us deliver those suffrages, in open Council,
registered in the Imperial Chancery; whereby sufficiently appears, what
means, we judged fittest to obtain a settled peace. But we have learned by
sad experience, that since the said Assembly, where that Resolution was most
hotly taken, which we esteemed most unpeaceable, all things in the Empire have
grown worse and worse. And somewhat after. The restitution was propounded, for
this regard; because the Ban, the execution and the Translation, which (as ye
know) followed thereupon, were all resolved without the knowledge or assent of
the Electours: which assent, is nevertheless, necessary, if so be the
Capitulation may have any force, or the Electours be maintained in their
Dignities: for you may easily judge, as a wise Electour, and well versed in
public affairs, That if, in such high matters, which concern the whole
Empire, the advice of the Electours be not regarded, their pre-eminence will
quickly fall, and their persons be abased, and the pillars of the Empire, and
most inward Councillors of the Roman Emperor will be vain titles, without
effect. And so the Estates of the Empire, who cannot otherwise imagine, but
that all, which passed in the College, is done by the Electours consent, may
justly lay the blame upon them, which we beseech you not to draw, but rather to
divert. We desire not, by this our opinion, to stir up tedious and fruitless
debate, but only to discharge our oath to the Electorall College, and our
care to posterity. For, suppose that the Restitution of the Palatine be laid
aside, and all the rest of the proceedings good and due; yet find we not, how
the Kindred and Agnation, can be excluded, or their Right, streaming in their
blood, made uncertain, or subjected to a Process at Law. Forasmuch as that
Investiture, by which they succeed, is proper, and fixed in their own persons;
who are no less bound to take a feodall oath, than the Possessour of the Fee:
which Right, cannot be forfeited by the fault of another, but only by their
own; otherwise, the innocent would be punished with the guilty; and loyal
Liege-men, have no difference from disloyal, which would open a door to much
Felony.

In another Letter of the two said Electours of Saxe and Brandenburg, which
they jointly wrote unto the Emperor, dated the 12 of March 1623. the confirmed
their former suffrage, with these reasons:

Letters of the two Electours, to the Emperor, jointly confirming the said
Suffrage.
Since our Votes, and Opinions, proceed not out of passion, or suppose, to draw
matters to delay; but are surely grounded upon nature, and equity, upon
examples in the Empire, and upon these fundamental Laws, and Constitutions,
which are so far, from our power to change, or abrogate, that we are bound by
oath, both to your Majesty, and to the Empire, to maintain them: We know not
how to vary, or depart of jot from that Declaration, which has been already
made unto your Majesty, by our Ambassadors. For if we should resort in person
unto your Majesty, that we might approve, what is passed; we should retract
our former suffrages, and all the grounds before alleged; from whence, what
else can be inferred, but that either our intentions, were not sincere, nor
well advised; or that our Ambassadors had no Commission for what they said:
Both which, would turn to our reproach, not only with the Princes living,
(whereof many are of our advice) but also with those to come, and all Posterity.
For as we willingly confess, that an Electour, or Prince offending, may, and
ought to be punished for his offense; so we hope, your Majesty will not deny,
that the case of an Electour, or Prince, should not be worse in their
punishment, than a private person; against whom, how notorious soever the crime
may be, the manner is not to proceed, without adjournment and open hearing. And
herein, the power of your Majesty, is not called in question; but the manner of
proceeding, observed, according to the fundamental Laws and Orders of the
Empire. Your Majesty, well knows, that by the feodall Laws, when a
difference arises, between the Lord and the Vassal, the case uses to be
decided by his Peers, in Court, bearing the same name and Arms. How much more
then should this be kept, in persons of greater Rank; That their advice should
be required, who are the inward Counselors of your Majesty; and of the same
Dignity and Condition, with the Delinquent? Your Majesty is not likewise
ignorant, what our Opinions are, concerning the Translation of the Electorate;
wherein, we have at large, remarked the course of former times; and in the same
persist. Neither can we conceive, how that Clause, annexed to your Majesty's
resolution, which sends the Children, and Cousins, of the Palatine, to seek
their Right, by Law and Arbitration, can avoid, delay, or advance the Peace.
For, by that means, the Right of Agnation, which, out of all doubt, is
inseparable from their blood, will become litigious, and that made liable, to
an uncertain suite, whereof they cannot, in their own persons, be deprived,
without their own misdemeanour: if therefore, we should personally assist, in
that deliberation; how, when, or in what manner, the claims of the said
Agnation might be friendly compounded; or for default of such agreement, might
be decided at Law; we should not only approve, all that is passed, but draw
upon all Electours, and Princes, who have the like Investiture, an
irrecoverable wrong, for which, we could never answer, to the said Houses;
neither can we conceive, how a judicious Court can be erected, to decide this
point; since all the Electorall, and most Illustrious Houses, have interest
therein. All these things therefore considered; That we could neither assist
in presence, nor depart from the Suffrages of our Ambassadors, without
prejudice to the Empire, and reproach to our selves, we humbly beseech your
Majesty, to admit of our excuses, and believe, that if we stood not bound by
oath, and the fundamental Laws, and Constitutions of the Empire, nothing
should hinder us, from giving your Majesty, free and faithful obedience.

Now it remains to set down, with what form, limits, and reservations the
two Electours of Saxe and Brandenburg, did at last acknowledge, and receive the
Duke of Bavaria. The Electour of Saxe writing to the Archbishop of Mentz, from
Dresden, the 1. of March, 1634. declares himself in these terms:

Conditions under which the Electour of Saxe allowed the Translation.
We agree with you; that nothing is more necessary, than the reunion of the
Electorall College, whereby Diets and Assemblies may be called, to confer in
Body, of all things expedient for public peace; at this we aimed, and this
we pressed, in the late Diet of Electours and Princes at Ratisbone: our
difference only was about the persons: for ye and the Ecclesiastical
Electours approved the Translation, which we and the Electour of Brandenburg
partly, to preserve the Authority of the College, and partly the quiet and
obedience of the Empire, utterly dissuaded. And although we propounded
nothing, but what our oath, the Dignity of our rank, and common tranquillity
required; and that all our reasons were so well grounded upon the laws,
ordinances and examples of the Empire, that we need not vary, from our first
mind and intentions: yet because ye and the Ecclesiastical Electours are of
another opinion; That ye think the filling up of the College to be the only
means to procure peace, and relieve the Empire, and that ye hope all wrongs
and Innovations, may be prevented for the time to come, by Reversals or other
means; We for our parts, should be unwilling, to give any occasion, that the
Empire should longer groan, under those miseries and oppressions, which
threaten utter destruction. And therefore, if the Rights of all Parties, may be
so provided for, that none may suffer wrong, we are contented to redintegrate
the College, by acknowledging the Duke of Bavaria for Electour. But before he
be put in possession, we think it needful, first of all, that all the Armies
speedily dislodge, out of the Lands and Territories of the Electours, Princes,
and Towns Imperial; whereby it may appear, that the said Duke be received,
for respect to the Emperor, and zeal of public peace, rather than by
constraint: which caution, is the more reasonable, because the troops of the
Duke of Brunswick, and Count Mansfelt, are utterly routed and disbanded, and
all the Evangeliks have licensed their soldiers; so as there being nothing
more to be feared, it would be unjust and against the laws of the Empire, to
burden it with soldiers, when there is no war, and oppress those parts with
superfluous charges, which live in quiet and obedience. Secondly, that letters
of recognisance, be given by his Imperial Majesty, as also by the Duke of
Bavaria; fully testifying, that neither the Ban of the Count Palatine, nor
Translation of the Electorate, shall be any way hereafter alleged, to the
prejudice of the Electorall greatness, and dignity: or of the Golden Bull; or
Imperial Capitulation; or else of the Electorall Princely Houses, in their
several Rights, and Investitures. Thirdly, that the Rights of all those, shall
be no wise diminished, to whom the Electourship Palatine belonged, before the
said Ban, or Translation; but that, in their several degrees, they may after
the death, of the said Duke of Bavaria, be admitted, into their Rights, without
delay: Upon these Conditions, we shall not refuse to acknowledge the said Duke,
for the present; and the rather, because, whatsoever shall hereafter happen;
the Suffrages, which we have delivered, in open Counsel, and which are
inserted in the Records of the Empire, will bear us witness, to all
Posterity; that we failed not, in due time, place, and manner, to represent all
things, which our oath, and Electorall Office required.

The Electour of Brandenburg, in his answer given the Baron Hannibal of Dona,
dated at Coningsberg 22 May 1627. thus declares;

The only cause, which has hitherto stopped His Highness, from agreeing to the
point of Translation, was, That he thought, it would rather sow, the seeds of
discord, than be a bond of peace; and stir up foreign Arms, then quiet all
at home; since, He has found by experience, to the great loss and ruin of
His Country, as well as other Estates; that he was not mistaken in his
belief. But, forasmuch as His Highness understands, that His Imperial
Majesty is out of hope, that the Empire would ever be appeased, unless the
Electorall College be first unanimously conjoined, by the introduction of the
Duke of Bavaria: That, on his part, he might further the Counsels of Peace,
and Prosperity of the Empire; and avoid the imputation of future Calamities;
His Highness is not unwilling, to bear respect, and obedience, to His
Imperial Wisdom; and conform himself unto His will, by receiving, and
acknowledging, the Duke of Bavaria, for a Coelectour, during his life, upon
these terms and reservations. First, That he intends not, by this Act, any
way to depart, from the Suffrage and declaration of his Conscience, made in the
Diet at Ratisbone, touching the publication of the Ban, and Translation of the
Electorate, thereupon ensuing. Secondly, That thereby, He will nothing
derogate, from the pre-eminence of the Electorall College; nor from the
Sanctions of the Golden Bull, nor Laws and Constitutions of the Empire; nor
the Capitulation Imperial; nor yet from the Rights, and Investitures, of other
Electorall, and Princely Houses; against any whereof, He means not, that this
His Act, shall be drawn in consequence. Thirdly, He purposes not, in the
least manner, to prejudice, by this His declaration, the Cause of the Prince
Palatine, nor His Children, Brother, Blood, or Agnation; much less to
contribute to their exclusion, or any was to charge Himself, with the Palatine
Cause.

We are not ignorant, that near, twenty years ago, and now afresh, since
the Translation of our Electorate, certain rumors have been spread abroad,
especially, in the Courts of foreign Princes; as if the Electorall Dignity,
had of old, been an exed to the House of Bavaria, and not of the Palatinate,
and that heretofore, Contracts of alternation, had been made and observed,
between both Houses, that they should enjoy the Dignity, by turns: All which,
has been forged to this end; that it should not seem strange, that the
Session, and vote Electorall, which had been so long neglected, by the
Predecessors of the Duke of Bavaria, should be restored by his industry, and
return to the proper house: Not to enter into the debatement or this Cause,
which is a digression from the purpose; nor to repeat that, which persons of
quality have published, to refute this vain pretention; we will wholly refer
our selves to the Golden Bull, as to that supreme and fundamental law, which
can only determine this cause; whereby it will appear, whether the
Electorate, belong to the Bavarian or Palatine Line; and what is to be judged
of the pretended part of alternation, In the 7. Title, thus we find it:

Law for entailing the Electourship, upon the Palatinate, and not on Bavaria.
Since therefore, it is commonly known, to almost the whole world, that the
King of Bohemia, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Saxe, Marquis of
Brandenburg; have by reason of their Kingdom, and Principalities, the Right,
Suffrage, and Session, to choose, with the Ecclesiastical Electours, a King of
the Romans, and install him Emperor: And that they are therefore established,
as true Electours of the Empire, with authority to make Elections, etc. And in
the beginning of the 20. Title; Whereas, all and every one of the said
Princedomes (by virtue whereof the Temporal Electours have full power, right
and suffrage, to elect the King of the Romans, and make him Emperor) together
with their rights, functions, dignities, and appurtenances are so straightly
knit and united, etc.

By another Edict of the Emperor Charles the 4. who enacted the Golden Bull,
the same was confirmed Anno 1356 in these words: That the right of Election,
was annexed and founded upon the County Palatine; his Imperial Majesty, and
all the other Princes, had certain knowledge, and no doubt was to be made
thereof. And a little lower: For as much as we firmly know, that the voice and
Power Elective are founded with such right in the lands of the County Palatine,
and office of high Truckcesse, that the one cannot subsist without the other.
To this may be added, That the Count Palatine, by reason of the Palatinate, and
not of the Duchy of Bavaria is, provisionally, the Vicar of the Empire, as the
Golden Bull clearly ordains in the 5 title. As often as the Empire shall
fall in vacancy, the most Illustrious Count Palatine of the Rhine (by virtue of
the Electorate and Princedome Palatine) shall administer the affairs thereof
in place of King of the Romans, over all the Countries of the Rhine, Suevia
and Franconia.

True it is, that Ludo vicus, the Bavarian Emperor, having banished and
dispossessed his elder brother, Rodolph, Electour Palatine, because He had
given his voice and assistance to Frederick the fair, Archduke of Austria,
against himself, he labored to impose upon the children of the said Rodolph,
restored after his death, such a covenant of alternation: but as it was
attempted without right or reason, so it never had effect: for the Bavarian
Line cannot produce one sole example, that ever executed elective power; and
all their pretentions were fully rejected, and nullified by the Golden Bull;
whereas in the Palatine House, the said Right and Dignity, has remained,
without any interruption, having for the space of three hundred and odd
years, assisted as Electours and high Truckcesse at the Elections and
Coronations of thirteen Roman Emperors one after another.

And here the occasion offers it self, to remember without boasting, the
merits of our Predecessors and Palatine House, not only in the Empire, and
all Christendom; but especially toward the House of Austria; which has been
oftener exalted to the Imperial power, and great nesse by our Ancestors than
any other, though many times, to their own disadvantage. The example of Rupert
Count Palatine King of the Romans, shows with what zeal and courage, He
governed the Empire, and pacified the trouble thereof: Philip and Frederick II.
Anno 1530. valiantly defended the City of Vienna against the Turks, neither
sparing their Estates, nor their life's. Particularly, the said Frederick did
diverse great and useful services to Charles V. and his brother Ludovicus was
the chief cause, that anno 1531. Ferdinand the first was elected Emperor at
Colen, notwithstanding, that John Electour of Saxe, protested against it for
his son. Rodolph of Haburg might next to God, thank Lodowick, Electour
Palatine, by whose means He was made Emperor, who was the first that began
to advance his house, and transmit the Duchy of Austria to his posterity. The
same Lodowicke stood alone, against Adolph Count of Nassaw, who by all the rest
was chosen Emperor, and mightily labored, to bring in Albert of Austria,
son of Rodolph. Rodolph Electour Palatine choose Frederick, Duke of Austria,
Emperor, against Lodowick of Bavaria, his own brother, which cost Him as is
said, his Dignities and Estate. And it is well known, that the late Emperors
Maximilian the I. Charles V. Ferdinand I. Maximilian II. Rodolph II. and
Matthias have received no small assistance, and good offices, from the
Electours Palatines our Predecessors, to attain the Crown. Here also may not
be forgotten, how true and sincerely, Our most honored Lord and Father, dealt
with the present Duke of Bavaria: not only visiting Him in person at Munchen,
Anno 1618 using all free communication with Him, but also, not long before His
journey into Bohemia, recommending to his trust his Countries and Estates, as
to one in whom he had most confidence; who also at that time, promised all
kind of good neighborhood, and to do no displeasure, as appears by their
mutual letters. But especially, when Our said Lord and Father, to make him
feel his entire affection, gave him his Electorall voice to be King of the
Romans, Anno 1619. in these words: Having ever in Our heart desired to see
Right and Justice duly administered in the Empire, all disorders and
oppressions removed, and the causes of foreign war prevented, We have among
all the Potentates, Electours, and Princes, fixed our thoughts upon the Duke of
Bavaria, as upon a Prince, wise, peaceful, full of experience, governing His
own Estates in quiet, and not engaged in any war; which We propound, not out
of disaffection to any of the forenamed, much less to the House of Austria,
which has often felt and found the good offices of our Electorall House; but
only as we conceive the course of the present affairs, and that according to
Our oath, And therefore, in the Name of God, We give Our voice, to the said
Duke of Bavaria.

All which, being in it self, clear as the day; we cannot, but think it very
strange, that, without taking notice, of the aforesaid demonstrations, the
proceedings against our dear Lord and Father, our Self, Brethren, Blood, and
Agnation, have been carried with such rigor, and animosity; taking from Us,
without all form of justice, what God, Our birth and Right has given Us. But
that, which grieveth Us most of all, is, That not contented, with those
exorbitant, and dangerous innovations, the pretended Translation, of Our
Electorall Voice, Place, and Function, with all that thereon depends; has
again been ratified, and confirmed upon the descendents of the Duke of
Bavaria, and his brothers, and upon the whole Line of Duke William their
father, deceased. Notwithstanding, that it was granted to the said Duke, for
the term of his life, as the Electours of Saxe and Brandenburg were assured,
who gave their assent for no longer time. By which violent, and peremptory
proceedings, that, which at first, was but oppression; and might have vanished
with time, will now put on the face of Law, and be made perpetual. Whereby,
We, Our brethren, blood, and Agnation, may be, for ever, deprived, in Our
spotless innocence, of all the ancient, and inherent Rights of Succession,
Reversion, and simultancous Investiture, inseparable from Our House; And that
without all bounds of Justice, or form of Law; unaccused, unheard without the
knowledge, and assent of the Electoral College; and to the infinite prejudice
of all Electorall, and Princely Houses, who may read their own story in Our
Oppression.

Indeed, our most honored Lord and Father, was in His life time advertised;
that the perpetuation of Our Electorate, in the Line of Duke William, had been
long ago projected, and more specially, in the late Electorall Diet at
Ratisbone. We have also heard; That, hereditarily, an Investiture was
promised, under Seal, to the Duke of Bavaria; and that to dispose, the
Electours, of Saxe and Brandenburg, the more easily to consent; the peaceable
enjoying of the Ecclesiastical goods, would be granted to them, for forty
years. But these things, being so directly contrary, to the former assurances;
to the declarations of His Imperial Majesty; to the protestations of the two
temporal Electours; to the reversalls of the Duke of Bavaria; to the Golden
Bull; to the fundamental Laws, and to all Right and equity; We did forbear,
along time, to give any credence to them: Till in the last Treaty of Prague,
between the Emperor, and the Electour of Saxe; We find, the Translation of
Our Electorall Dignity, with all the dependances, to be settled, and entailed,
upon the Line of Duke William; for ever; and to be received, and approved, by
the two said Parties Treating, as an Article of Peace, and a Case clearly
decided.

The Case in Law, that the Electourship can neither be forfeited, nor
translated, but only by failing in blood.
But, for the better understanding of this Point; we must know, That the
Electorall, and Sovereign Estates, which hold in Fee, upon the Empire, are
far more transcendent, than common Tenures of Inheritance. It is true indeed,
that Lands and Lordships, which descend by inheritance, from the last
Possessour, to the next heir, are subject, to many changes; They may be sold,
morgaged, alienated, attainted, confiscated, according to the several Reasons
and Statutes of Law; and all to the prejudice of the lawful heirs: But
Electorall Tenures (so long as the State of the Empire stands) are warranted,
against all these kind of changes; and but in one only Case, are immutable,
and unreversable to the Empire, and that is for deficiency of male Issue, by
the Fathers side, and extinction of blood; For when the Estates of the Empire,
found it at the first needful, for the policy and peace thereof, to erect the
Electorall College, and invest the three Houses, of the Palatinate, Saxe and
Brandenburg, (which at that time were Sovereign) with the power elective,
there passed a Contract between the said Houses, and the Empire; that the said
Electorall Dignity should remain rooted in them, and descend, from Father to
Son, and so to the next males of the Fathers blood; comprehending all, that
should hereafter be borne, as if they had been then extant: and enabling them
to succeed, in their own proper, inherent, and unalienable Right, for ever.
This stipulation, in the first Investiture, has been a leading Rule, and
President, for all after times; wherein, it has been, the constant use, and
practice, in the Empire, to keep up the same form; and in all Electorall
vacancyes, to admit, and invest the next of the male blood, without rub or
interruption. This Custom, has received strength and authority, in the
Empire, for the continuance of times, from the foundation of Laws; from
Covenants, and Capitulations; from trial and experience; from the approbation
of all Estates; and from the reverent esteem, and inviolation of it self,
till these present times. And for further declaration, of this ancient Right,
and Regality of Succession, in Electorall Houses; it has been a maxim, and
opinion, delivered in all Ages; that they succeed, not by right of inheritance,
nor by any will, or disposition, of the last possessour, but by the providence
of their Ancestors, and by Covenant made with the first Contracters, whereby
the Right of every male, who should appertain to that Stock and Lineage, to the
worlds end; was actually included; not only as pretenders in their own time,
but as Compossessours from, that present. From which infallible grounds, these
consequences naturally will arise. First, that it is not in the power of any
Father, or possessour of these Electorall Lands, and Dignities, to alienate, or
engage them, to the prejudice of their Blood, though it were to pay a Dowry, or
redeem a Captive, or for any other extreme necessity; the reason is, because
they have no further right in them, then during the life of their own persons,
and cannot therefore alienate the right of others, who by their decease, step
into their place, by surrogation, and not inheritance. Secondly, no
Predecessor, nor Father, can by any Felonious crime whatsoever, though it were
of the highest treason, attaint the blood, or forfeit the Right of his
Successors, who are not guilty of the same crime, because their claim is not
from their Father, but from their Stock, invested in their birth and blood,
and by Law irrevocable. Thirdly, the Emperor being only upon certain
Conditions, by choice, not by nature, Administrator of the Empire; on which,
these Electorall Dignities, and Estates do hold, has no direct power, or
dominion, over these Tenures, all He can do, by the uttermost of Law, is to
lay His Action against the right of the party offending; but not against the
Right of the rest, which resideth in their innocent blood, and is locked up
within the bars of immutability, as too noble and precious a gift to depend
upon the fact or keeping or inheritance of any possessour.

Since therefore as well the Electorall claim, belonging by Covenant to our
House, as the natural and lawful possession of our Estates, and Regalities
are delivered by our Ancestors, and devolved upon us, as the first in blood,
no earth by power whatsoever, can call them into question, or deprive us, our
brethren, or Agnation of our right, and much less transfer it to any other,
without rearing it out of the faith full custody of ancient Covenants, stable
laws, and venerable customs, and obtruding foreign plots and innovations,
and making an irreparable rent in the frame and body of the sacred Empire.

Had we, our brethren or blood been as guilty of crime, as we are laded with
punishments, yet if any respect had been shown to the ordinances of the
Empire, to the Capitulations of Emperors, or to the grave and solid
remonstrances of the two foresaid Electours, we should at least have been
tried by the law; but since the proceedings against us, in our tender
innocence, has been no less extreme and rigorous, than if we were the most
obstinate enemies of the Empire, and highest delinquents against His Imperial
Majesty, we doubt not, but God, in whom we trust, and who is Judge of all,
will do us right, and when he pleases, pronounce his sentence, according to
the justice and equitle of our cause: In the mean time, we hope, that all
Kings, Potentates, Electours, Princes, Estates and Persons whatsoever, that
free from partiality, and void of passion, shall examine these violent and
precipitious proceedings, by our blameless innocence, will not only be
touched, with a sense and compassion of our case, but will esteemethem all as
vicious, and unjust, and of no force to prejudice our Rights, unto which God
and nature, the consent and sanction of the whole Empire has entitle us. And
that the rather, both because nothing to this day has been, nor can be laid,
to the charge of us, or our brethren, as criminal, against the Estates and
laws of the Empire, or his Imperial Majesty, as for that, the seysure of our
prerogatives, the detention of our Estates, the translation of our Dignity, and
the present perpetuation of all, like so many linkes of usurpation, were
contrived and compassed in the time of our nonage, whereby we could not sooner
protest, nor oppose, nor vindicate our Rights, nor cuter into the government of
our affairs, till now that we have attained our Majority. Here we may note,
that if the two Electours, of Saxe and Brand enburg, judged at the first, that
the translation of our Electourship, though but for a time, and restrained
only to the person, and life of the Duke of Bayaria, would not withstanding be
injurious to the pre-eminence of the Colledgre Electorall, and to all temporal
Princes, as depriving innocents of their inherent, and simultaneous Right,
invested in their blood, and planted in their Stock against all the laws,
Rights, forms, and customs of the Empire, and would therefore in stead of
peace, be a cause (as the events have shown) of further exasperations, and of
cruel wars, which might waste the Empire. How then can they but resent this
present Act, whereby, without suit and try all, We were comdemned in Our
minority, when we were neither indicted, nor could be guilty of any crime, and
Our Estates and Royalties translated from Us, our brethren and Agnation, to the
Line of Duke William, far removed, and that for ever. And what else can they
judge of it, but as of an attempt and conspiration never heard of, not only to
fill the Empire with mistrusts, factions, hatreds, and utter desperations, but
likewise to outrage the fabric of the State, and undermine the very
foundations, that upon the rubbage and slavery of the same, might be raised a
new and absolute Domination.

As long therefore as the Electorall College, shall be reputed the foundation
of the Empire, and the Golden Bull, the Imperial Capitulation, and the
Constitutions of State, for inviolable laws, whereby the whole body should be
governed, and knit together, so long can neither We, Our Brethren, nor
Agnation (altogether innocent and inculpable) be deprived of Our Estares and
Dignities without manifest rupture of all Right, and open violation of' humane
peace and society. Neither is it sufficient to allege, the success of
arms, and victories gotten in the field, for a proof and testimony of the
justice of their cause, for then the condition of Christians, and truth of the
Religion we profess, would be much worse than Turks and Mahumetans: And if
any think, that their designs be so smoothly carried, and their strength so
great, that they may dissolve, change, and dispose of all things, as they lift,
without the fear of any foreign opposition, let them know, that there is no
Council against God, nor might against his providence, which has bounded the
thoughts of men, and set a period upon their power; and albeit they may
surmount humane vengeance, and outward force, yet great oppressions never want
an inward worm, to gnaw down the pillars of pride, and lay them in the dust,
even as it shall please him, who raises and disposes Princes and transporteth
Kingdoms for unrighteousness.

Let every one therefore in his own impartial judgment consider from the
public Acts and authentical letters of his Imperial Majesty, from the
suffrages and other documents of the Electours and Princes temporal, from the
infinite and untolerable wrongs, disgraces, and oppressions of our House,
whether we have not just cause to publish our Complaints against these unjust
proceedings, and to protest against them before God and the world. And
therefore we do by this present and public Manifest in the best and most
solemn form, according to all Right and custom withstand and protest against
them, and every one of them, leaving this our Protestation, as a perpetual
witness of the outward injuries done against our Right to this Age, and all
posterity.

And as we are thus forced to protest against our wrongs, so we do freely
profess in the sight of God, and upon our Conscience, that whatsoever has
been recited, alleged, urged, or proved in this Manifest, is only for the
defense and evidence of our just cause, and for the maintenance of our proper
and inherent Rights, devolved to us from our Ancestors, and not any way to
black, or despite, or offend any living soul of what condition soever.

These Asseverations being done, we make our recourse unto Your Imperial
Majesty, to all Kings, Electours, Princes and Estates, as to the Dispencers of
Justice, Protectours of Innocence, and Guardians of oppressed Orphans here
below. We appeal a Caesare male informato, praeoccupato and irato, ad
Caesarem, Electores and ordines Imperii, tan quam Pares Curiae, melius
informandos, and affectibus vaeuos, and humbly beseech your Imperial Majesty,
That if Our innocence will not move you, ye would be moved with your self,
and call to mind, your own final resolution, which ye gave to the Electours
and Princes, at the Diet at Ratisbone, the 23 February 1623. Wherein, ye were
pleased, to promise, and declare; That ye never intended, neither was it your
will, by any Act, which was passed in the Palatine Cause, to cross, or
prejudice the preeminence of Electours; nor your own Capitulation; nor the
Golden Bull; nor Constitutions of the Empire; nor, for that business, to take,
or entrench, from any, the Right, and due, which to any belonged. By virtue of
this, your Imperial Declaration, confirmed since, to diverse Princes, within
and without the Empire; as also, for those many instances, and mediations, made
in Our behalf, We again beseech your Majesty, to restore Us to Our Rights; to
Invest Us in Our Electorship, and Estates; and to protect Us in the same, as a
most faithful, and eminent member of the Empire; not suffering any hands, to
withhold Our Right, nor trouble Us, in the lawful possession of that, which
God and Nature has appointed Us: Whereby, ye shall imitate, the best examples
of your Predecessors; who, upon better informations and advice, have left the
ways of rigor, for the ways of peace: And so, ye shall use that high power,
committed to your trust, to still the present storms, to repair the breaches,
heal the fractions, and wounds of your own members; and to establish the
Empire, in peace and unity, which is now falling to desolation.

And that our own requests may be the better seconded, we entreat all Kings,
Electours, Princes, and Estates, that they would employ their Power, and send
their exhortations, as in all places, where they shall think it availeable, so
especially with His Imperial Majesty, and the Duke of Bavaria, to the end,
that being put into the peaceable possession of our proper Rights, and
Electorall and Ancient House, which has produced Kings and Emperors, and done
such services both to the Austrian and Bavarian House, and stood so long a prop
and pillar of the Empire, be not razed nor demolished in our days, nor We
and Our blood, which spring up within the walls thereof, to be driven to
desperation, nor seek Councels from Necessity. Wherein, as they have all some
interest, either in regard of that reproach, which our injuries and affronts
unredressed, may cast upon them, with most of whom, we have the honor to be
allied, or else for the consequence, which may fall upon themselves, if this
fire be not timely quenched: so they shall labor in a most Christian work,
pleasing to God, and glorious among men. Which we desire of them, with this
further assurance, that our carriage and intentions to His Imperial Majesty,
and the whole Empire, shall be ever sincere, loyal, and respectfull, Zealous
to remove jealousies and distrusts, to confirm friendship, and intelligence to
preserve the rights and authorities of all, and with our power to establish
public peace, and advance the good of all Christendom. And for themselves,
They shall lay an eternal obligation upon Us, our brethren, and our whole
House, upon all occasions, to acknowledge this their favor, and by the
faithful offices of our friendship and vicinity, to make them thankful
retribution.

And for conclusion, to close up all, We do hereby summon and exhort, all
our Liegemen, Vassals and Subjects, that hold in fee on our Electorall House,
in due time, not to fail of doing homage, faith, loyalty and obedience unto
us, as to their natural Lord and Prince, hoping that every one of them, will
be careful to discharge their bonds and duties, and take heed of failing,
under the Censure of the laws, by any felonious or disobedient act.

Here shall end our present Manifest, which for defense of Our inseparable
rights, and information of the whole world we were feign to publish, by
inevitable necessity.

Given at London the 12. of January, 1636. Charles Lodowicke, Electour.


