HALLELV-JAH: OR, KING DAVID'S SHRILL TRVMPET, sounding a loud Summons to the
whole World, to Praise GOD.

Delivered by way of Commentary and plain Expos^tion upon the CXVII. PSALM.

By RICHARD CHAPMAN, Minister of the Word of God at Hunmanbie in Yorkshire.

Laus in nobis referatur ad ipsum laudabilium vniversorum authorem and
largitorem. Bern. sup. Cant.

PSALM. 92. 1. It it a good thing to give Thanks unto the Lord, and to sing
Praises unto thy Name, O most High. LONDON. Printed by B. Alsop and T. Fawcet,
for ROBERT ALLOT dwelling at the sign of the black Bear in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1635.

TO THE RIGHT VVORpfull, and his much honored Friend, RICHARD OSBALDESTON Esquire
all Happiness, etc.
Worthy Sir,
THE many and manifold kindnesses which I have received from you (as real
additaments to my welfare) like the officious Servant in the Comedy, or like
another Cynthius, aurum vellet, stand up as so many Monitors, bidding me take
heed of that detestable monster Ingratitude, which so venemously has stupefied
the senses of most, so generally lessoned and taught in the Academie of the
unthankful World; Therefore to shun those detested shelves, I have made bold
out of a truly (though not sufficiently) thankful heart, to Dedicate this
weak Embryo of my newly teeming brain unto your self: I might indeed take
notice, that there are Scyllean Cri^tickes, but Scylleos Canes obturata aure
transibo, Ierom. That there are left handed Benjamites casting stones at an
haire-bredth, Judge. 20. 6. Demea solus sapit: that a Paper vessel may easily
miscarry, as the Travailer betwixt Jerusalem and Jericho; Yet will I venture
under your Worships patronage, (as little Teucer under the Buckler of Ajax) to
pass into the glassie Sea of the world, having still more encouragement from
Plinius secundus, beati quibus Deorum munere datum est, aut facere scribenda
aut scribere facienda. And it is given to Adamantius Origin. Ne erubescas
primum recte facere, quae non potes been, melius erubescas male facere quae
potes been, Eusebius. eccles. Hist. lib. 6. And though the manner of the handling
of the Divine matter be weak and imperfect, the very Image of the Author as
you know, yet the Subject of it is the Psalmodicall Hallelu-jah of Princely
DAVID, rowzing up and goading the unthankful mass of Mankind to
Praise-giving, teaching them the Hosanna of Obedience here, and their
Hallelu-jah here, and hereafter, that they are ABRAHAM'S sons who do Abraham's
works. Etiam fertus fecit mihi Iesum fratrem Abrahamum patrem. Orig. hom 8.
super Ezech. and in Romans c^^. 4. And that there is Spuria pietas as well as
Spuria febris, a piety which goes with Iucobs voice, but Esaus hands, masked in
the colors and showing forth the Symptoms of true holiness, which I desire
to pass thus under your tutelarie Name, and leave you and yours, your actions
and occasions, to the All-guiding hand of Heavens protection and providence,
and rest

Yours ever devoted to do you service, RICHARD CHAPMAN.

Ad Lectorem.
SI mihi, (viri Anglicani) in presentia concedatis vitam, hac condition vt ne
posthac in sapientiae inquisitione verse^; diligo quidem vos, sed Deo certum
est parere potuis quam vobis ac quamdiu vivam and valebo Philosophari atque
vnumquemque vestru^^ exhortari ad virtutem non desistam.

SOCRATES oration quae est apud Platonem in ejus Apologia. HALLELV-IAH, OR, King
DAVID'S shrill Trumpet, founding a loud Summons to the whole World to Praise
GOD.
PSALM. 117. 1. O Praise the Lord all ye Nations, praise him all ye People.
THis book of Psalms, containing the Sacred songs in the Scriptures, was
penned by the direction and inspiration of that all-guiding Spirit of Truth, as
a brief Compendium of the holy History, Quid est quod non in Psalmis?
as Augustine says. Matchless DAVID in composing of them, sometimes speaks
as a King, Psalm. 101. 2. I will walk in my house with a perfect heart; noting
his Princely and Religious government both of his Kingdom and Family:
Prophetical.
Sometime as a Prophet, speaking of the Messiah, his Incarnation, Sufferings,
Resurrection, Exaltation, etc. himself the type, Didascalicall.
CHRIST the antitype. Some of them further comprehend matter of Inseruction
concerning Faith and Manners, as Psalm. 1. 15. 37. Other some contain matter of
Prayer and Confession of sins, E^cticall.
as Psalm. 25. 51 etc. Some prayers against the Enemies of the Church, as Psalm.
79. 83. etc. Historical.
Some Historical, as Psalm. 78. 105. 106, etc. Some comm^nding Gods laws, as
Psalm. 19. 119. Some describing Gods wonderful Power, as Psalm. 18. Some
Thankesgivings for several deliverances, as Psalm. Epaineticall.
144. Some are for the stirring up of men to praise God for his Mercies, as
here; Wherein the Prophet summons all Gods people comprised in these great
Seeds of Iaphet and Sem, to praise God, to acknowledge the Scepter and
Kingdom of CHRIST JESUS the true Messiah; Not only his general regiment, in
which even the Devils are his vassals to exercise unregenerate Men and Women in
their lusts, till he bring them to destruction, from the poisonous
soporiferous cup of sin, to the scalding cup of Gods eternal Wrath: but
obediently to submit themselves to that mighty Scepter by which in particular
he guides and governes his Church: And so this Epaineticall, or Praise-giving
Psalm, brancheth it self into two parts:

First, a Proposition or general exhortation, verse, 1. O praise the Lord all
ye Nations, praise him all ye People.

Secondly, a double reason, 1. In regard of his Mercy in making Promises. 2.
His Truth in the performing of them, verse, 2. To leave this for a while, come
we to the first, which is the Exhortation: In which consider;


1. The Duty enjoined in the Exhortation, [Praise] which is urged by the
interjection [O] which is not supernumerall, but necessary:

2. The Object [the Lord]

3. The parties enjoined, 1. [Nations,] 2. [People,] which are taken of some
generally for all the people of God: but others and the more general current
of Interpreters, do by these note the two great Seeds; The Gentiles, which
are accounted before their calling, Lo-ruhamah,
Hos. 1. 6. Not beloved, Lo-ammi.
and verse. 9. Not my People; but here Prophetically called to praise God: And
the Jews which by a certain special prerogative, are called Gods people, his
darlings, and dearly Beloved ones, which he carried upon his wings as an
Eagle her young ones, and led them in the Wilderness like a flock of Sheep,
which had his special protection and favor, the kisses of his mouth, He gave
his Laws unto Jacob, his Statutes and Ordinances to Israel, He has not dealt
so with any Nation, Psalm. 147. 19. As it were confining his Graces within the
skirts and strait borders of Palestina, at Salem is his Tabernacle. Psalm. 76.
2.

The duty is called here Hallelu-jah, Duty.
which is doubled in this Verse, and repeated in the next; To show how
necessary the sacrifice of Praise and Thankesgiving is; and also, how backward
we are in the performance thereof, that must so often be called upon. Now to
gather all these into an handful as a well composed Posie, pleasant to the
smell; [O]
Consider that this which stands in the porch of this Psalm, is not
superfluous, but notes the fervent ardency, which is required in this Duty,
which must be performed not superficially, orally, but zealously, heartily;
which must or ought to be the salt and season of all our Duties and Devotions:
Nullum omnipotenti Deo tale est sacrificium, quale est zelus animoru^.
Our prayers and our praises must not freeze betwixt our teeth, but (even with
Eliah) must be transported to Heaven in a fiery Chariot, winged with the heat
of our zeal; Gregor. in Ezech Hom 12.
and there is no Sacrifice so incomparably pleasing to Almighty God.

Next, [Praise]
the thing enjoined, is to [Praise] which is nothing else (as Aristotle says)
but to elucidare, Lib. 1. and 3. Rhet.
make manifest and known (as it were a cunning Herald) the greatness of
virtue; as to praise Alexander for his Liberality, Julius Caesar for his
Patience, etc. To praise Mercy, Power, Justice, Wisdom, what is it, but to
magnify those eminent backe-parts and attributes of I^HOVA the mighty GOD, in
and by which he has revealed himself unto his Creatures, Men, and Angels?
Exodus 34. 6, And so this leads us to the true object of our Duty.

[The Lord,] [The Lord]
as he is called God in respect of his goodness, so is he Lord in regard of
his Majesticke greatness. Dominus Deus noster Papa.
This title is given to a great man upon earth, Dij titulares, non tutelares.
and more, is Sycophantically given to the Pope, to be called, besides Lord, a
God; which are but only so in title. How great then is he, Quantus est
Dominus qui Dominos fecit?
which makes and unmakes these Lords at his pleasure? There be many Gods and
many Lords, August.
1 Cor. 8. 5. but this is he which controls and commands them all. Others by
Authority of usurpation, Psalm. 82. 1. But he is judge among the Gods, able to
do more by his absolute power, than he will by his actual, able in potent not
impotent works: He is called Omnipotent, Dicitur omnipotens faciendo quod
vult, non patiendo quod non vult. August de Civit.
says Augustine, in doing what he pleases, not in suffering what he pleases
not; Which makes him, and none but him, the true object of our praise and
service; not the World, Flesh, or Devil, but the Lord; not the Saints in
heaven, Dei. lib. 5. cap. 10.
Job. 5. 1. To which of the Saints will thou turn? not to Baal-zebub the God
of Ekron, nor Belz^bub the Prince of Devils, but with David, Psalm. 73. 28. It
is good for me to draw near unto the Lord. Our prayers and praises,
confidence and hope, do here level at him, as the surest mark. Make him the
beginning and end, (...).
the first and last of all thy labors and endeavors, A love principium, etc.
says Gregory Nazianzen; the very Heathen could both acknowledge and practice
this. So then this stands as one of the Priests upon a turret of the Temple, or
as a monitor to tell us what praise belongs not to our selves. Prove. 27. 2. Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger, and not thine
own lips; This is Pharisee-like, Luke 18. Because he had slow neighbors, he
becomes his own trumpet, and sounds an Alarm to his own folly: this is but
a cold praise, Friget laus quam sibi quisque assumit, nulla necessita. te
coactus. Pineda super Job, cap. 29. ver. 12. n. 5.
to blow the coals with thine own breath. This fault was sometimes in the
Church of C^^inth, 1 Cor. 4. 7. which the Apostle reproves, Who makes thee to
differ from another? and what have thou that thou have not received? (gifts of
mind, as learning, wisdom; gifts of body, strength, agility, beauty) if thou
have received them, why boastest thou as if thou had not received them? P^ter
Martyr.
Which is a Metaphor taken from swollen vessels, super locum.
which have in them nothing but air: Or from some member in the body sweld
with rotten putrefaction, and corrupt humors; Know then, that every good and
perfect gift comes down from the Father of lights, Iam. 1. 17. This is the
groundworke of all Christian modesty. Have thou Faith? It is from thy calling:
have thou Remission of sins, and Justification? It is from Christ: The gift
of Prayer, Prophecy, Preaching, or of the Tongues? it is from the Spirit: all
which or whatsoever else thou have, Marlorat. sup. locum.
do offer thee occasions of humility and modesty, more than of pride or
haughtines, because thou have received them. Yet consider this, that a man may
speak in his own praise, in the case of necessity, when a man's person or
cause is calumniated; or whereby the glory of God may be advanced, to the
credit of his calling, and the profit of the Church; as Paul the most modest of
the Apostles, as appears, 1 Cor. 15. 9, I am the least of the Apostles, which
am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God;
ashamed, and yet not ashamed to confess, 1 Timothy 1. 15. A blasphemer, a
persecuter, and injurious, the chief of all sinners. As B. Jewel defended his
learning against the railing Papists.
Yet when the credit of his calling came into question, and the wondrous work
of God in him seemed to be disparaged by false Apostles, he was then a chief
Apostle, one that spoke more languages than they all, Vide Plutarch. in
Comentario, Qua ratione quis citra invidiam laudare seipsum potest.
had more revelations, and was more extraordinarily called, and if any one may
boast, this holy elect vessel of salvation, the learned Doctor of the Gentiles
may boast, and will praise himself, and so may you.

Neither must we hunt after others, to praise us: where there is good Wine,
there needs no Ivie-bush, and where there is true worth, there needs no
flatterer. It is but a poor reputation, that is pinned upon another man's
Tongue, and hangs upon the sound of his clapper: This man must be left as a
prey for his Parmeno, and carry with him the badge of Pride, Qui laudare se
appetit, superbus esse convincitur. Super Psalm. 5.
as Augustine says; He that desires to be praised, needs no other witness
of his ambitious heart, and the apparent danger of a swelling Impostume.

Neither must we settle our admiration and praise upon any particular Person
or Sect, to pin our salvation only upon them, as if they were the only
Oracles of GOD, to account of them as the people voyced of Herod, Act. 12. 22.
The voice of God and not of Man. And thus to despise others, as not
sufficiently guifted for their calling and embassage: what is this, but to have
men's persons in admiration? The Apostle accounts such to be but Carnal, 1. Corinthians. 3. 3. For ye are yet Carnal, there being among you envying, strife,
and divisions, are ye not carnal, and walk as men? While one says, I am of
Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal? For what is Paul, or
Apollos, but the Ministers by whom ye believe? Peter Martyr.
Nihil aliud molitur Apostolus, nisi quod personarum ratio non habeatur in
Ecclesia: In this, the Apostle aims at nothing else, Aquinas, super locum.
but that there should be no Prosopolepsie, or acception of persons in the
Church. He reproves their judgment in this, because they gave to their
Ministers more than was requisite and expedient; as if the Spirit of God were
too sparing in some, and too lavish and prodigail in others.

Object. Object.
But it may be objected, Valentinian the godly Emperor, would be Baptized by
none but Ambrose.

Answ. Answ.
The reason is apparent, not to be respect of persons which caused him to
travail for Baptism to Ambrose: but because the Bishops of that time were
generally possessed with Arianisme, and scarce one so sound as Ambrose was, the
cause why he repaired thither. But where Idolatry is banished, Heresy
demolished, the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments established, and sincerely
delivered and administered, Christ himself being the head and President over
his Church, giving gifts unto all that he sends, though to some more, to some
less, yet to all sufficient for their Calling, Ephesians. 4. 11: We must not, we
ought not, (if we will escape the brand and mark of c^rnall men) have men's
persons in admiration, in setting one so far before another, to make them
more than Christ himself ever made them, which is, to be instruments for the
gathering of his Church. It was his own admonition, Mat. 23. 8. Be ye not
called R^^bi, for one is your Master, which is Christ: and he must be heard if
he come in stammering Moses, as well as in eloquent Paul, or courtly Esaias, in
the weakest and poorest of them, Mat. 3. 17. and Math. 17. 5. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him.

Neither must we idolatrously magnify the creature, to shrink in, and pinche,
and pin up too straight, the large glory of the Creator. The wise man, Wisd.
14. 15. laying down the groundwork of all Idolatry, and spiritual
fornication, says thus; A Father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he had
made an Image of his child soon taken away, now honored him as a God, which
was then a dead man, and delivered to those that were under him, ceremonies and
Sacrifices. Thus we see, out of the heat of a too ardent and earnest love,
transported in a preposterous current, that is soon taken from the Creator,
and given to the creature; and where that true-loving affection of man is
placed, there is way made for Idolatry, if not rightly and strongly guided by
the Spirit of Grace and thus we may offend even in things that are most dear,
most near unto us, in our wives, children, self love etc. as 1 Samuel 2. 29.
Eli honored his children more than God. Ambition in the disobedience of our
first Parents, in a self love to themselves, is made the way to that fearful
Apostasy; hence covetous men are called Idolaters, Ephesians. 5. 5. Col. 3. 5. Mammon
is the Idol, and the worldling the Priest that sacrifices to their imprisoned
god, as the Giants Aloydae did to their captived Mars: And upon this he
bestows a double worship; an inward, for he loves, desires, delights, and
trusts in his wealth: and an outward, for he spends most of his time upon his
Idol, in gathering carefully, keeping watchfully, increasing painefully, and
honoring dutifully his carved and painted God; and yet the dust of earthly
profits has put out both his eyes, that he sees not his horrible Idolatry.
The like we see, Wisd. 13. 1. etc. The madness of man! first to ascribe the
praise due to the Creator, to stocks and stones, creatures insensible;
Secondly to men, which are but dust and ashes, verse. 18. for health he calls
to that which is weak: Thirdly to wicked men, the worst of reasonable
creatures; and then even to Devils the enemies of God and man, they gave that
incommunicable name of God; Thus by little and little, the Devil brought on
the highest pitch of Idolatry, making the ways of men and their Religion as
uncertain, as Hanniball's crooked passages upon the Alps; That fools make a
mock at sin, Pro. 14. 9. and they err in their hearts, not knowing the
ways of God, Psalm. 95. 10. Thus when we will set our hearts upon these
sublunary and terrestrial vanities, it is just with God, Supplicij causa est
suppliciumque sui.
to make our ignorance both our sin, and our punishment, that the ignorant
Idolater may complain with the wicked, Wisd. 5. 6. Therefore have we erred
from the way of truth, and the light of righteousness has not shined upon us,
and the Sun of righteousness rose not upon us; we wearied our selves in the
way of wickedness and destruction, yea we have walked through deserts, where
there lay no way, but for the way of the Lord, we have not known it.

Neither must we, with these bezling Bacchanalians of Belshazzar (swallowing
his last draught in the sacred bolles, which his father had sacrilegiously
taken from the Temple) drink wine, and praise the Gods of gold, Silver, Iron,
brass wood, Dan. 5. 4. neglecting to praise and glorify the God, in whose
hand our breath is, and whose are all our ways; sacrificing to our cups and
our cannes, our nets and our navigations. Thus as though we had made an
atonement with death, and an agreement with hell, Esaias 28. 15. Though we be
poisoned with the drowsy venom of the Aspe, securely snorting in the fools
Paradise, and enchaunted castle of this ebrietie, swimming in the charmed cupps
of Calypso, and the dangerous drugges of Circes, we are for all this, in no
more saftety than ^ man sleeping in the midst of the Sea, or upon the top of
the tottering maste of a ship, Pro. 23 34. and though it have the face of
beauty, yet in the end it bites like a Serpent, armed in the tail with the
sting of a Cockatrice; How Odys.
and though we miss the heavy doom of Elpenor who in this madness was sent
to the grave, if not to the horrible pit with a broken neck: Yet let every
intemperate Hellu^, and grape-devouring panther (the ancient Hierogly phicke
of this vice) know that without his speedy amendment, his belly is his God, and
he glories in his shame, and a fearful destruction waits his cursed end,
Phil. 3. 18. For he is a lover of pleasure more than of God, 2 Timothy 3. 4.

Neither must we place in this our Hallelu-jah an admiration of any
superstition, be it as ancient as the Embryons world, in its nonage, like
those Ephesians, Acts 19. 28. for their she god Diana; erring in the knowledge
of the true God, which is a spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and
truth, Io. 4 24. or like those famosed Idolaters, Ier. 44. 17. We will burn
incense to the Queen of heaven, and power out drink offerings unto her, as
we have done and our Fathers, our Kings and Princes have done in the Cities of
Judah, and in the Streets of Jerusalem; for then had we plenty of all things,
we were then well, and saw no evil.

See we not this foolish generation to continue? Vide Moresinum de origin and
incremento Papatus.
praising the superstitious times of heathenderived Popery, even wholly sprung
out of superstitious Gentilisme, as has bin proved; their outward shows, and
their antique fashions in crossing, creeping, washing, elevating their newmade
god, etc. that we might wonder at them, as sometime M. Cato did, Cic. lib. 2.
de Divinat.
to see their charmers, because one of them laughed not to see another in their
antique and apish Idolatries, which are more fit to please babes, than any way
to satisfy the conscience of man: all in the shadow, nothing in the
substance. If these then, or any such have forestalled the market of our
affections, and have taken a lodging in our hearts, let us deal with them as
Jacob did with his false Gods, or as Ephraim with his Idols, cast them out: And
let the current of our affections run in the right stream, and be fixed on the
right object, Praise ye the Lord.

Whence and from what has bin spoken, and the natural genuine sense of the
words themselves, let us erect for our supportance in this duty, the doctrine
following, viz.

It is a chief duty necessarily enjoined to all creatures and especially to
man, Doct. 1.
to become instruments of the glorious praise of their omnipotent Creator. This
was the gracious practice of old Zachary, Luke 1. 68. for receiving his
graceful son John, supposed to be the Messiah, Ioh. 1. 21. a blessing from
God no sooner given but a blessing from man returned, Blessed be the Lord God
of Israel, etc. rightly called in the language of Canaan, a blessing;
ingratitude being the devils text, wicked men the Glossers and Expositors, both
which must end in a cursed destruction. Blessed Marie in her song calls it a
magnifying, Luke 1. 46. My soul does magnify the Lord. Deus Optimus Maximus.
To magnify, is to make great: Now God is the best, the greatest, and cannot
in himself be made lesser or greater by us; all that we can do, either in the
magnifying or vilifying of him, is in regard of others, when we swear falsely,
protest rashly, blaspheame like an Atheist or Turk; we do to our power,
Magnificare nihil aliud est quam magnum facere. Lexicon Theologicum.
lessen his greatness, when we unthankefully return not his due praise for his
mercies, we vilipend and debase as much as we can his gracious goodness, and
when we magnify him, we make him great, we proclaim him good.

To make this more plain, and to drive this duty deeper into our souls; it
is in regard of us, the end of our election, foreseen in the mercy and love of
God before the foundation of the World, as over-looking our estate in Adam, as
changeably good, to that in Christ, immutably glorious, Ephesians 1. 6 To the
praise of his glorious Grace. It is the end of our creation, even enjoined to
insensible animals, the visible and legible book of our instruction and
lessoning in this duty, the sun, Psalm. 150. last verse.
moon, day, night, Psalm. 19. 1. and every thing that has breath are summoned
by David's Trumpet, to become the well uned Cymball of their Creators praise.
But Man, the rare Epitome of all these, has an instrument of speech, to tune
it to a higher key, Rev. 4. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive honor and
praise, for thou have created all things for thy wills sake, and for thy
pleasures sake were they created. It is the end of our redemption, Rev. 5. 9.
Thou art worthy to take the book and open the seals thereof, for thou wast
slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood. And thus I must instance in
the rest, even to the lowest particular deliverance, from the hellish; and the
highest, to the least and lowest danger, as Exodus 15. Judge. 5. etc. no sooner a
deliverance, but a song of thanks giving to the deliverer: And it is the sum
of what thy God for this requires of thee, Psalm. 50. 15. Call upon me in the
time of trouble, I will deliver thee, and thou shall praise me.

Reas. Reas. 1.
1. Because as all rivers come from the sea, and return thither again,
returning as it were a thankful tribute to their Lord: Even so all things
come from the Father of lights, Iam. 1 17. which are for our good, as from the
fountain of goodness, and must, or at least ought in thankfulness to
return to him again: All the gifts of fortune, falsely so called, as riches
and possessions; the graceful endowments of the body, as agility, beauty,
strength; all the goods of the mind, as wit, learning: No silver in Benjamins
sack, till Joseph put it in; and no good in man except God bestow it: Even
that noble skill in physic, standing upon two legs, Reason and Experience,
Galenus.
is an excellent means to preserve our health; and yet for all this, it is the
great Doctor, which has Heaven for his chair, that keeps us alive; for so
soon as he is angry, we are gone, we bring our years to an end, as a tale
that is told, Psalm. 90. 9. If the keepers of our house do not tremble, Eccles.
12. 1. 2. 3. etc.
and the grinders cease not, and the golden ewer be not broken, and our eyes
the windows of our bodies, be not dark, it is from the Father of lights.

Hence renowned Solomon, and all the learned Clearkes have their wisdom; and
the same it was, which took away that great knowledge from the learned
Trapezuntius, Volateran: lib. 21. Comment. Funcius et Bucholcerus in Chronic.
lib. 7.
who was not only infatuated in his learning, cap. 13.
but forgot his own name: Hence are all students counseled by Sarisburiensis
in Policratico, to knock at heaven gate to God for their good speed, that the
key of knowledge may open a door of utterance. So there are diversities of
gifts, diversities of administrations, and diversities of operations, but all
from the same Spirit, and from the same Lord, who works all in all, 1 Cor.
12. Among the Apostles, Paul was good at planting, Apollos at watering. Among
the Fathers, some construed the Scriptures all egorically, as Origin who
excelled others either in effect or defect; Vbi been, nemo melius, ubi male,
nemo pejus.
Augustine dogmatically; Hierome more literally; Gregory the great Morrally;
Sixtus Senen: hibl lib. 3. page 1^ 7.
and Chrysostom pathetically. And also among our modern writers, Erasmus was
full of matter and words, In Celloquio de Erasmo.
Luther had store of matter without many words, Carolostadius neither etc. as
Luther himself wrote upon the walls of his Chamber: So also among our ordinary
Preachers, some have good utterance, but a bad conceit; some an excellent
utterance, but a mean wit; some both, some neither. As for the gifts
appertaining to the will, 2 Cor. 3. 5. All our sufficiency is of God. For
faith, which (as some think) belongs both to the will and understanding, it
is also the gift of God, 10. 6. 29. This is the gift of God, that ye believe on
him, whom he has sent. God works in man, the first desire to believe, De
spiritu and litera, cap. 34.
ipsumvelle credere, says Augustine; The staying of the bloody flux of thy
corruption comes from some virtue in Christ, Mar. 5. 30 The purging of thy
lips from lying, swearing, blaspheaming etc. is by a coal from the Altar,
Esaias 6. 6. The gift of Prayer powerfully soliciting the throne of mercy,
Quisquis tibi enuxerat vera merita sua, quid tibi enumerita nisi munera tua?
August. Conf. lib. 9. cap. 13.
and filling heaven and earth with Abba father, proceeds from none but the
Spirit which makes intercession for us with groans, which cannot be expressed,
Romans 8. 26. The tongue of the learned, it is from the Lord, Esaias, Bonamea, dona
tua.
50. 4. If thou had the zeal, love, constancy, knowledge of those noble
Patriarchs, Aug. Confess.
and those constant Martyrs, lib. 10. cap. 4.
in the Primitive times, every drop of whose blood bred and sprung up a new
Saint; if thou were glorious as an Angel, thy meat as Manna, thy garments as
Aarons Ephod, thy breath as sweet, as the perfume of the Tabernacle, from the
life of Nature, to the life of Grace, and so to the life of Glory, all is from
this Fountain which is God.

Nay, even that thou art not wicked, as the most debauched creature in the
world, it is from the supporting and restrayning grace of God, upon whom thou
leanest, in the wilderness of this world, as the Spouse upon her beloved,
Cant. 8. Or as Moses hands were supported by Aaron and Hur, Exodus 17. 12. Or as
the Altar of the Sanctuary at the base thereof had Lions for supporters; so
thou, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; else how is it in man to direct his ways
aright without this? Cephas in the Syriack tongue a Stone.
Though Peter, a Petra, a Rock, surnamed Cephas, for his steadfastness, yet
fell into a fearful Apostacy: Godly David, molded in the mint of
Regeneration, into Adultery and Murder; these, and much more had thou
committed, if God had not prevented. Marshall then all thy gifts and graces
together, let them face one another, as the Cherubins upon the Mercy-seate, and
all look upon God; For of him, and through him, and for him are all things,
Romans 11. 36.

Because it is a great part of Gods worship, Reas. 2.
and even the most of that service, which he requires at the hands of silly
Men, David in his Quaere makes it the sum of all, Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Poculum Eucharistiae.
but only this, I will take the cup of thanksgiving, Gratiarum actio, est
actus la^^ig. ^quinas.
and call upon the name of the Lord. For this purpose it is called a sacrifice
of praise, Heb. 13. 15. The calves of our lips, and the first fruit of
faith, Acts 2. 46. It is his honor, and that he will not give to another;
Sing unto the Lord a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth etc.
Esaias 42. 10.

To teach us, Use. 1.
not only to condemn in ourpractise, that ingratitude, which is a monster in
nature: As we call the grateful man, a kind man; so the ungrateful an
unnatural, an absurd soloecisme in manners, consisting of two foul vices,
falsehood in not acknowledging, injustice in not requiting a benefit. Alexander
the Great, and Julius Caesar, both renowned, the one for liberality, the other
for patience; the one would not give, nor the other forgive an ungrateful
person. Not only this; but forasmuch as every one arrogates a due performance
of this duty, Aug Euthim^us super Psalm. ult.
To teach us how to tread right in the steps of his service; And to this
purpose consider, that God is praised 1. vocally, as sing to the Lord, 2.
Chordally, praise him upon the Harp, 3. Pneumatically, with Trumpets, Shawmes,
Cimbals, etc. when our breath is the bellows, Clemens Alexandrinus.
4. Allegorically, in our actions, contemplations, words, works, life, death,
being not only temples, 1 Cor. 3. 16. but also timbrels of the Holy Ghost. Know
then that thy right praising and magnifying of God is thy obedience to his
voice, his law, Noli gloriari quod lingua been dicis, si vita male dicis. Super
Psalm. 133.
his Gospel, etc. Never boast, says Augustine, that thou blessest with thy
mouth, when thou cursest with thy life and conversation: It is not only thy
breath, but thy breast, thy song, but thy soul; thy voice, but thy life, that
must be this Davidicall trump of praise and thanksgiving. 1 Pet. 2. 12. Have
your conversation honest among the Gentiles, and by this means they which are
yet without, and strangers from God, shall have occasion to glorify God in the
day of their visitation. Math. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Our
praise is our obedience; and our obedience is nothing else, Damascen lib. 3.
cap. 4.
but a subiecting of our will to God. So that it is with every disobedient
person (though he can marshall his words, and adorn his phrase, that they be
like apples of gold with pictures of Silver, Prove. 25, 11.) as with a secretly
disloyal traitor, who in the chamber of Presence is highly extolling and
commending the King, the State, and Government; but being without the Court
gate, is opening his poisonous jaws, and casting whole Seas of contumelious
reproaches, and outrageous slanders against the same; who will take this for a
true subject? and who will account a wicked man the servant of God, though with
his tongue he praise God, when he speaks nothing but contradiction in his life
and conversation? This false and pseudo-christianity makes the Gospel and
sincere professors thereof, and even God himself to be traduced; and as Jacob
was accounted with the Sichemites; Ye have troubled me (speaking to his cruel
sons) to make me stincke among the inhabitants of the land, Genesis 34. 30. For
this cause, Romans 2. 24. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles,
through you, professing to know God, but in works denying him, being
abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1: 16.

And hence we see plainly the reason and groundwork of those foul
aspersions, daily slanders, and Ismaelitish songs of Turks, Jews, Infidels,
and Papists, which are daily cast as dirt into the face of Christianity, to be
only our dissolute lives, disobedient carriages, and disordered conversation,
Salvianus de guhernatione Dei, lib. 4.
Christiani hoc ipso deteriores, quo meliores esse deberent, Christians are so
much the worse, as they ought to be better; Either then be as thou seem, or
seem as thou art, else thou art but like the little bird with the great voice,
which the Fowler only hearing, and thinking her to be some great foul, took
pains to take her; and seeing her little body ill able to countervaile his
pains, Tues vox and nihil praeterea.
he said, Thou art a voice, an Echo, an empty outward sound, and nothing else.
Know then that all thine orall profession, superficial adoration, and
Pharisaicall sepulcher-like gilded outside, is in Gods account without the
inward subjection of the heart to his holy laws, no better than to cut off a
dogs neck, to offer swines flesh or to bless an Idol, Esaias 66. 3. so long
as thy heart is unsanctified, wanting the salt of Grace, 2 Kings 2.
and remaining unwholesome as the poisonous waters of Bethel, Christ rejects
thy lip-praises, and outward service as the sacrifice of fools. Psalm. 50. 16.
Unto the wicked says God, Why do thou preach my laws, and take my
covenant into thy mouth? whereas thou hate to be reformed, and have cast my
words behind thee. Christ will not suffer the Devil, the father of lies, to
bear witness of his truth, Mar. 1. 24. and Paul will not suffer the
Pythonesse to proclaim the truth, O tempora, O mores!
Acts, 16. 18. O then the rottenness of our times! how is our obedience (if we
have any) cut short, and we are become like that speech of Phavorinus, A.
Gellius Nost. Attic.
who seeing a mother communicating her motherly duty to the nurse of her child,
cried out, Quodnam est hoc imperfectum and dividiatum matrum genus? What a
company of halfe-faced, and halfe-faithed imperfect Christian Herod's, Agrippas,
Naamans, whose obedience and religion is pinned upon their profits, pleasures?
like those Libertines, Mal. 3. 14. What profit is it, that we have walked
humbly before him? These be but lefthanded Ehuds, or as children which say
their prayers to have their breakefasts; or as the Sichemites, which took upon
them the Seal of the Covenant for gain, Genesis 34. Or as those that followed
Christ, more for the loaves, than for the love, Io. 6. That come to Church, as
most do to a Funeral, more to fill their bellies, than to lament the dead, or
to comfort the widow, or the Orphans. But remember Christian, that God requirs
the whole man, to fulfill his whole law, and that the whole time of his life,
Totum hominem, totam legem, totum tempus.
Totus, tota, totum, are required; but further God requires, Phil 2. 10. That
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven and things in
earth, and things under the earth, and every mouth must confess him. And yet I
see a rank of worse Locusts issuing as it were out of the pit, even openly
by their open profaneness, and horrible blasphemies, proclaiming themselves
to be men of stubborn knees, stiff necks, and uncircumcised hearts, openly
with Bebemoth, Leviathan, or Satan himself, or at least with those Gyant-like
sons of the earth proclaiming rebellion and disobedience against the most
High: These shame at nothing but virtue, and blush at nothing but honesty: Of
whom it may be said, as Mecaenas spoke of the saucy fellow, that would not
bow to Caesar, Hic homo crubescit timere Caesarem.
This man is ashamed to fear or reverence Caesar: so these men are ashamed to
fear God, and blush at nothing, but against their wills to wear the livery of
Christianity; Surely these men go down to the Chambers of death, if not to
the pit of destruction. Let us then prove God to be our Father by our
obedience, and our Master by our fear, Mal. 1. 6. Let it not be in word only,
but in deed, as John spoke of Love, 1 John 3. 18. or as Socrates when the
people admiringly praised his oration, Lauda ut videam.
said, Praise it, that I may see it. Obedience is better than all our
sacrifice, 1 Samuel 15. 22. preferred by God himself, Hos. 6. 6. whereas
rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft. Obey my voice, and I will be your God,
and ye shall be my people, this is a favor of rest unto God, therefore, Let
every one that names the Lord, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy, 2. 19.

We praise God, Use 2.
when we acknowledge his Kingdom, power, and glory, and ascribe them unto him
as his due. This our Savior CHRIST teaches, Math. 6. 13. after he had taught
us how to pray for things inward, outward, spiritual, temporal, all things
needfully requisite for soul and body; in the conclusion he teaches us to
give thanks, and that in the acknowledgeing his Kingdom, power, and glory.

Now forasmuch as the infinite and ineffable essence of God, cannot be fully
comprehended of the weak vessel of mortality, Man; he being eternal, and
which inhabiteth eternity, Esaias 57. 15. the Ancient of days, King of ages, 1 Timothy 1. 17. he made the times the word eternal in Hebers language being taken
from a root; which signifies to lie hid, teaching us, that our knowledge is
not able to find out the hidden being of the Almighty, being but weak, and in
part, 1 Cor. 13. 12. only seeing as it were, a glimpse of one suddenly
passing by, the more full knowledge of him is reserved till we be made like
him, and see him as he is, Deus est circulus.
1 John 3. 2. even face to face, 1 Cor. 13. 12. To desire any full knowledge of
his inscrutable essence, Cic. de natura Deorum.
is to lose our selves in a maze, or labyrinth, and with Simonides to add unto
one days labor in the search thereof, three days more, and be further off
then when we began; Socrat. lib. 6. Tripart. Eust.
and with the Child, we may as soon bring the whole Ocean into a little pit,
as with the old man paint the Trinity on a table: cap. 21.
And therefore when Evagnius had heard a long disputation of the Trinity, he
wisely concluded, that it was without the compass of any logical definition.
So because our weak vessel cannot sail with safety over this innavigable
Ocean, he has revealed himself by his back-parts, Exodus 34. 6, His Power,
mercy, Longanimity, Justice, etc. Romans 1. 20. The invisible things of him from
the creation of the World, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made; even his eternal power, and Godhead; and so by acknowledging
these, by humbling our selves under his mighty hand, 1 Pet. 5. 6. and by
fearing him, that cannot only kill the body, but also cast the soul into hell
fire, Math. 10. 28: We praise his power, acknowledging what he can do, the
whole army of his creatures, N Olans de Attila.
and hell being at his command: The strongest tyrant in the world (as Attila
confessed of himself) is but his scourge, which when he has used to the
sufficient chastising of his Church, he will cast into the fire, as the Father
does the rod, which he used in whipping his child. Pilatus sibiipsi intulit
manus Niceph.
Look upon Pharaoh, Herod, Pilate, Heliodorus, which are spectacles of Gods
power, sometimes their own hands their own executioners; lib. 2. cap. 10.
even Tophet is their portion, and cap. 13. de morte Herodis: suiipsius
interemptor divina ultione factus.
Esaias 30. He is a consuming fire, Hebr. 12. last verse, to burn up his
enemies: and as weak stubble is not able to withstand that furious element;
Euseh lib. 2. ca. 7. Eccl hist.
no more can a weak man the omnipotent Creator. Take heed then how thou
offendest him, Josephus lib. 28 Act. cap. 5.
but acknowledge him in his wisdom, Eutropius lib. 7.
power, etc. and seek him while he may be found.

Then hear this all ye abusers of the glory of God, Glory, put for all that
may be known of God as Exodus 33. 18
Romans 23. Which change the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image of
corruptible man and to birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping things,
contemners of him in his Kingdom, power, and glory; that say with those
drunken Atheists, Esaias 28 15. The overflowing scourge shall pass through, and
not come nigh us, for we have made lies our refuge. Ye that put far away the
evil day, and suffer the seat of violence to enter, Amos 6. 3. that say, The
vision is yet for many days to come, and he prophecieth of times a far off,
Ezec. 12. 27. That hear the thunder claps of judgment against thy bribery,
usury, oppression, etc. and yet with the deaf adder stoppest thine ears
charm the charmer never so wisely; what is this, Aelian. varia Historia Lib. 4.
but even to mock God in his power, and glory, and to say with Pherecides, We
are as safe, that offer no sacrifice, as they that offer whole Hecatombes? What
is this but to play with Gods sacred book, and his truth therein, as Daphias
with the Diabolical Delphicke Oracle? who enquiring, where he might find his
lost horse, Inventurum se quidem, sed ut eo turbatus perierat, Cic. de Fato.
when he had none; the Oracle answered, he should find one indeed, but his
death with it: Homeward he comes joyfully, that he had deluded the Oracle, but
by the way was commanded by King Attalus to be thrown down a rock called a
Horse.

Though this be fabulous, yet the moral will surely fall heavy upon all the
despisers of God in his power and glory, and the enemies of his kingdom, even
to crush them to destruction in the furnace of Gods implacable wrath. Consider
this ye that forget God, Psalm. 50. 22.

We must learn hence to praise God in his creatures, Use. 3.
in acknowledging his uncontroleable sovereignty and Lordship over them, that
he is only that which the flattering Parasites would have given to Canutus one
of the Kings of England, English Chronicle.
who styled him Ruler and Lord of Sea and Land; Polyd Virgil. lib. 7. Anglicae
Historiae.
which he modestly confuted, when going to the sea side, and sitting in his
chair of State, he would but could not command the waves of the watery
regiment, no more than Pharaoh could the red Sea. Esaias 44. 24. I am Iehova that
made all things, therefore his by right of Creation, and thence requires his
honor and praise in the moderate use of them: He is the Landlord, thou the
tenant, and that at will; he may put thee out of thy earthen tabernacle when
he will, though thou be a freeholder, yet (as the lawyer speaks) not without
impeachment of Waste; a lease thou have indeed with a large scope, but yet with
this proviso, John 6. 12. Let nothing be lost. The Almighty as the head of this
great house, the World, as he has created all things and given them their
being, Luke 16. 1. (...); sic Scorpius a vastando violas. Arist. Plin. Dioscor.
so he will surely take a strickt account of their waste, Luke 16. 2. How do I
hear this of thee? give an account of thy stewardship: He is arraigned for a
matter of waste in the first verse; which word there used, seems to be taken
from the Scorpion, which wilfully wastes the sweet smelling Violets. How have
thou increased thy talents, and not bezeled and imbezled them away, to the
dishonor of thine and their Creator? The creatures abused to the dishonor of
their Chiefe-Lord even groan under thee; the Sun blushes to be made a God, 2
King. 23. 5. The high places are ashamed of their idolatrous Chamarims burning
incense there; the Fire of the Persian, the Crocodile of the Egyptian, the
Gold and Silver of the Jew, which made Baal thereof: Only the shameless
Devil is not ashamed of his worshippers in Calecute, etc: If we considered
this, and Gods Lordship over them, we would not be thus impudently bold in the
abuse of them. And first in this matter let us arraigne the proud man: To what
end is this waste? to lay lands and livings upon his back, to make it glister.
God indeed has not only allowed garments for necessity; Genesis 3 21. a
leatherne coat for Adam; but also ornaments for comlines, Esther 6. 11. royal
roabs for Mordecai: They that are in Kings houses wear and are allowed to
wear soft raiment. But those antique fashions both God and nature, and the
laws of all Countries have always condemned as irreligious and wicked, those
being marred in the making, Propter venustatem invenustae. Chrysostom. Ornamentum
est quod ornat, ornat quod honestiorem facit.
as one spoke of fantastique women, spoiling and defacing those genuine graces,
and natural beauty, which nature from a liberal hand has bestowed upon them.
That does beautify, which does beatifie, making our graces more gracious, and
our souls more happy. The ridiculous chain of pride, Psalm. 73. 6, and the
foolish fashions of the Jews, Esaias 3. 16. that now puffes up thy soul like a
tympany, making thy body bright, as Herod's drawing the eyes of admiration after
it; will one day without repentance accuse thee for a waster to the great God
and Lord of the Creatures.

Next comes to the bar, as guilty of Waste, De grege porcorum. Horat.
the fat bellyed swollen guts, the Epicure, a dishonourer of the Creator in the
abuse of the creature, meat and drink. Hebraice.
Agur, Prove. 30. 8. prays for food convenient, or the food of allowance: But
must feed of all dishes, Jerome.
and knows no mean but surfeit, Apicius had 1000. Cooks.
makes his morsel his god, in mea patria Deus venture, his belly, his Bell, his
idol, like Aesops hen, too fat to lay, to produce any fruits of goodness;
Dives-like faring deliciously every day: Sense his purveyor, Appetite his
Steward, his throat his heaven, like sensual Philoxenus, that wished his
throat like a Cranes, more fully to delight his bestiall part. Solomon, Prove.
23. 25. joins a twinne of the same womb, The drunkard, and the glutton shall
come unto poverty; He likewise dishonours God in his creatures, Esaias 5. 22.
There is a woe hangs over him, like Damocles sword at his delicates, tied by a
slender hair, while he carowses his condemnation, and fears not: Dr. Boys.
Non dispensat, sed dissipat bona Domini.
Either of these are a morbus hydropicus, a Baltazzars sin, while he does not
wisely dispense as a steward, but blindely scatter as a waster of his
Mastersgoods, and so must pass as a prodigal unthrift.

Again, we dishonor God in his creatures, when they are made instruments
against the godly, whom the whole host of Heaven and earth desire to serve and
comfort, from the highest Angel to the poorest worm. Heb. 1. 14. Are they not
all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes, which shall be
heirs of salvation. Psalm. Angele Dei, qui custos es mei, etc.
91. 11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy
ways. Math. 4. 11. Christ in the heat of his temptation, has Angels to
comfort him. Math. 18. 10. The elect, even the little ones have Angels:
Distressed Hagar is comforted by an heavenly messenger, Genesis 16. 7. Jacob by a
vision of celestial spirits, Genesis 32. 2. Thus were the Israelites conducted,
Exodus 14. 19 What need I speak of Joshua, Ios. 5. 13.
Gideon, Elija, etc. nay even Sun and Moon, Judge. 6. 11.
with every star in the glorious firmament, 1 Kings 19.
all fight for the Church. Iud. Miitat ^ther Lucan.
5. 2. They fought in their order from heaven, even the stars in their
courses, the river Kishon, stood not idle, but swept them away as a besome does
the filth in the house: The sea gives way to the passage of Gods people, and
heapeth together his fluctuant fluide moisture, to make them a dried pavement,
Exodus 14. 22. Ios. 10. 12, had experience of this from the help of heaven in
their defense against the Amorites; so that sea, land, heaven, and the whole
host of the creatures would do service to the Godly. Hence the creature
groans to be made an instrument of torture by a Tyrant, to whom he is
appointed a minister of comfort by his maker, as the fire to burn, the water
to drown Gods servants, abused to this end by the earth, or rather hell-sprung
Giants of the world. And as the creature groans to be an engine to hurt the
godly, so is it weary of those that dishonor him, an enemy to Gods enemies,
Atheists, Idolaters, Swearers, etc. the Sun would cloud, and obnubilate his
glorious face, the Moon her light, the Cressets of heaven their twinkling
luster, from the rebellious, idolatrous, disobedient sinner, that has so long
viewed and enjoyed their excellent comfort continually cast from those
crystal eyes of heaven, and is not lessoned by them to praise his God; Vesta,
a vistando.
the Vestall-earth mourns under the burden of a rebellious Nation, every
furrow thereof cries against the depopulating Incloser, Weep against him.
Hebraice.
Job 31. 38. The stones and timber where the wicked man dwells, Hab. 2. 11.
All he possesses is his enemy, because he is an enemy to God; witness these
ten Plagues powered upon Egypt both from heaven and earth, Tota creatura est
armatura Dei.
all the creatures are Gods army to fight against them that fight against him.
So then, if thou be a blasphemer, Persecuter, etc. were thou in a City, whose
walls were as strong turretted, and inexpugnable, as the wall that Phocas built
about his Palace, Civitatis eversio est morum non muror^m casus.
yet shall it be really performed on thee, as it was voyced to him in the
night, Did they teach the heavens, they may be scaled, the sin in the soul
spoils all: Graviores inimici sunt mores pravi quam hosts infesti.
A cities overthrow is sooner wrought by wicked lives, than weak walls, says
Augustine; they worst enemies are thy finnes, says Ambrose; so the host of
creatures are thine enemies, while thou have no peace with God; peace and
wickedness cannot dwell together: Mars vltor galeam perdidit, and res non
potuit servare suas.
The heathen gods indeed, could not revenge their own quarrels, as the Poet
speaks of Mars; but our God has heaven, earth, and hell to fight his battles,
a thousand ways to revenge, mill nocendi arts. Wicked man! why do thou
continue in thy sins, and say with stupid phara^, Who is the Lord? When thou
can not breathe, moove, or live without him.

Learn then like the Be to gather honey from every flower, In caula de aula,
in hara de ara loquitur.
to give praise from every creature; all objects to a meditating Solomon are
wings to mount his thoughts to heaven; as the old Romans seeing the blewe
stones, were put in mind of Olympus; so from every creature to elevate our
thoughts to Sion, and so we may honor God in honoring him in his creatures.
Whether ye eat or drink, Do all to the glory of God, in all things give
thanks, 1 These. 5. 18. Every creature is good, and ought not to be refused, if
it be received with thanksgiving, Ingratum si dixeris omnia dixeris Plaut.
1 Timothy 4. 4. Be not then an unthankful Esau, to sit down, eat, drink,
enjoy the creatures, Ingratitudo obstring it manus Dei. Marlorat.
and irreverently rise up, and go thy way. Gratitude opens, ingratitude pens
up and closes the wine cellars, the heavens; the buckets and cisternes of the
sky are ready to shower upon the thankful. Praise the Lord, makes the heavens
as Nilus Egypt, fertile.

Lastly, to drive this Hallelu-jah deeper into thy Soul, consider that thou
not only have the creature from God, but also he must give it power to comfort,
nourish, and sustain thee. There is indeed bread that nourishes not, Esaias 55.
2. Why do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and labor for that
which satisfies not; it seems, but is not bread, and if it be, it satisfies
not; Such is that bread of secrecies, and waters of stealth, Prove. Pabula
peccati, pocula lethi.
9. 17. The delicates and cates that sin sets before us, deadly cups, and
Acheronticke potions, Z^uxes painted grapes to feed the devils black birds to
meager leanness: But God gives the creature power and strength; Exodus 23. 25.
It is not thy meat, drink, sleep, clothes, that of themselves do nourish
and warm thee more than the hard and cold stone, but Gods blessing upon them,
Math. 4:4. Man lives not by bread only, but by the word and blessing of God;
Else might thou starve in the midst of thy plenty: Dan. 1. 15. see Psalm. 104.
13. 14. 15.
The poor man with Daniel may be as well liking with pulse and pure water, as
they that eat of the portion of the Kings meat; may go as warm in his
rags, as they in Kings houses, that are clothed in soft raiment, if God
bless his bread and water, Exodus 23 25. Thus when God threatens a famine and
dearth, he takes not away the bread it self, but the staff, viz. the strength
and nutritive power of it, Levit. 26. 26. When I shall break the staff of
your bread, Hag. 1. 6.
Ezech. 4. 16. and 5. 16 I will break the staff of bread, called Esaias 3. 1.
the stay of bread and the stay of water. It is but a poor elementall creature,
to which Gods blessing has not added strength, if God did not hear the
heavens for virtue, the heavens, the earth for influence, and the corn and the
wine for vegetative power, Hos. 2. 21. All simples were but simple things, and
all componds idle, when they want the best ingredient, Gods blessing. Goutish
Asa wants this powerful ingredient in his physic, when 2 Chronicles. 16. 12. He
sought not the Lord in his disease, but to Physicians; He was not so lame in
his feet, as in his faith. We must not stick so fast in the secrets of
Philosophy, but also look upon the mysteries of Divinity; God is the chief
Physician, let Plato hold the candle to Moses, and Physicians learn from the
sons of the Prophets.

In all thy labors and endeavors, Psalm. 127. 2 it is in vain for thee to
rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows; For except the
Lord give a blessing to our works, it is but to plowe the sand, and to lodge
at the Labor in vain. 1 Cor. 3. 6. Paul plants, Apollos waters, but God gives
the increase; So the vintage of works depends upon the showers of Gods
blessing. Parturiunt montes, Hor.
The works of the world may have likely and proud entrances, but yet halt in
the conclusion, if not attended from a superior influence: But God from a
slender beginning brings a plentiful issue, Carpo-balsamum. Isidor.
as in that Balm immortal, incorruptible seed of the Word, Inest in viva voce
nescio quid latentis energiae. lerom.
which in it self is dead, by Gods Spirit assisting, concurres to the
begetting of a new man, powerfully mortifying the rotten flesh, and quickening
the spirit. That little mustard-seede, which spreads up into branches, able to
give the fowls of heaven harbor, able thus armed to bind the strong man,
disarme him and cast him out of his usurped possession of thy soul, 2 Cor. 10.
5. Casting down the highest things, that exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God, and captivating every thought to the obedience of Christ:
Ier. 23. 29. A hammer to break the stone, not in the reins, but in the heart.
Simile.
As a tree has manifest to the eye, leaves, flowers, and fruit, but the root
lies hid: And as in man, the body is seen, but the better and purer part is
veiled under the curtain of his flesh. And as in all things we see the
Accidents, not the form and substance: So the Word we hear, but the life of
it is the power of God. So then if thou see a blessing upon thy labors,
wicked men called, and that come to pass, prophesied by Esaias 11. 6. Ravenous
Wolves, Cruel Leopards, etc. swearers, liars, drunkards, forsaking their
wicked, loathed, slavish drudgery to the world, flesh, and devil; and submit
their sinewy necks, uncircumcised hearts, and profane lives in obedience to
the scepter of Christ, and out of a sincere profession, and unfaigned
confession, Post mortem Iuliani Aposta^ae. Euse^.
cry with the Soldiers under Iovinian, We are Christians, and will be true to
the colors of the Cross, according to our Sacramental Oath under the banner
of our Michael, we will wage war with the red Dragon, and all the spiritual
enemies of our salvation.

God by his Word has persuaded us, 2 Cor. 5^. 21.
called, and called us out of our enchanted fools Paradise, wherein we lay in
the prison and dungeon of spiritual darkensse, into his marvailous light, has
opened our eyes, freed our feet, and as a bird we are escaped out of the
cords and manacles of our hellish sins; Pro 5. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 26
And whereas we lived to our own corruptions, emancipated to our lusts, even
the devil the Prince of the air, Ephesians. Gal. 2. 20.
2. 3. tutoring our disobedience; now we live to God, Esaias 32. 15.
the life of God, the life of Grace; our scorching lusts, and rebellious
natures (which heavenly influence should have wasted) the scalding cup of Gods
wrath, are washed and cleansed in the blood of the immaculate lamb, made ours
in our justification, Acts 4. 10.
and sealed to us in the laver of our new baptizing renovation. It lies not in
man's power to beget faith in his own soul.
He that is the ministerial instrument of this wondrous work, which causes
admiration and joy in men and Angels, Luke 15. 7. Though his tongue were the
pen of a ready writer, Psalm. 45. 2. and spoke as the Oracle of God, had the
mouth of golden Chrysostom, the gravity of Tertullian, the spirit of heavenly
Augustine, could make Felix tremble with Paul, conjure the cursed works of
darkness; Yet if he sacrificed to his own nets and yarne, Hab. 1. 16.
he robbes God of his praise and glory. It is not thy word nor thy eloquence,
or learning, but Gods power that brings these mighty things to pass,
Menecrates called himself in pride before King Philip, Rex salut is; Ego Rex
Medicinae, tu Macedoniae.
and so all other things. If the mercy of God be not in our sustenance, we may
dye with meat in our mouths, as did the Israelites: if his providentiall
goodness restrain her influence, and withold her virtue, were our garments as
rich as Aarons Ephod, there were no heat or benefit in them: Nature declines
her ordinary working, when Gods revocation has chidden it. Though thou
labourest and sweatest with diligence till the taper of thy life were burnt
out, if the Lord prosper not thy handy work, thou make but roapes of sand to
bind Sampson. Then sing with the Psalmist, Psalm. 115. 1.
Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give the glory. The
principal end of Gods actions, must be the end of ours, and his is his praise,
Prove. 16. 4. The Lord made all things for himself, viz for his own praise,
even the wicked for the day of evil; Even out of the unhallowed heap of
sin, will he mould the silver trumpet of his own praise.

To teach us, Use. 4.
That God is praised, magnified, and made great by us, when his Image is
repaired in us, Genesis 1. 26. Let us make Man after our own Image: Ambr. and
Origin super. Lucam.
Now this image, which is his righteousness and holiness, the new man, Ephesians
4. 24. newly coming out of the mint of Regeneration (as furnace-smoaked Israel
out of Egypt) is a glorifying of God, and this, (as a curious work graces the
artificer) magnifies the maker.

Man, the little Epitome or Compendium of the world, has bin admired for his
wonderful structure, Herm. Trismegistu^.
and frame, called by that almost miracle of Antiquity, a great Miracle.
Nothing more admirable than Man. Man, a certain divine thing, Memento quod
homo sit quoddam Omne, what shines not in him? Our Savior CHRIST honors him
with a large title, Mark. 16. 15. Go Preach the Gospel to every creature;
Quasi homo esset illa omnis creatura (...) creatio Romans 1. Gal. 6.
and who but Man must have the benefit of this Gospel. But, if we look upon
him as the image of God repaired, a new creature; nay a new creation, 2. Cor.
5. 17: As Joseph coming from Prison; as Mordecai, Que potest ^egere me and te
Bern.
whom the King of honor will honor; as Queen Hester perfumed with the
aromaticall graces of the Spirit, having the royal robe of Christ's
righteousness; Cant. 4. 7. Thou art all fair my Love, and there is no spot in
thee, comely as the Curtains, and pomp of Solomon, having cast off the black
scorchings of Kedar, Cant. 1. 5. and the Gibeonitish rags of sin; now
remember old things no more, Esaias 7. he is now a glorious creature, and here is
God magnified; the greater measure of grace affords a greater measure of
praise. Strive then, beloved, to have thy unhallowed soul sanctified, thy life
reformed, thy crooked paths of vanity straighted, every thought brought into
subjection, that God may be made greater in thee, and thou the trumpet of his
praise.

And the further to stir us up to holiness, consider that the magnifying of
God is the magnifying of our selves. Luke 1. 46. Mary sings, My soul does
magnify the Lord, and verse 49. He that is mighty has magnified me: He that
blesses the Lord, Qui benedicit deo, augetur; qui maledicit, minuitur.
is increased; he that blaspheameth, decreased. Our exultation is the first
staire of our exaltation: Would thou be exalted, made great, and honored of
God, of men and Angels? then season thy soul with grace, honor God, For they
that Honor him, he will honor, and they that despise him, A^ in Rome.
shall be despised, 1 Samuel 2. 30. He that goes to the Court of Honor must pass
by the temple of virtue, from the Palace of Grace to the Place of Glory.
Learn then to have the praise of God in thy mouth: Let Hallelu-jah be the
Cadence in all our Music, and our Music in all our actions, that being our
practice on earth, we may one day be Angelical Choristers in Heaven. Psalm. 103.
Praise the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name;
Aug. lib. 1. de D. Chianna cap. 31.
for Omne bonum nostrum velipse vel ab ipso, All our good is either God, or
from God.

Parties; Gentile, Jew, enjoined to this duty. 1. The Gentile, the stock of
Iapheth, one of the sons of Noah, Sem first named in regard of his
prerogative; as Izaac before Ismael, and Jacob before Esau. Genesis 9.
Genesis 9. 18. the eldest by birth, but reckoned by way of Anticipation in the
last place: And though a long time they stood, as it were, excommunicate, and
cut off from the Covenant of grace, yet in Gods appointed time, this rejected
seed is persuaded to dwell in the tents of their brother Sem the Jew, Psalm.
18. 49. 2 Samuel 22. 50.
as Noah prophesied: And the never erring Spirit makes this place a
prophetical prediction of Gods never failing purpose of their calling, D^ut.
32. 43.
Romans 15. 11. with many other scriptures pregnant to prove it; Esaias 11. 10.
the word [Nations] in the old testament in Hebers tongue, (...).
being rendered by Paul (Gentiles) a most fit prophecy for this purpose,
Appositissimum vaticinium ad comprobandam Gentium vocationem. Marlorat.
says Marlorat and others upon the place. Thus though a great while the
forlorn Prodigal sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death, and God
vouchsafed his loves and favors to the Jews, At Salem is his Tabernacle, and
his dwelling in Sion, and gives this land a peculiar appropriation to himself,
Psalm. Pars pro toto per Synecdochen.
108. 8. Gilead is mine, Manasses is mine, being as the signet upon his right
hand; yet the Floods of his favor is shoured down at last plentifully upon
the heads of his long neglected Nation, and now he decks them as Isaac his
lovely Rebecca, and marryes them to himself in righteousness, judgment,
mercy, compassion, and faithfulness, Hos. 2. 19. hence this Doctrine.

God has according to his word revealed Christ Jesus to be a Savior to the
Gentiles, Doct.
called them out of the night of their superstitious blindness, into the liberty
of the sons of light, and has made them Choristers in the quire of his
Saints, and partakers of his grace unto salvation.

This was shadowed, prophesied, and testified long before. Shadowed in the
calling of Abraham out of his own country, Genesis 12. 1. into Canaan, where the
Canaanite the Maldonat ex Chrysostom. in locum.
worst of the Gentiles dwelt. Ex vocatione Abrahae praefigurata est vocatio
Gentium and Iudaeorum, quia pater est fidelium. Cyril.
This does notably prefigure the calling both of Jew and Gentile, because he
is called the Father of the Faithful. Also in the Candlestick, Exodus 25. 31,
which is commanded to be made of one entire piece, but having six branches,
to signify the multitude of the Churches of Jews and Gentiles, whose
Original is from the same shanke called a little sister, Cant. 8. 8. We have a
little sister, Hall super Cant.
and she has no breasts, viz. small as yet through the rareness of her
Converts, and destitute of the help of any outward Ministry, whereby she
might either bear or nourish children unto God; she has no paps, that is,
knowledge in the Doctrine of Salvation; contained in the dugges of the two
Testaments, Iacobus de Valentia super Cant.
whereby she can as a mother suckle her newborn babes, being but newly come
out of the wilderness of damnable superstition, and the curiosity of
Philosophy, Acts 19. 19.
as the students in Ephesus.

Gods two Testaments, in which only is eternal life, as testifying of Christ,
which is the truth, the way, and the life, Ioh. 14. 6. are called the Tower of
David, built for defense, a thousand shields hang therein, furnished with rich
Armorie, which affoords infinite ways of protection, and monuments of victory,
Cant. 4. 4. and These are twins, verse 5. like those of Hippocrates, or those
Socia's in Plautus, one so like the other in resemblances, that as our Savior
Christ said of the knowledge of his Father, If ye have known me, ye have
known my Father: And these the Gentiles Church knew not as yet, which after
was supplied in the time of Constantine, Idem ibidem.
and after by those famous Luminaries of the world, Chrysostom, Portae
Ecclesiae dicuntur in quantum iutroducunt bonos in Ecclesiam. Ibid. Hieron. in
Hoseam.
Eusebius, Augustine, etc. called therefore the gates of the Church, having the
keys of knowledge to let in the Godly. Shadowed also, Hos. 1. 2. Go take unto
thee a wife of fornications: Where it is observed, that Hoseas signifying a
Savior, Iren. lib. 4. cap. 37.
intimates that Christ took unto himself for his spouse, the polluted Church
of the Gentiles, Aug. contra Faustum lib. 22. cap 89.
a wife of fornications in worshipping Idols and Devils in stead of the living
God, ^^^pertus lib. 14. Com. in Johan.
that He might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle. Ephesians 5. 27. or any such thing, Math. 8. 10.
but to make it holy, and without blame; and so The not believing wife is
sanctified by the believing husband, 1 Cor. 7. 14. Shadowed also in Ruth the
Moabitesse, gleaning in the field of Boaz the Jew, and their providentiall
marri^ge, the poor ruthful Gentile, with the rich Jew, Ruth. 2. 3. and 4.
13: And shadowed also in Peter and John, running to the sepulcher; John the
Jews, they came first to Christ; Peter the Gentiles, overtaking them, though
not the sooner, yet the sounder. Bifeild super Col. 2. 1.
It was also shadowed in Christ's burial in Jerusalem, where the dying
sacrifices had given warning of his death, but it was without the city, to
answer the type, Levit. 16. 25, of the Escape goat sent into the wilderness,
and to signify his sufferings belonged to Gentiles as well as to Jews:
Tertull. contra Marci. lib. 5
In his birth, borne in the night, to signify that he should lighten the
Gentiles, that sat in the darkness of superstition and ignorance, Acts 10.
23. And thus was it shadowed in Peter's vessel, Act. 17. 11. descending like a
Sheet, in which the Doctor of the Jews is taught to call the long rejected
Gentiles, called by the free mercy of God, clean: Shadowed also in Jacob, who
served for Rachel and Leah, Genesis 30. 31. And in the land of Egypt, Genesis 41: And
likewise in the marriage of Sampson, Moses, Gideons fleece, and David's building
in Araunahs floor.

It was also fore-prophecyed, Fore-prophecied.
Genesis 9. 27. God shall enlarge Iapheth, and he shall dwell in the tents of Sem,
which signifies, not the enlarging only of his borders and dominions, and his
surprising, enchroaching, and being in league with Sem; for this was also in
cursed Cham the Egyptian, and others of that spewed-out seed, were in league
with the Jew, and sometime enlarged their boarders upon them; Blande reducat.
Vatablus.
but gently to persuade them home to their Fathers house, Luke. 15. to become a
chosen people, partakers of the means of salvation, Rupertus super Genesim.
and heirs of life. The Greeks and Latins by these two languages did open
the tents of Sem, that is, the Hebrew Scriptures laid up in Hebers sacred
tongue, and made them known to the Gentiles, and so they were received into
the Covenant: The Church a long time stood pailed, and imparked, as a garden
enclosed, or a spring shut up, Cant. 4. 12. Or as Israel in the land of Goshen,
within the skirts of honored Palestina, but now Christ has broken down the
partition wall, Ephesians. 2. 14. and has made all one; there is neither Jew nor
Gentile, the two walls of Nations; bond nor free, the two walls of Conditions;
male or female, the two walls of sex; the great two quick and dead, and the
greatest two heaven and earth: but all are one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28. all
these so many combinations; all meet in him as in a Center, he in the midst of
all draws all, and knitts up all in one faith, one blessed hope of his
coming, he is a Cornerstone, or coin to join these two walls together,
(...),
Zac. 10. 4. Out of him came forth the corner, Luke 16. 26
Zach. 3. 9. Esaias 28. 16. etc. and so that great gulf that made a particion
against us the Gentiles, is taken away, and all made one. Esaias 52. 10. All the
ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God: And again, this
Evangelicall Prophet, or prophetical Evangelist, Cap. 11. 10. In that day
there shall be a root of Iesse, which shall stand for an ensign of the
people, to it shall the Gentiles seek: and Cap. ult. 19. They shall declare my
glory among the Gentiles: So though their eyes were as yet dim as Elie's, 1 Samuel 4. 15. and they could not see the light of saving truth, yet there should
come out of Iesse, a light to lighten the Gentiles, Luke 2. 32. being set in
the sight of all upon the Candlestick of the Cross, the Gospel preached in
an open field, and he borne in a common Inn, Luke 2. 7. The desire of all
nations shall come, Hag. 2. 7. From the rising of the Sun unto the going
down thereof, my name is great among the Gentiles, Mal. 1. 11. If ye be
Christ's, ye are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise: For
though Abraham's person be but one, Abraham gignens, Abraham credens.
yet his conditions are diverse, as he is a begetting Abraham; so the Gentiles
are not his children according to the flesh; as he is a believing Abraham, so
we are his children according to the faith, and according to promise: Esaias 9.
2. The people which walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that
dwelled in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined:
And thus in a matter so copious, I refer you to the fountain of divine
prophecies, the rich Cabinet (much more worth than the Cabinet of Darius, so
curiously kept by Alexander) the book of God.

Thirdly, Testified in time.
it was manifestly testified in time, whose appointed revolution being
finished, these forlorn, forsaken Nations were gathered, with as much love and
tenderness, as the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, fed as kindly
at the breasts of him, whose paps are girt about with a golden girdle, Rev. 1.
13. as the young ones at the breasts of the more than natural Pelican; And
though in the time of Solomon they had no breasts, and of Esaias, they sat in
darkness, and of Hosea they made Lo-ammi not my people, Lorucha may not
beloved, few in number, scarce one among a thousand, as yet they did not cry
unto God, Ier. 3. 4. My Father thou art the guide of my youth; They were scarce
one of a city, two of a family, verse 14. the Apostles with a large mandate
and commission must go teach all nations, Math. 28. 19. then was the wild
Olive engrafted in and made partaker of the fatness of the Olive, Romans 11. 17.
the branches were plucked off, as the signet of ones finger, and she grafted
in; the Jews decreased, and near in a falling sickness and consumption; the
Gentiles increased and multiplied, and came forth of their darkness, as the
twin kling Cressets of heaven at the setting of the Worlds great Luminarie, the
Sun, like to that, Ezech 16. 17 I have caused thee to multiply as the budde
of the field, and thou have increased and waxen great, and thou have gotten
excellent ornaments, thy breasts are fashioned, thine hair grown, whereas thou
wast naked, and bare, but a few Proselites; But after the ascension of our
Savior Christ, the very seed and first bud begun to flourish, take root and
grow like a Cedar in Lebanon.

Now consider in this, Conversion is twofold.
that conversion or calling is twofold: First, it signifies repentance of them
which have fallen away from the truth of religion to heresy, from virtue to
sin etc. and afterward return again to God: Joel 2. 11. Therefore now says
the Lord, turn unto me again, and such was Salomons conversion: Secondly it
signifies Regeneration, when a man is effectually called, and converted to the
faith, which before stood in the way to perdition: such, Ephesians. 2. 1. And you
has he quickened, which were dead in sins and trespasses, wherein in time
past ye walked; Tit. 3. 3. For we our selves were sometime foolish disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy etc.
1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, etc. Such is the conversion of the Gentiles, Paul and Barnabas being
sent by the Church through Pha^nicia and Samaria, their Countries, to make them
Christians, Acts 15. 3. The good success which God gave to their planting and
waterings may easily appear, when the burning Lamp of the Gospel like a
flaming fire went over the whole earth by a divine disposing thereof: Vide
Niceph.
It light upon Candaces Aehiopian Noble: Eccles Hist. lib. cap. 6.
Acts 8. by the Ministry of Philip, Hic primo ex gentibus a Philippo per
apparitionem verbi divini sacra consceutus est.
which was made the first fruits of the believing Gentiles, making good the
Oracle of the Prophet, Psalm. 68. 31. Ethiopia shall soon stretch forth her
hands unto God, this Noble man being the first Preacher of these glad ydings to
the Moors. Eusebius. lib. (...)
This is also manifest in the woman of Chanaan, 1. Eccl. hist.
or a Syrophoenician, Math. 15, her discreet, humble, fervent and constant
prayer to Christ, which goes away with that great commendation, O woman great
is thy faith; as at the faith of the Centurion, Maldonat. super Math. cap. 15.
Math. 8. 10. I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel; Where we see
Christ never wondering at the faith of any Jew, but of the Gentiles; because
in old time They were strangers from the covenant of Promise, without hope,
without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. And so this is the Lords doing, and it
is marvailous in our eyes, that we the dogs of the Gentiles should become Gods
people, to magnify his mercy in our conversion; she is called no more Dog, but
Woman, no more an Infidel but a believer; and now like a Spaniell, she will
not away from her Masters heels, till she get (though not a whole loaf, yet)
crummes from his table. Testified also in the Eastern Magi, Math. 2. 9. which
brought offerings to the new incarnate Savior; Art Mathematica vim, et
discursum noverant Planetarum, and Elementorum naturam, Cyprian.
whether they were Astrologers, which by art Mathematical knew the power and
motion of the Plannets, and nature of the Elements; or whether they were
Magically learned, and professors of those divelish mystical Arts, as Justin:
contra Triphon: Origin lib. 1. contr^ Celsum; Or they were Kings according to
that of David, Psalm. 72. 14.
Psalm. 68. 29. Chrysostom in Math. Tertul. lib. 3. contra Iud^^s.
Kings shall bring presents unto thee, as of Tharsis, and the Isles of Arabia
and Saba, the Queen whereof presented Solomon Christ's type, odoriferous
perfumes, Theophylact. in 2 cap. Math.
etc. 1 King. 12. which are foretold of these wise men; Or whether they came
from Persia, as Cyril lib. 2. in Esa 2. 49. Basil. Hom. 25. de Nativitate
Christi, Theophylact, which calls them Persian Kings, Invencus Poeta; which is
probable from the situation of the Kingdom, the names of the wise men, their
manner of adoration, their gifts etc. or from Chaldaea, as Hieron. super Esa.
cap. 19. Chalcidicus in Platonis Timaeo, calls them the perfectly wise men of
the Chaldes, Chaldaeorum perfect sapientes viri.
Anselmus in 2. Math. Ioachimus Abbas says, This day has he (speaking of
Christ) revealed himself to the Chaldaeans by the leading of a new star, Hodie
revelavit se Chaldaeis novi syder is indicio.
and this also is confirmed by many reasons: Or from Arabia Faelix, Sabaei
Arabum propter thura clarissimi. Plinius lib. 12. cap. 14.
they shall bring gold and incense from Saba, Esaias 60. 6. which is the
Metropolis or mother-city in Arabia the happy, Cyprian ser^ de stella and
Magis, Epiphanius, Hilar. lib. 4 de Trinit. Tacitus lib. 5 hist. and these were
the first converted of the Gentiles; Diod. Siculus.
Or from Mesopotamia, or Egypt; all with one consentand one voice, make their
coming a plain testification of their calling, which afterward increased as
the sand of the Sea, the daughter of Egypt forgot her fathers house, and the
profane barren Gentile bore children unto God. The wise men come here among
the Jews as Apostles, Sus Minervam.
and teachers of their Rabbinicall Doctors, Olitor Eremit^ Thaulerum, Asina
Balaam docet.
that so long had held the chair of Moses, blind fat-bellyes, that could not
see so far as the ancient Sybils, or those strangers, that so often had tossed
over those divine Oracles of this star of Jacob, and the mighty volumes of
their Master Moses; Dij laborantes adjuvant.
but Thou, O God, hidest those things from the wise and prudent of the world
and revealest them to babes and sucklings, even so it is thy will: Thou pullest
down the mighty from their seat, and exaltest the humble and meek, Luke 2.
revealing that mystery, that was hid from ages and generations. Col. 1. 26. 27.
Testified likewise, John 4. 27. he is found talking with a Gentlewoman,
showing himself to be a Jesus, a Savior to her, verse. 10. If thou knew the
gift of God, that is, me, which am given of my Father: 2 Cor. 9. 15. so called
by the Apostle, Thanks be unto God, for his unspeakeable gift; And if thou
knew me, which am the true immortal Ambrosia, Nectar, and aqua vitae of
the Soule-sicke sinners, The fountain of living waters, Ier. 2. 13. The
fountain of Israel, Psalm. 68. 26. all this he is, even to the Gentile, John 4.
26. I that speak unto thee am he, I am the expectation of you Gentiles.

The sides of the North, Populus Gentium erant later^ Diaboli propter
conjunct^m amicitiam. Stella super Luc.
which Satan challenged for his own seat and Pontificiall throne, Esaias 14.
13, are become the City of the great King Jesus Christ, Psa 48. 3. so that
even as a stone though malleable, is hardly brought to frame and square to his
fit place in a building, yet being laboriously hammered is durable, and of long
continuance; so the Gentiles were a most crabbed, wild stock to plant in;
Chrysostom in cap. 3. Math.
a most crooked timber to hew for Gods building: yet being planted and brought
to the faith, they are most permanent, gathered into the enclosed garden of
Gods Church.

Reason 1. Reas. 1.
That they might show forth the wonderful riches of Gods mercy: the greater
the sinner the richer the mercy that saves him, as Gods mercy appeared more in
calling one covetous Publican, one incontinent Magdalene, one Saul as bloody as
Nero or Julian, one lost sheep to be brought home, Luke 15. one profane
Gentile, than in a multitude that needed no repentance. It is a greater work
of Gods divine majesty to change a wicked man to a godly, Majus opus est
divinae majestatis, ex impin pi^m sacere quam universum mundum condidisse.
than of nothing to erect the glorious arches of thewhole world, as Paul said
of himself, Where sin abounded, there grace more abounded; and 1 Timothy 1. 16.
For this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first Christ Jesus might show forth
all long suffering for a pattern to them, Aug.
which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. Qui adversarium
extoll^t ja^e^tem, and amplificat pristinam dignitatem, etc Cic Orat. pro M.
As the Orator spoke: He that exalts his dejected adversary to his ancient
place and dignities, and not only thus, but amplifies his honors, I not only
comparatively equal him with the best of men, but judge him most like to God
himself. Marcello.
It is the glory of a King to pass by offenses, says Eccles. so is Gods mercy
made great in pardoning the innumerable sins of the East, the abominations
of the Gentiles. In the East was the fall of our first Parents, the unbeleefe
of Eva, the disobedience of Adam, Genesis 3. Boskhierus in ara Coeli, co. 10
the fratricide of Cain, Genesis 4. Nimrods rebellion, first Idolatry, Magic
delivered, and taught by those Phantasticke devils Incubus and Succubus, with
many more; so that here is the magnifying of his mercy and also of his glory:
Simile.
As it is a great glory to a King to have strangers from remote parts of the
world to bring presents and submit themselves to his scepter and government;
So is it to have the raging Gentiles, that so long had bandied themselves
against the Lord and his anointed, to yield their necks under his yoke: and
those lands which like Ezechiels bloody pots had naught but their scum in them,
Exhalat opaca M^phytim.
full of Mephyticall stinckes like the five Cities, Virgil.
or like the pot among the children of the Prophets, in which was naught but
death, and the entoxicating poison of abominable villains, should at the last
like Noah's sacrifice be a favor of rest in the nosthrils of Almighty God, pots
of holiness, like those in Zach. 13. last: And so here is the mercy, love, and
glory of God, manifested in the calling of those long-loathed Gentiles. Thus
we see Christ's Kingdom according to his promises, and prophecyes, reaching
from sea to sea, and from the great river to the ends of the World, Boskhierius
vbi supra.
as the Angel said, Of his Kingdom shall be no end; Imperium Oceano, famam
non terminat astris.
not only in regard of the stability, and durance; but also of the boundless
interminable amplitude thereof; The Ocean shall not bound his regiment,
His fame shall fly above the firmament.


Else, where had been those huge Nations, which have bin converted to the
faith, some by Apostles etc. to omit the rest, our selves which long lay in the
darkness of superstitious Gentilisme: and of late times by those famous
Colonies in Virginia, brought from worshipping of Divils (mirabile dictu) to
worship the true God in spirit and truth, the instruments of whose happy
calling were our famous English. If the mercy of God had not appeared, how had
we and the most part of the world still remained in horrible blindness,
slaves to Satan, and heirs of eternal perdition. Come unto us then, miserably
blinded Turks, Infidels, and Pagans, and we will tell you what God has done
for our souls; we have tasted how true, how gracious the Lord is: the Sea of
knowledge which Esaias spoke of, is accomplished among the Churches of the
Gentiles. Ier. 16. 19.
Jeremy said, They should come unto God, from the ends of the earth, and it is
fullfilled; the concourse to the preaching of the Word, foretold by Micah and
Zachary, is verified, Mic. 4. 1. Zach. 8. 20. This day are these Scriptures
fulfilled in our ears. Thus much for confirmation of the Doctrine, the uses
follow.

First to teach us to magnify the glorious name of God, Use 1.
who has called us out of darkness into the marveilous light of the saving
knowledge of Christ. If we should make a quare with David, concerning the
general estate of man, What is man that thou art so mindful of him? or of
himself, What am I, and what is my Fathers house? Why, we were even a refused
people, in whom there was neither favor nor beauty, without hope, without God
in the World, children even whose profession was disobedience, drowned in the
sink of abominations: Our religion (if we had any) was mere idolatry;
Quicquid humus, pelagus, coelum, mirabile gignit,
Id dixere Deos, colles, freta, flumina, flammas.
What'ere the God of nature has made strange,
In Sea, in earth, in hill, flood, fire, or sky,
The Gentiles from their lawful use did change
And made them gods in their Idolatry.


Nay even the dropping clouds, Otho Frisingensis ex Philone.
and fire was the god of the Chaldes, who having devoured all the other wooden
deities, Ruffinus Eccl. Hist lib 2 cap. 26. Puras nubes and coeli unmen
adornant. Iuven. Sat. 14
was confuted by Canopis, with a cauldron of water, which quenched that furious
Idol. Nothing so base, but they gave Gods honor unto it, Romans 1. 23. Changing
the glory of the incorruptible God, into an image made like unto corruptible
man, Citius apud vos per omnes Deos, quam per vnum genium Caesaris pejeratur.
In Apelcon. Gentes.
etc. Caesar (as Tertullian upbraides them) was so sacred, that it was more
tolerable to swear and forswear by all the Gods, than by him: Nay in all the
whole course of their lives, they were so abominable, and debauched, that when
the Scripture would aggravate and make a sin seem Hyperbolically great, and
paint it in the true colors, he sends us to the Gentiles for patterns, being
as truly Doctored in the acting of sins, as the Jesuits in the art of
poisoning: As against distrust, Math. 6. 32. For after all these things do the
Gentiles seek: (...).
They sought with all their might, arising from a distrust of Gods providence
For incontinent incest, 1 Cor. 5. 1. It is reported, that there is such
fornication among you, as is not named among the Gentiles, that one should have
his fathers Wife; which is spoken as negative of the Gentiles, to aggravate the
hainousnes of it; for we read their common practice thereof in the Iliade of
their abominations, Antiocho filio cessit. Plutar.
as the wife of Seleucus a Gentile, became after the wife of Antiochus his
son. Then were Nicholaitans in Ephesus, Amos 2. 7.
Reu. 2. 6. a Church of the Gentiles, in their common conversation, not only
being dishonest, but hating honesty in others, in so much as one Hermodorus was
banished from Ephesus, because he was an honest man; ^s was Aristides out of
Athens, Iustus quia iu stus.
for no other cause, but for his justice. And so it was their opinion of
honesty, Te colui virtus vt res, ast tu nomen iaanc es. Livie.
as Brutus opinioned virtue, I honor thee virtue, as something, but thou art
indeed nothing but an empty name. No sin so sensual, so senseless, so
unnatural, unreasonable, but they have been actors thereof, Greg. Mag. hom.
10. in Evang.
And as the knowledge of CHRIST was preached to the Jews by an Angel, as to a
people endued with reason; so was it to the Gentiles by signs, nor by voice,
as to a foolish people, with the Prodigal, feeding themselves with the husks
of their base affections. Simile Chrysostom. in cap. 19. Mas
And as a burden is easily stayed upon the back of a Camel, by reason of his
bunch; so the diveli kept those Gentiles easily in their blindness, Ne noceat.
causing them for fear to worship him, and offer him sacrifice, as those
so^tish Indians, the Pigusians etc.

Then learn we to magnify the name of our God; It is an honorable thing to
speak of the works of God, Tob. 12. that was so mindful of us, when we were
not mindful of our selves; when our hearts like Ephraims, Hos. 7. 11. as a
silly Dove deceived, Cucurrit.
even then he ran to meet us, fell on our necks, and kissed us, with the
kisses of his mouth, Cant. 1. 1. fearing to be too late in showing mercy;
whereas in the execution of his justice and wrath, Ambulavi^.
Genesis 3. 8. he walked slowly. Us that were Captains in mischief has he
called out of the fools Paradise, and enchanted castle of Satan's baits, and
set us upon the Rock that was higher than us, the rock of Salvation CHRIST
JESUS: So that we may say with the Governor of the feast, Ioh. 2. 10. The
good wine was kept till now; the firkins of the Jews were but water to these,
beggarly rudiments. See then and admire the infinite mercy of Almighty God, to
call thee beloved, which wast not beloved; to remove thee from under the
regiment of Satan, to draw thee out of his power, as David did the Lambs from
the Lion and the Bear: broken the shackles and manacles of that more than
Egyptian, Babylonish, or Turkish slaverie; taken thee as Abraham out of
idolatrous Chaldea, Lot out of Sodom, or a firebrand out of the fire, and set
thee in the glorious liberty of the new Jerusalem, confirmed thy Charter to the
Kingdom of Heaven.

Leap upon thy feet then with the Cripple at the beautiful gate of the
Temple, and praise thy God, Acts 3. 8. Let him be praised, that has brought
thee home like the lost sheep upon the shoulders of his Mercy, sought thee out
with the light and lantern of his Word, persuaded thee by his Spirit, called
thee from thy banishment, enfranchised thee. Tristatur non de sua inturia, sed
de nostra miseria. Chrysostom.
He that was incarnate and made Man for thee, grieved and wept for thee, sweat
water and blood for thee, hung on the Cross for the malice of Men and Devils;
for thee, etc; give then the glory unto him. Here is a behold of stupefying
wonder, Psalm. Ecce.
18. 43. A people whom I have not known, shall serve me; As soon as they
hear of me, they shall obey me: The Ox has known his owner, and the Ass
his Masters crib, Esaias 1. 3. I am found of them that seek me not. An admirable
and surpassing miracle, that those which did bandy themselves against the Lord,
and his Anointed, should willingly put their necks under his yoke. Velut
jugum ipsum ambire Besthier.
O work above all expectation! Christ to ride upon the Asse-colt unused to the
yoke; Belial to be turned to CHRIST, Zoroastres into Moses, Surgunt indccti
and coelum rapiunt. Aug Conf.
Superstition into Religion, Orgyes into mysteries, sacrilege into Sacrifice,
dogs into Saints, Quaenam est ista permutatio apud Iudaeos, propheta loquitur,
and non auditur; apud Gentiles stella tacet and suadet. B. Max. in Esa.
publicans and harlots to teach the way to heaven, the scholar reading a
lecture to the Master, the one reading the most secret mystery of man's
salvation wrapped in the sacred leaves of Gods eternal Counsel, and that by a
dumb star; the other standing amazedly sottish at the lively voice of Gods
learned interpreters; the one as it were striving whether faith, Proximus
Ecclesie semper vult ultimus esse.
the other whether unbeleefe should prevail: the nerer the Church the farther
from God; the poor receive the Gospel. See then the unmeasurable riches of
Gods free mercies, he will have mercy Upon whom he will have mercy, and whom
he will he hardens, To. 9. It is not of him that runs, nor of him that
wills, but of God that shows mercy.

Consider further, that mankind may be divided into a tripartite rank; First,
are those most remote, and far off from the covenant, upon whom God in his
unfearchable judgments has not vouchsafed so much as an outward calling: Genesis
9. 25. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren;
as Pagans, Infidels, etc. which stand in the outmost Circle, Tanquam vultures
ad male olentia feruntur. Basil.
which delight in Atheism, as Vultures pass over sweet meadows, and
fragrant groves, to pass to loath some carryon; these like Noah do not awake
from their drunkenness, hardness of heart, etc.

Secondly, are those which stand in the next Court within the visible Church, and
are as tares with wheat, bad fish with good, corrupted humors in a sound body,
Cain with Abel, dross with gold, Vessels of dishonor with Vessels of honor,
2 Timothy 2. Which may have the ordinary gifts of the Spirit; they may prophecy
with Saul and Cajaphas, preach and do miracles with Judas, speak like the
Oracle of God with Achi tophel, cry Lord, Lord, Math. 7. 22; challenge an
interest in the free demesnes of heaven, Math. 25. 11. Open to us; and yet are
sent packing to their hell home with a nescio vos, I know ye not. If ye ask
the reason and cause of it, Our Savior CHRIST orally, and oraculously returns
it, Math. 11. 25. This mystery of Salvation is hid from some, and revealed to
others, even So Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight; as in a Princes
Proclamation, It is our pleasure. All the works of these men failing in their
end, not done in faith to the glory of God, and if God rewarded them, it was
temporally, for temporal respects, the good of mankind, civil order and
society; not showing any approbation thereof in respect of himself: their
mercy, justice, continency etc. Infideliter misereri vitium est, peccatu^ est.
being without faith was sin, as Augustin^ says; which indeed arises not
from the act of compassion; Aug. lib. 4. cap. 3. contra Julian
but from the privation of faith; they may have these and many more honest
civil moralities, but they never have the inward calling, the donation of
faith, the true knowledge of God. I know my sheep, and am known of mine; John
10. 14. which knowledge is like the Sun casting his beams upon us, by whose
reflection we look upon and view the Sun. Gal. 4. 9. Seeing ye know God, or
rather are known of God: If they have any, it is a literal, no saving or
spiritual knowledge, no true love of God, for he never knew or loved them. 1
John 4. 19. We love God, because he loved us first. If these carnal
Capernaites follow CHRIST, doing his will in any thing, it is more for his
loaves than his love, Ioh. 6. 26. all proceeding from some s^nister respect,
their praise or profit; they never have the inward beautifying of the Church,
To be all glorious within, Psalm. 45. 13. the rich habiliments and garments,
wherewith (as Isaac decked his beloved Rebecca, and the King of Persia
religious Mordecai) CHRIST I^SVS bespangleth his spouse.

These be the foolish Virgins, Anima aut Christi sponsa, aut diaboli adultera.
Aug.
which a long time had their lives blossoming, as if their souls had bin the
maidenly bride of CHRIST, when in the end they were unvailed, and found the
speckled adulteresses, and unclean concubines of Satan, Math. 25. This is the
man boldly intruding himself into the marriage supper, not having on a wedding
garment, his faith; but fig leaves notable to cover his nakedness, Math. 22.
These walk like friends in the Church of God together, But many are called,
and few are chosen.

In the third rank are they, which out of the brazen mountains of Gods
election, flowing out of the rivers of his endless mercy, which are not only
within the skirts and territories of his regiment, as the former; but they are
inwardly sanctified, called, and culled out of the whole heap and mass of
Mankind by a lively Faith, engraffed and planted into the mystical body, and
have as near an union and communion with their head CHRIST, as the branch has
with the vine, the members with the head, or the husband with the wife; Ephesians.
5. 30. We are members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones: these are
built upon the sure foundation, the rock of safety, and horn of salvation,
Luke 1: 69. He is the corner stone, upon which their whole building is coupled,
Ephesians. 2. 20 No other foundation can any man lay, than that which is already
laid, which is JESUS CHRIST; 1 Cor. 3. 11. and, These are living stones built
upon him, 1 Per, 2. 5. Othoniel delivered the Israelites from Chushan, and is
therefore called their Savior, Judge. 3. 9. but they fell again into the hand
of Moab, Ehud rescued them from the Moabites, and they became servants to the
Canaanites, Judge. 4. 2. A Physician may cure a man of one disease, and he may
after fall into another, or the same, and dye of it: But CHRIST has them sure,
John 10. 28. I give my sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish; he
has washed away the^r sins, and made a passage to heaven, a perfect and sure
rock of safety, upon which these are placed.

Antiquam generis labem mortalibus agris
Abluit, Sannazarius de Parta virginis. lib. 1.
obstructique viam patefecit Olympi.
Poor mortals sick, he washed has
from ancient stain Original,
And opened wide Olympus path
that barred was and shut to all.
So that here, the gates of Hell, and Luciferiall powers of darkness may
shoot their darts of poisoned malice, as against CHRIST the head, Math. 4. so
against these the members, to be retorted upon themselves, as from a tower of
brass; for ^hee that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep; and
though the two first parts be cut off and dye, the third will the Lord fine as
Silver and Gold, Zach. 13. 9.

And from this consideration arises a Cordial, Cordial.
a Caveat, and a doleful Madrigall. First, it affords a comfortable cordial
to the Christian, that he is one of those secret ones, inwardly called,
separated from the world, and endued with power from above: This is the summum
bonum and chief dignity and blessedness of all other; So that it may be said
of him, as a certain heathen, of a wise man, Sapiens unominor est Jove.
of a wise man, He is only less then God: And as another spoke of the
virtuous, Horat.
He that has virtue, Omnia ei assunt bona, quem penes est virtus. Plaut. in
Amphit.
has with her (as a dowry) all good things. As the Lord of hoastes, and of
the whole earth, and all that therein is, Psalm. 24. 1. accounts it his
greatest dignity, and title of honor to be styled The Lord God of Israel, of
his Church, Luke 1. 67. as thence receiving his greatest honor: So is it the
chiefest honor of a man to be an Israelite, a limme and member of that
Society, of the Communion of Saints. It is indeed the worlds felicity to build
pillars with Absalom, towers with Nimrod, to call our lands after our own
names, to engrosse rich revenewes, Parsonages, and patrimonies for our
posterity, to build our nests on high, and to covet an evil covetousnes to our
houses, while The stones cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber
answer it, Hab. 2. 9. worse than the King of Sodom, Genesis 14. 21. Give me the
souls, and take the goods to thy self: But we say to the spiritual king of
Sodom the devil, give us the goods, and take our souls to thy self. This is
our hope, and our posterity praise our doing, selling our Savior for thirty
pence, our heaven for a mess of pottage, and our souls laid in the bank for
a quid dabitis? What will ye give me? Ps. 4. 6. Who will show us any good? O
miserable mucke-worme, that sellest thy soul and thy solace, Non dom^^ aut
fundus, ^on aeris acervus and auri, Aegroto domino deducunt corpore febres.
thy heaven and thy happiness for these faile-friends, which in the time of
need cannot so much as cure the aching of thy finger, much less give ease to a
sinne-loaden, sin-sicke soul: Horat.
All they can do, is to attend thy loathsome corpse, like a ricke of hay to thy
cursed burial. But the Godly with David place their felicity in the remission
of sins, Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no sin:
In Gods favorable countenance, Psalm. 4. 6. Lord lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us; and this exceedes all things else as far as the Sun
excels the least light-borrowing star, as the purest gold, the foulest
dross; the poorest officer in this fraternity, is preferred before a
scepter-swaying Monarch, Psalm. 84. 10. I had rather be a door keeper in the
house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness. Here is keys
before crowns, caitiffes before Kings, Lazarus before Lords: What then will it
profit a man to win the whole world, and to lose his own soul? Mat. 16. 26.
Extra Ecclesiam nulla salus.
Remove thy self then from all societies, and join thy self unto this, as
Moses left the idolatrous profane court of Pharao; and refused to be called
the son of Pharaohs daughter, and joined himself to Gods people, Heb. 11.
24. So do thou shun the tents of wickedness, and when all the wicked societies
in the world shall be deplumed and cast into hell, thou shall be received into
everlasting habitations. Rejoice in the Lord, and again I say, rejoice, Phil.
4. 4.

Next is the Caveat; Caveat.
and this like a watchman standing upon a turret of the Temple, gives warning
to take heed to the calling, whereunto God has called us, and to walk worthy
of it. As it was with the Egyptians and Israel, wheresoever the one was, there
was darkness, but the other had light: So must Gods people be discerned from
others by the light of their conversation, shining as a candle upon a
candlestick, in the sight of all, 1 Pet. 2. 11.
as a city, or beacon upon a hill. Have your conversation honest among the
Gentiles, that they seeing your good works, may glorify God in the day of
their visitation. A Christian must take heed how he walks; hence the Apostles
Caveat for thy feet, Ephesians. 5. Walk circumspectly: For thy tongue, let no
filthy communication proceed out of thy mouth; it must not be like Shallecheth,
but the beautiful gate of the Temple: Full of grace are thy lips, Psalm. 45.
For thy loins, they must not be loose and lascivious, but girt; For thy eyes,
Job. 31. 1. I have made a covenant with mint eyes, and so for the rest, all
must be like the strings of a Davidicall Harp in tune: All thy ways are
marked, and by thy weakness, and upon thine infirmities the profane wretch
lays the lawfulness of his impieties. If the Abbot pipes, Citharizante
Abbate, tripudiant Monachi.
the Monks dance; As Popish pictures and images are laymens books; so
examples are the bests patterns, Longum iter per verba, breve and compendio
sum per exempla. Seneca.
and most followed. One vivall is better than ten vocal instruments. A
Christian is the salt of the earth, if he loose his savor, wherewith must he
be seasoned? Take heed then of stayning thy profession, Si doctcr erraverit,
quo alio doctore emendadabitur? Hierony.
whether general or particular; In thee every mote is a mountain, every
cicatrice a Cocatrice, and every fall is a full sea of iniquity. As it is
unseemely for Achilles to have the base behavior, and be a drudge to the
servile offices of Thersites: So is it for a Christian nobly sprung of the
blood royal of heaven, to bow himself to the base druggery of the most base
of creatures, Satan. Agnosce O Christian, Leo Sermon. 1 de Nativ. Christi.
dignitatem tuam, and divine consors factus naturae, noli in veterem vilitatem
degeneri conversatione redire: memento cujus capitis, and cuius corporis sis
membrum, reminiscere quod erutus de potestate tenebraru^, translatus es in Dei
lumen and regnum: Acknowledge, O Christian, thy dignity, and that thou art made
partaker by the divine nature: return not into thy old vileness of thy
degenerate conversation; remember of whose head, and of whose body thou art a
member remember that thou art taken out of the power of darkness, and
translated into the light and kingdom of God. Use then thy graces to Gods
glory; If thou have bin a dog, a Gentile, return not to thy vomit; If thou
have bin at the custom house, return not with Demas, but keep thy profession
unstained with Matthew. How grievous is it unto almighty God, to give give
graces to dishonor himself withal. As C^r^^^ shreatned to the river Gindes,
Herodotus in Clio.
that had drowned one of his white horses, to cut it into so many channels, till
it should loose both depth, name and glory; So will God deal with our virtues
and graces, pluck them from us if we abuse them, and leave us to a multitude
of enormous impieties, suffer the devil to re-enter us with seven worse than
himself, Math. 12. 26.
fill us so full of the tares of iniquity, that not the glory, nay scarce, the
name of Christian shall be left written upon us: as may be seen in Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 24. See ye him whom the Lord has chosen, that there is none like unto
him among the people, endued with excellent gifts of government, and fought
many excellent battles of the Lord; but when he began to rebel, and go
against the commandment of God, as in the matter of Agag, Chap. 15. then Chap.
16. 14. The spirit of the Lord departed from him, and an evil spirit from the
Lord troubled him, deprived and deplumed of all those graces of excellent
government.

The like we see in Julian, Vide Hist. Ecclesiast. Tripartit. lib. 6. cap. 1.
who being borne of Christian parents, from the line of religious Constantine,
so carefully lettered and educated in Christianity, and that under Christian
teachers, that he was forbidden to hear Libanius the Syrian, because he was a
Pagan: Yet afterward harkening to the Pagans, he was deprived of the
profession of the Cross, and became a fearful Apostats, both an Ismael with
his tongue and pen, and an Esau with his sword, persecuting his former
profession, blasphemously continuing therein to his last gasp, which was
breathed out full of blasphemi^; when the fatal dart had given him his deadly
wound, whether by the ministry of men or Angel, he filled his hand with his
blood and cast it into the air, saying thus reprochfully of CHRIST, Vicisti
Galil^^e. Theod^rit. Hist. tripart. lib. 6. cap. 46.
Thou have overco^e, O thou Galelian.

The like of Nero, whose first five years were peaceable and gracious, that we
might say of him as Suetonius of T^tus, He was the love and delight of mankind:
But after falling to st^ddy Magic, and sold himself to a Lern^ and ^^ltitude
of vices, Corpore fuit maceluso and faedo. Sueton. in Net. Plin. lib. 30. cap.
that he made his mind as filthy as his body, he lost all virtue, and became
the vilest Monster that ever the earth bred, Niceph. lib. 2. Eccles. Hist. cap.
37.
or bore: he delighted as much in villainies and strange murders, as ever he
did in his Music; Notu^ feritate Lycaon. Ovid. lib. 1. Metam.
the first persecuter of the Church among the Roman Emperors in the Martyrdom
of Paul and Peter, a Saul-like blood sucker in fratricide, marricide, and what
not: a monster of men, notable in nothing but cruelty, and villainy, a strange
Lycanthropicisme, inward, outward, all wolvish; that it is truly verifyed of
him, which was proved upon Pope Alexander the 6, his parallel in most things,
Spongi^ sanguinis.
That he was a spounge of blood: And the like may we see in the Church of Rome,
degenerate from her primitive purity, to that height of abominations.
Therefore let us (as it is counseled to the Church of Thyatira, R^^. 2. 25)
Hold fast, let no man take away the crown of our profession, let us be known
by our works; Let thy light shine when the cloudy children of darkness grope
at noone day as the blinded Sodomites: Be thou that one among a thousand, of
whom the Heathen;

-- Vix repperit vnum, In calce Opus^. Virgilij.

Millibm e multis hominem consultus Apollo.
The Or^cle^ Apollo being asked,
Scarce of a thousand finds a man but maskt.
Let then thy love to God, to his word, be without dissimulation, thy
profession without hypocrisy, thy calling and conversation without stain,
that thou may be found blameless in the great day of the Lord.

Last, from these considerations arises an Elegiacall or doleful Madrigall,
Madrigall Ezekiel. 2. 19.
which (like Ezeki^ls book) is written within and without, the contents
whereof is nothing but lamentations, and mourning and woe: Or Zacharies flying
book of judgments, Zach. 5.
which shall light upon the head of every hypocritical and impenitent person,
though he stand within the Circle of the visible Church, even wrapped up with
cursed Cham, in the compass of the Arc of safety; standing in the way while
CHRIST passes by, and not so much as touching the hemme of his garment;
abiding in the garden while it is watered and planted, and yet remaining
withered and rootelesse; lying by the all-curing poole of Bethes^^ while the
Angel moves the waters, Job. 5. and not moving a foot to be washed, having
the prophet directing thee to Jordan, and never bathing for thy leprosy, 2
Kings, ^5. living in the fruitful Gilead, and never tasting the sweetness of
the balm; Ier. 8. last verse.

Hear this all ye that stand as yet strangers from grace, that have not yet
broken the strong cords of your sins, have made no divorce and separation
betwixt you and your iniquities; what grief of heart should this be to
consider, how many have been clothed in white roabes, and you still remain
in your Gibeonitish rags; to see the grace of God in abundance (as the holy
Ghost at Pentecost) Acts 2. lighting on every side of you, in the country,
town, family and society wherein we live, and you remain the barren fig
tree, Telluris in utile pondus.
troubling the ground. To see the rain (as in Ahabi time) watering and
fructifying every soil, but your own: To see the shower wetting every stone
in the street, and you still abiding under the pent-house; to see every one
receiving a penny, and you remain idle in the market place; to see lamps full
of oil, and yours empty. Should not this cause thee to breathe out thy
doleful Madrigall, Wretched man that I am, Romans 7. how miserable and
lamentable is thy estate? Pray then beloved for the dew of grace, supplicate
with the spouse: Awake O north wind, Can. 4. 16.
and come thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow
out; that the spirit of Grace may season thee; that the Lord would open unto
thee, Zach. 12. 10.
the fountain promised to the house of David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem;
for sin and uncleanness, Zach. 13. ^. Till then thou stand a stranger
from God, from Christ, and have no part or portion in salvation. Suffer not
thine eyes to sleep, nor thine eye lids to slumber until thou find out a
place for the Lord, even thy soul to be an habitation for the mighty God of
Jacob, Psalm. 132.

4. Let the want of Christ ^ent thy heart, and distill as in a limbecke thy
pumice eyes, and flinty heart into tears; and let the heads of the dragons,
thy sins Be broken in these waters. In the mean time I dare not send thee to
despair, I have no such commission, so long as God vouchsafes in the out ward
calling, to let thee stand in the way of grace, waiting for thy year of
Iubilee and deliverance; but if it still pass by thee, thou had better never
have bin borne, or strangled in the birth.

To teach us, Use. 2.
never to despair of any man's salvation, but to judge charitably of all men;
The first may be last, and the last may be first, and they that are not now
under mercy, may go to heaven before us: We must not be rash in this, as those
that have affirmed Salomons damnation. No man must presume to understand above
that which is meet to understand, Romans 12. 3.
but he must understand according to sobriety; and what it is to understand
according to sobriety he expresses, 1 Cor. 4. 6. No man must presume to
understand above that which is written. Revelation or Euthusiasmes we have
none, as the familists and others have thought; and without word or Revelation
we cannot know, Who knows the mind^ of the Lord, 1 Cor. ^. 16. He only
knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. He imparteth not this mystery unto us, except
upon the matter of malicious Apostacy, and ^inne against the Holy Ghost, as in
Iulia^, L^ria^, ^^^phyry, Heliodorus, etc. 1 John 5. 16. A sin unto death,
which God will not forgive either in this world or in the world to come; a
final revolting and backsliding from God, a total separation of the soul
from the life of grace, without return; and so we must understand that, ^eb.
6. 4. It is impossible that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and of the power of the world to come, if they fall away
(viz. finally, Novatiani negabant lapsis poenitentia^. vide Niceph. Eccles.
hist. lib. 11 cap. 14.
totally, maliciously) should be renewed by repentance etc. Orelse we fall into
that Heresy, That a man fallen into sin cannot be re^^ored by repentance;
and so we understand that place. Heb. 10. 26. If we ^inne willingly after we
have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more sacrifice
for sins, but a fearful looking for of judgment, Theodorit. lib. 3. cap.
16.
etc. of a general revolt from CHRIST, malice against his, as in Arius and
Julian, waging war against God; not in Abraham twice dissembling, David
adulterizing, Joseph swearing by the life of Pharaoh, though they fell
fearfully, insomuch as David, Psalm. 73. 22. confesses himself to be a beast
in Gods sight; yet he fell not finally, but still as a man in danger of
drowning, he started not from the anchor of Gods mercy.

Therefore let the rule of charity lead us to a charitable judging of men
which perhaps are not yet under mercy, and say of them as David of the child, 2 Samuel 12. 22. Who can tell whether God will be gracious or no? Never things more
unlikely to be performed, than the promise concerning the calling of the
Gentiles. CHRIST may be found even upon the Cross to the condemned thief,
Stella super Luc.
Luke 23. 40. all his disciples were sted, yet his new disciple boldly
confesses him before his enemies. Here is a marveilous Faith; others believed
on him when he raised the dead, thou beleevest on him when he is dying. Abraham
believed God speaking from heaven, Genesis 12. Esaias from his throne, Esaias 6. Moses
from the bush; but thou beleevest him hanging on the Cross, more like a
malefactor than a Messiah, a sinner than a Savior. Surely many have bin
glorious believers, but thou surpassest them all, Per vnum verbum factus est
haeres Paradisi. Stella Ibid.
by one word speaking is he made heir of Paradise; this thief that came the
last to his work, receives his first payment, This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise, Luke 23. The like may we see, Math. 20. some were called early in
the morning, some at the third hour, some at the sixth and ninth hour, some at
the eleventh hour; So some are called in their youth as Josiah, some at one
time, some at another, some one way, some another. We must neither prescribe
time nor means to almighty God, the supreme Lord and maker of time and
means; The wind blows where it lists, John 3. 8. where the spirit is
compared to wind for the free liberty of it is blowing, and for the power of it:
As no man can resist the wind, so no man can resist the working of the Spirit,
when God will; as we may see in the conversion of that rare Luminary of the
Church St. Augustine; Vide Aug lib. de Confess.
little did he dream of it, when he went rather for carping than profiting,
to hear Saint Ambrose: Thus Acts 2. 41. Three thousand were called at one
sermon of Peter's, which even now were mocking the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit in the Apostles: so that God can give grace and show mercy inter pont em
and fontem, betwixt the brook and the bridge. His voy^e that causes the
Thunder, and makes the Hindes to calve, and that mighty voice of CHRIST, John
11. 17. which shall raise the dead, shall raise thee from the death of sin,
as he did Lazarus that stuncke in the grave.

Comfort thy self then, he that receives the Gentiles casts away none that
come unto him, John 6. 37. He that breaks not the bruised reed, nor
quenches the smoking flax, will not reject thee. Here is comfort for Parents
if they have wicked Children, Masters if they have wicked servants, and
especially for Ministers if they have profane Parishioners, and that as yet
they have labored in vain, Note.
and brought forth to the wind; Yet they must expect with patience. Some are
called sooner, some later, the vision is yet for an appointed time, but in the
end it shall speak, and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it, because it
will surely come, and will not tarry, Hab. 2. 3. The Mariner leaves not the
sea, though his voyage be not profitable at the first: the Husbandman leaves
not plowing, though as yet he have an ill Harvest: so must not you Pastors, and
Parents be discouraged, Job 1. 5.
but (with Job for your children, with Paul and Samuel for the people) offer
the incense of your prayers for them: Instruct them, correct them, persuade
them, go as patterns of good lives wisely in and out before them; and who can
tell if the Lord willbe merciful unto them?

But I would not have any emboldned by this, to climb as high as the sin of
Presumption, Psalm. Privilegia paucorum non faciunt legem communem. Stella ubi
supra.
19. 13. For as one Swallow makes not a Summer; so the privileges of a few,
make not a general rule: He saved (says Saint Augustine) one at the last
gasp, that we should not despair, and but one, that we should not presume. We
know a wound, the longer it is festered, the harder it is to be cured: a bird
newly taken, struggles in the Cage, but being accustomed, is content with her
bondage; enemies being entered, are hardly expelled: Qui non est body cras
minus aptus eri^. Ovid.
so with the sinner in his repentance, the longer deferred, the more unfit is a
man to perform it: Therefore beloved, rise from the bed of thine iniquities,
the stinking grave of thy sins, and though thou were as black as the tents
of Kedar, had seven devils with Magdalene; nay, as many as he, whose name
was Legion, as profane as a Gentile, as spotted as a Leopard, as filthy as a
Swine, or a Dog; upon thy true repentance, the blood of CHRIST shall purge
thee, and perfume thee, and make thee white as snow in Salmon.

To teach us, Use. 3.
that seeing none are so miserable, but the Gospel can make them happy, none
so far gone in sin, but the mighty voice of CHRIST can raise them: then to
bewail the hardness of our hearts, that have the same powerful means of
salvation in a greater abundance and plenty then they had, and yet remain
obdura^e. CHRIST JESUS is not the flower of the garden enclosed, but of the
field; not private to a few, but may be gathered of all; first indeed, Judge. 6.
37. The fleece of Gideon was wet, and the barne-floore dry, then the
barne-floore was wet, and the fleece dry: So first God gave his Law to the seed
of Abraham, but afterward we which were the wild Olives were ingraffed, and
the natural Olives rejected, Romans 11. 17. God is now rich unto all that call
upon him faithfully; Crux Christi non est ara templi, sed etiam ara mundi. Leo.
the Cross is not the altar of the Temple, but the altar of the world; CHRIST'S
death is sufficient, not only for part, 2. Cor. 12. 9. but for the whole world
of believers, though never so weak, My strength is made perfect in weakness.
If thou will not then gather this flower of saving grace, it is thine own
negligence; it is not enclosed in the garden, but grows in the common field,
Cant. 2. 1. Can the Gospel, the inexhausted treasury of grace, so mightily and
powerfully conquer these worlds of people, to the obedience of faith, striking
them down to the ground with Saul, Acts 9. 4. bringing them to such a tender
sense of the glorious riches thereof; and are not our hearts melted and stirred
within us? Though the Lord cry and roar, and rouse up himself in jealousy as
a man of war; and are not we still deaf and hear not, blind and see not?
still putting off our repentance, the forsaking of our vanities, the breaking
of our Sampson-like cords of sin, our removing from our Sodom, our love to
the Garlic and Onions of Egypt, the stinking sulphurious lakes of lusts and
profaneness; our-returning with Noah's dove to the arc of safety, and with
the profuse prodigal Gentile to our own fathers house. Multi aeternaliter
damnantur, and finaliter in peccatis detinentur, quia ad vocem domini se non
corrigunt. Dionys Cajet. in speculo amat. mundi.
Many are eternally damned, and finally detained in their sins, because they
return not, when the Lord calls, but say to morrow we will repent, while
the gate of mercy be shut. To morrow is the voice of the Raven which returned
not to the Arc, Genesis 8. 7. but the dove comes home with her Olive of peace.
Why will ye dye, O house of Isreal's standing in the desperate estate of the
young man, Mortuus Christo and Deo. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 20.
which was dead unto CHRIST and unto God: Or like Paul's wanton widows, which
are dead whilst they live, 1. Tim. 5. 6. Was the Word able to raise the
Gentiles? suffer it then to conquer thy lusts, to mollify thy hard heart, to
wash thee, to supple thee in the fountain of Israel, the Spring of living
waters, to be a lantern unto thy feet, and a light unto thy paths, Psalm. 119.

It is worthy the consideration of the most considerate, that CHRIST is come
unto thee. Ioh. 1. 14. The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us: And if thou
continue a wicked Cham, a cursed Canaan, a profane Esau, a flowting Ismael,
and come not unto him by prayer and obedience, Christus venit ad homines, in
homines, and contrahomines.
and he into thee by his Spirit, John, 14. 17. be sure he will come to thee,
and against thee in his judgments to thy most fearful ruin and destruction,
Appion.
as he came to Herod, Julian, Antiochus, like a Lioness bereft of her whelps,
and to the rest of his enemies, Luke 19. 27. Those mine enemies, That would
not, that I should reign over them, bring hither and stay them before me.
Kiss the Son, least he be angry; and ye perish in the way, Psalm. Da mihi
domine te defiderare, defiderando quaerere, and quarendo invenire.
2. Inflame my heart, O Lord, with zeal to desire thee, desiring thee, to
seek thee, and give me grace by seeking to find thee, in the word,
Sacraments, etc.

To teach us, Use. 4.
that until a man's eyes be opened, his heart touched, and his soul
enlightened, and he by the Gospel endued with the power of grace from above,
he sees no glory nor excellency in religion and Christianity; like those
Gentiles, so long as they wallowed in their sins, and superstitious vanities,
the precious word of reconciliation was to them, but as pearls cast before
Swine, Math. 7. 6. Or the childrens bread unto dogs, Math. 15. 26. But when
the unsearchable riches of CHRIST was preached unto them, a mystery which from
the beginning of the world was hid in God, and not opened to the sons of men,
nor to very Angels, principalities and powers, Ephesians. 3. 5. 8. 9. the
accomplishment of which riches, is the glory and joy of heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 12.
the Angels desire, and delight to look into it; we see how inwardly they are
affected with it, and they see no glory in any thing else, as the wife of
Phineas, 1 Samuel 4. 21. calling the arc, Acts 9. 1.
the glory of Israel: As Saul, before an Herod, a Julian, persecuting CHRIST
with as much fury, as any tyrant, breathing out nothing but fire and faggot;
yet when he was smitten down to the ground by the powerful voice of CHRIST,
he became a most zealous Preacher of the truth, in which formerly he saw no
glory; and a pillar of that Church, which even now he would have pulled down,
and desires to know nothing but CHRIST and him crucified, Gal. 6. 14. he joys
in nothing else. Those also, Acts 2. 13. that were mocking the gifts of the
Spirit in the Apostles, affirming the heat of too much wine to cause that
volubility of strange languages among them: Yet when Peter had taught them,
that it was the accomplishment of Gods faithful promise prophesied by Joel,
chap. 2. 28. of the pouring out the bottomless Ocean of Gods Spirit in the
gifts and graces thereof upon all flesh; and had applied a corrasive of
redargution and reproof unto them for crucifying CHRIST, they are changed and
pricked in their hearts, longing after the way of salvetion, verse. 37. Men and
brethren, what shall we do? The like we see, Acts 16, in the laylor, when he
heard Paul and Silas praying and singing Psalms in the Prison, he is presently
like King Saul, 1 Samuel: 10. 9. when the Spirit of God came upon him, changed
into another man: So in him was a strange alteration, being cast down by the
miraculous earthquake, and the cohibition of Paul, verse 29. his backwardness
into forwardness, he called for a light and sprang in; his pride into
humility, he came trembling and fell down; his cruelty in his former insulting
over them, into compassionate mercy, he brought them forth; his desire (which
was formerly to persecute them) to be saved by them, What shall I do to be
saved? So the sinne-sunke citizen woman, that had a long time almost rotted in
the Dead Sea, and sulphurous Asphaltites of loathsome lust, hearing of a JESUS
a Savior, though in a proud Pharisees house, Luke 7. 37. sticks neither for
costly ointment to annoint him, nor s^a^e to stand behind him, nor plenty of
tears to wash his feet, who was watering her soul with the dew of Grace;
nor her hair, which sometime (like Nauplius his lights to bring the Grecian
fleet to destruction, Nauplius vlturus necem filij sui Palamedis, falso indicio
Graecis Troja victa, redeuntibus facem e scopulis tanquam e portu ostentavit
etc.
in revenge of his son Palamedes) was as a bait to ensnare the hurtlesse
passenger, to wipe his feet, which was to wipe her soul with the immaculate
sacrifice of his own blood, John, 1. 29.

Thus we see Publicans and sinners, when once they are touched in remorse for
finne, Dictus Cretensis de reditu Graecorum.
how deeply they are affected, and inwardly touched, Romans 7. 24. Wretched man
that I am, Dares hr Pygius.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death? even with Ezekiah, Esaias 38.
14. To chatter like a Crane, or a swallow, and mourn like a dove with David,
Job, and the children of God; with prayers, tears, watchings, mournings, to
fill heaven and earth for the pardon of their sins, their reconciliation with
God, the peace of conscience, the comfort of the Spirit of comfort, and the
Salvation of their souls. When the civil honest man is scarcely moved with
any sense or feeling of the need of his conversion, he feels no sweetness in
the word, which is sweeter than honey, or the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 10. He
feels no need of it, Recta and sana doctrina est suavissimus pastus animorum.
and yet Job esteems it above his ordinary food: we have our spiritual life
by it, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being borne anew, not of mortal, but of immortal seed
by the word of God, which lives and endures for ever. We have Gods benefits
for his words sake, 2 Samuel 7. 21. For thy words sake, and according to thy
promise, have thou done all these great things: The preaching there of makes
Sa^an fall down as lightning, Luke 10. 18. Witness those new found Indi^^,
lamaica, Iappo, Virginia, which have formerly had a strange familiar commerce
with Satan, and have sacrificed unto him, though not for love, yet for fear of
heart; Ex histor. universally vtriusque Indiae.
as the Pigusians every morning run with baskets full of rice to pacifi^ him
in the shape of a black dog, with many more brutish benevolences to him. So
soon as Christopher Columbus and others had discovered them, and planted the
Gospel in some parts of them, how deeply have these poor Pagans bin
affected, and the kingdom of Satan demolished, that now seldom or never he
appears among them: He sees no power in it, he accounts of the threatenings
denounced out of the Word, but as Morbasan the Turk did of the Excommunication
of Pius 2. when he sent him word to call in his Epigrams:

Thus do wicked men and civil honest men, when God threatens the confiscation
of their consciences, their banishment from heaven, and hanging in hell: Like
those, Esaias 28. 15. which have made a covenant with death, and are at an
agreement with hell, when the overflowing scourge shall pass through, it shall
not come nigh us, when as heaven and earth shall pass, and be melted like wax
at the presence of God in the day of conflagration, before one title either of
the threatenings, or promises of God in the Word shall be dissolved, but
fulfilled. He sees no comfort in the Sacrament, which is offered, the true and
living bread which came down from heaven, Ioh 6. 32. the bread of life, verse
48. My flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; and so of the rest
of Gods holy ordinances, in which the sons of the earth find no favor, no
sweetness, or comfort, but like the Cock on the dunghill, esteem a barley
corn above a pearl. Whereas the man whose eyes are opened, makes them his
comfort in the house of his pilgrimage: he sees nothing in those mundane and
sublunary vanities, but grief and vexation of spirit; only in Religion, and
the ways of godliness is his repose and rest, he says with Paul, 1 Timothy 6. 6.
Without controversy great is the gain of godliness, his soul is filled
with marrow and fatness; be esteems it as Balaam prophesied of the glory of
the Church, Numb. 24. 5. How goodly are thy tents O Jacob, and thy tabernacles,
O Israel! O let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
his, Number. 23. 10.

To teach us, to acknowledge the wonderful power of God in the salvation of
man, when our estates in Gentilisme were most desperate and miserable, 1 John
5. 9. The whole world lying in wickedness. Or as Esaias, Chap. 35. 1. calls the
Gentiles a wilderness, a desert, unfruitful, barren, rough, and good for
naught, but to be dens for wild Beasts, Dragons, and Serpents: Even so we
were a habitation (not for the mighty God of Jacob) but for the infernal
Dragon the Devil; yet by Gods powerful grace, this wilderness exceeds
Lebanon, and Carmel for fruitfulness, he has made this desert to flourish as
a rose, he has made this wild Olive to be grafted in, and be made partaker of
the root and fatness of the Olive tree, Romans 11. 17. has made us unto God
the sweet savor of Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 15. From rejected, refuse, and castaway
stones which the builders refused, has powerfully raised us up children to
Abraham, Mat. 3. 9. has made us of strangers from the true God, sacrificing
with the Athenians, Act. 17. 23. to the unknown God, Elobim gentium sunt
Elilim.
Psalm. 96, 5. The gods of the Nations, are vanities, to be partakers of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. has given us the Spirit of wisdom, Ephesians. 1. 17.
He has opened the barren womb of Sara, and made it fruitful in the Child of
promise, has opened the uncircumcised hearts of the uncircumcision of the
Gentiles; has turned the dry rocks into pooles of water, so that these things
which are impossible with men, Luke 18. 27.
are possible with God.

Learn then to acknowledge it the mighty power of God, to call a sinner from
Iezabels loathed bed, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God. Say then
with David, The right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass. And let
us which are abjects of the Gentiles, which have no true honor but in Gods
covenant, draw water with comfort out of these wels of Salvation, Esaias 12. Act
10. 34.
3. because God is no accepter of persons. The promises of the Gospel are
universal, John 3. 16.
he respects not thy outward respects, Romans 10. 12.
thy learning, riches, Mat. 11. 28.
circumcision, or uncircumcision, but his own determinate will in electing
thee. John 1. 13.
What could he see in us Gentiles but a mass of Idolatries, Romans 9 7.
and stained pollutions? yet he has purified us by faith in the blood of
Christ, 1 John 1. 7. Politicians and Statists can see no honor, but in earthly
Kingdoms, profaning their lives, in making it their scope and drift to get
riches and honors: But this is that which makes us truly honorable, to be
translated out of death into life, to be taken as Abraham, a brand out of
Chaldea, from Gentilisme to true religion. Let this then be thy comfort, that
when all the Machiavils, Statists, and Politicians in the world, that have died
without CHRIST, and never could see any glory but in vainglory, shall be
tumbled headlong into ruin and perdition, Esaias 30. last verse, thou shall be
received into everlasting habitations. O taste and see, that the Lord is good,
blessed is the man that trusts in him, Psalm. 34. 8. All the Kings of the
earth could not have done this; Cyrus, Alexander, and all the rest, who in the
power of their armies, and pride of their hearts have wept, because there were
no more worlds to conquer, with all their authorities, commands and threatenings
could never heal a dog of his lamenesse; as we see in those two greatest
kings of Syria and Israel, both which could not cure Naamans leprosy, as the
King of Israel answered, 2 Kings 5. 7. Am I a God to kill and give life, that
he does send to me to cure a man of his leprosy? much less can they cure a
spiritual leprosy of sin; Esaias 32. 3.
he can open our lips, Psalm. 51. 17. open our eyes to know the hope of our
calling, Ephesians. 1. 18. open our ears, Job 33. 16. by corrections which he had
sealed: he can raise us from death, for he is our resurrection, John 11. 25.
which all the power of man, the poole of Bethesda, the water of Siloam cannot
do, Ezeh. 47. 8.
but only that Fountain opened to the house of David, Zach. 9. 11.
and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and uncleanness, which is CHRIST,
Zach. 13. 1. it springs up in thee to eternal life, and thou shall never
thirst after, Aquatantum ascindit quantum descendit.
John 4. 14. As other waters flow as high as they descend: So this having it is
Spring and Fountain from life, being the chiefest aqua vitae, stays not till
it bring a man to life through the Channels and conduits of the Word and
Sacraments: so the Word is said to drop and distill, Job 29. Deuteronomy. 32. 2
22. This is then the comfort, Esaias 55. 7. He that thirsts come then to the
waters and drink, Ezech. 21. 2
ye that have no silver, come buy and eat, come buy wine and milk without
silver and money. Draw then with joy, thou abject of the Gentiles, at this
common Fountain, least being unquenched and as yet scorching in thy
transgressions, Apicius had 1000 Cooks.
thou be forced with the luxurious Apicius and pampered Epulone, to thirst
without mercy or pity in the place of torments for evermore, Luke 16. 24.

To teach us, Use. 6.
that are Gentiles by nature, and yet called by the inmeasurable mercy of God,
and that freely by the righteousness of God made manifest without the Law, Romans
3. 21. and made the true Israel of God, not outwardly in the flesh, but
inwardly by faith and the promise, Romans 9. 8. The children of the promise are
counted for the seed; we which were a far off, Zach. 6. 15. must come to
build in the temple of the Lord, the last house, whose glory shall exceed the
first, Hag. Josephus de bello Iudaico.
2. 10: that is, the spiritual Temple, not that which was reedified by Cyrus,
for to this came the liberality of Alexander, and the kings of Egypt, with many
other; nor the magnificence of Seleucus, 2 Machab. 3. 3. a king of Asia, who of
his own rents was liberal toward the material temple: But we are called to
build the spiritual Temple, as it came to pass at the calling of the Gentiles
how many Master builders, more cunning than Vitruvius, came in to lay the
lively stones of this spiritual structure, as Luke the Evangelist from
Antioch, Barnabas from Cyprus, Timothy and Titus from Greece, Aristarchus,
Aquila, Dionysius Areopagita, Onesiphorus, Hermes, with infinite more; and in
ages following, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Hierom, Basil, Ambrose, Augustine, etc.
To come nearer to our own times, what famous Luminaries and lights have shined
from Belgia and other parts, 3 Noble men from France, Sadeel, Morney, and
Iunius.
as Luther, Calvin, Oecolampadius, Marlorat, Bucer, Bullinger. In our own
times, out of our own nation, our own tribes, and families; reverend Fulke,
Whitaker, Raynolds, Field, Willet, Perkins, Andrews, the late Bishop of
Winchester, and the present famous Doctor Hall, now Bishop of Exeter, all which
have issued out of the dark celles of gentilisme, which have brought their
gold, theit silver, and some their lives, to the building of this spiritual
Temple. What should this, I say, teach us, but (in tender compassion to the
Jewish nation) to pray heartily for their restoring, since they were cut off,
that we might be grafted on, Romans 11. 19 they were the holy seed, the first
borne the first and natural heirs to the Gospel, Iudaei primi and naturales
heredes Evangelij.
Mat. 15. 22. I am not sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel;
Calvin lib. 4. cap 16.. 14. Institut.
God chose them above all nations, Deuteronomy. 7 6. he loved them, Deuteronomy. 10. 15.
Jacob was his portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 8. and he has promised (though for their
ingratitude he has for a while rejected them, and suffers them as Caines and
vagabonds to wander without any abiding place, yet) in the end to call them
home, Zach. 12. 10. He will pour upon the house of Jacob, and the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication, that is, the Holy Ghost
with the graces thereof, and which restoring, Paul proves Romans 9. and 11. that
they shall be called and acknowledge CHRIST, and wishes to be separated from
CHRIST in the ardency of his love toward them, so that they might be restored.
O pray then for the peace of Jerusalem, that thy God would perform his promise
in their conversion, with David, Psalm. 51. 18. Be favorable unto Sion, and
build the walls of Jerusalem; and Paul, my hearty desire for Israel is, that
they may be saved. Let thy heart be greived then to see the horrid desolation
of them, as Nehemiah 1. nothing could be so pleasant unto him, as the
desolation of Jerusalem was grievous; He is but a merciless Samaritane, that
neglects his duty, and woe to him that is an enemy to Isreal's common wealth;
but let us pray for Jerusalem, that prosperity may be within her walls, and
peace within her palaces.

[People] that is, The second subject of this duty.
as we formerly noted, the Jew of the stock of Sem, which God knew before all
nations; Amos 3 2. and thus beloved were they not in regard of themselves, but
of Gods free election: So the difference betwixt these two seeds is not
because the one embraced CHRIST, and the other refused him; for how can there
be a refusal, where the Messiah was not known? but among the Gentiles he was
not so much as named, Romans 15. 20. as their own Doctor witnesses. These Jews
were Gideons fleece, which was watered, when all the world beside was a barren
desert; the name of God, the Gospel of CHRIST, his love and favors were
appropriated only to the land of Jury, Mat. 10. 5. Go not into the way of the
Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritanes enter ye not: They thought his
providentiall care reached no farther, but was limited within the narrow skirts
of Palestina, Iudaei suspicabant soli Palestinae ipsum dominari, and ipsorum
tantummodo curam agere.
and only to have a care over them, as Theodorit speaks of them; they were as
the signet upon his right hand, as the apple of his eye, he that cursed them
was cursed, and they that blessed them were blessed; nay there is no
enchantment against Jacob, nor divination against Israel, Number. 22. 23. he set a
beautiful crown upon their heads, Ezech. 16. 12. that is, established the
Kingdom of his grace among them. Yet when they yielded not correspondence to
his word in dutiful obedience and thanksgiving, it came to pass as truth it
self had denounced against them Math. 21. 43. The kingdom of God (which was
their crown and honor) should be taken from them and given to a nation, that
should bring forth the fruits thereof. Jerusalem was the city which the Lord
did choose to place his name there, 2 Chronicles. 6. 6. She was a faithful city,
Esaias 1. 21. How is the faithful city become an Harlot? But departing from her
former stepps, Josephus de bello Iudaico lib. 7 cap 12. Migremus hinc. Eus.
Eccles Hist.
crucifying the Son of God, and killing his Saints, she was rejected and cast
off, a voice from heaven giving warning of her imminent rejection, lib. 3. cap.
saying, Let us depart hence. And Almighty God, like old Jacob, lays his right
hand upon the head of Ephraim the younger, and his left hand upon Manasses the
elder, Genesis 48. 14. Now one cluster of the grapes of Ephraim are better than a
whole Vintage of Abiezer, Judge. 8. 2. So now the right hand of honor is laid
upon the Gentile, and the Jews degraded, as the birthright was convayed from
Esau to Jacob, the Priesthood translated from Abiathar to Zadock, and the
regal dignity from Saul to David; the prodigal Gentile must have the fat
calfe killed, and be brought into the Kings Cellar, when the Elder has not
wherewith to make merry with his friends, Luke 15. 23, etc. Hence this doctrine.

God is not tied to any place or people. Doct. 1.
If the chosen Jews will not bring forth fruits worthy of the Gospel, but
despise it; he will provoke them to envy, even by a people which sought him
not, and for sin will remove his love and favor, his word, and worship, and
make it a free passage for the floodgates of his wrath, to their inevitable
destruction, and unavoydable ruin.

For confirmation of this truth, we need go no further than our proposed
pattern and example of this people, which was a chosen Cedar among all the
trees of the Forest, so long as holiness kept residence there, the Cisterne
into which the Fountain of all grace powered his blessings by many
Conduit-pipes and means, but they left their first love, Rev. 2. 4. cried loud
for Christ's blood to fall upon them and their children, Math. 27. 25. and so it
did: and now their gold is become dross, which makes the Prophets complain
that Bethel is become Bethaven, the house of God, the house of vanity, the
valley of vision into the valley of the shadow of death, Esaias 22. 1. Their
house is left unto them desolate, Mat. 23. 38. Look upon that famous City,
which was the glory of the world, whose turretted Bulwarks, and huge heaps of
wellcompacted Fabrics, made the Disciples to wonder, Mat. 24. 1. Mar. 13. 1.
and the Kings of the earth to stand amazed; yet now verefied that was spoken,
Ier. 19 11. I will break this people and this City, as one breaks a potters
vessel, that cannot be made whole again, and make their city as Tophet: and
Mic. 3. 12. Zion shall be plowed as a field, Jerusalem shall become heaps, and
the house of the Lord, as the high places of the Forest: The ruins thereof,
Civitas eorum in aeternos cineres collapsa est lib 4. cap. 19 in Ierem. in Dan.
c. 9.
says Jerome, shall continue to the worlds end, the consummation of her
desolation shall continue without any change, says Theodoret: Indeed Aelius
Adrianus the Emperor built a city near to it, Arias Montanus in Mic. cap. 3.
which he called after his own name Aelia, which since goes under the name of
Jerusalem, Iosep. de bello Iud. cap 18. and 28.
but has neither the fashion, nor situation of it; but of it, says Josephus,
the very foundations are laid so flat, as men would think there never had been
habitation there. The first captivity of the Jews after the Law, was that
prophesied, Ier. 51. 7. Babylon has been a golden cup in the Lords hand, that
made all the earth drunk with vengeance, which came upon them. Psalm. 137. 1.
By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept, etc. But they were surprised
again after the death of Christ, as being willing neither to bear the hard
yoke of the Law, nor that of the Gospel which is easy, The Romans bare the
Eagle in their Ensign.
Mat. 11. and a law of liberty, Iam. 2. 12. The Eagle in the Roman Ensign
towred so high with incredible majesty, that it couched all the world under
it, like lesser birds; and made them tributary to Caesar, to which this,
whilome holy land of Jury, now stinking in her abominations, became a prey; and
after many apparitions and voices from heaven, Josephus de bello Iudai: lib. 4.
6. 3. etc. 7.
from the East and West, and diverse civil broils within the walls, as if their
own hands had been made to be excoutioners of their rebellious souls; famine
making mothers eat their own children, and these wombes that first gave them
harbor, were made the places of their burial: then came the Pestilence, and
laid them grovelling by heaps gasping and gazing upon the Temple, so lamentably
and miserably, that Titus lifting up his eyes and hands to heaven, called God
to witness, it was not his cruelty, but their impiety that had awaked God in
vengeance, to bring the man upon the red horse, Rev. 5. 4. blood and war, and
winged sword to fly in triumph among them; so many slain, and so many taken
prisoners, Euseh. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. c. 6.
that thirty Jews were sold for one penny, because among them, their Master
was sold for thirty pence: Aelius Adrianus which built another City, would
have reedified this, but could not; Sozom. lib. 5. c. 1.
and Julian, the Apostata thought in his blasphemous imagination to have built
it, Ammi. Marcel lib. 23. c. 1.
as glorious as it was, to disprove CHRIST who had prophesied before of the
utter dissipation of it; Socrat. lib. 3. c. 17.
but he that sits in heaven laughed him to scorn, his workmen and work were
hindered by the falling of lime and sand, by the flashing of fire, and
earthquakes, as if God had laid the curse of Ierico upon it, Josh. 6. 26.
Cursed be the man before the Lord that raises up and builds this City. So
Jerusalem is like Reuben, Genesis 49. 2. The beginning of Gods manly strength, but
in the end was unstable as water, to forsake God, and so to be forsaken of him,
and her dignity is gone.

So this matchless, Nine special privileges of the Jews.
people, who had these nine most excellent privileges, which all the world
wanted, Romans 9. 4. First, to be Israelites, Secondly, to whom pertained the
Adoption; Thirdly, and the Glory; fourthly, and the Covenants; fifthly, and the
giving of the Law; sixthly, and the service of God; seventhly and the Promises;
eighthly, whose are the Fathers; ninthly, of whom came CHRIST according to the
flesh; and which adds to their dignity, the miracles of CHRIST, the
immediate work of his Godhead were wrought among them. Acts 10. 38. He went
about, doing good, and healing all that were oppressed with the devil, for God
was with him: yet all these are not able to sway with God, nor to keep back
the point of his flaming sword, that was brandished over them for sin, till
it was sheathed in their destruction, and their foreheads branded with Caines
mark, to wander dispersed upon the face of the earth, without King, without
Prince, without Priest, without Image, without Ephod, and without Teraphim, as
Israel aforetime was threatened, Hos. 3. 4. and they now have felt, almost as
long, as the first Age was before the Flood, Morn. du. Pless. de veritate
Christ. relig. cap. 29.
so scattered, and have so corrupted their own Pedegrees, that at this day
there is not a Jew in the world; which can say he has his genealogy certain,
but are a scattered and contemptible Nation, throughout the whole earth.

And not alone to instance in that now forsaken nation; such is the weight and
power of sin, that after the plantation of the Gentiles, the Church of Rome a
virgin, and the chaste, and faithful spouse of CHRIST, their faith was
renownedly spoken of through the whole world, Apud vos solos incorrupta
servatur patrum bereditas. Hier. ad Damas. Romans Episcop.
Romans 1. 8. continuing steadfast in that doctrine by which she became the Church
of CHRIST; but since when she became an unclean filth; prostituted to all
manner of fornications, embrued and drunken with the blood, which she has
spilt, usurping upon the land-markes of Supremacy, exalting her self above all
that is called God, and is worshipped, 2 These. 2. 4. like the proud Lucifer,
Esaias 14. 14. above the height of the clouds; her hateful ambition, cruelty,
and abominations has caused God, even to spue her out of his mouth, to give
her up to strong delusions, to believe lies; and has warned us, by an
admonition of his own Spirit, Reu. 18. 4. Come out of her my people.

The old world so long as it continued in Gods service, and the sons of God
had no commixture with the lascivious daughters of men, issuing from the
murtherous loins of runnagate Cain, they stood sure as mount Sion, resting
upon the brazen pillars of Gods love and favor,; but when once they mixed with
the wicked, and inordinately doated upon the face of skin-deepe beauty (see a
miserable spectacle of Gods wrath) the cataracts and windows of heaven were
opened, Niceph. lib. 1. c. 3. vide peccati horrendam paenam.
Genesis 7. the flood of Gods anger prevailed against the multiplied world,
dispeopled it, and brought those great multitudes to eight persons: where we
see what it is to offend God; A fruitful land makes the barren for the sin of
them that dwell therein, Psalm. 107. 37. See the Church of Ephesus, Reu. 2. 2. a
glorious Church; God with liking makes a remembrance of her graces, I know thy
works and thy labor and patience, and how thou can not forbear them that
are evil etc. yet verse. 4. I have somewhat against thee, because thou have
left thy first love, thy pristine, original purity; thy zeal has lost his
ardor, and become chilly and cold as Caucasus: and for this relapse he
threatens the confiscation of her Candlestick, the removing of his favors, as
they have sufficiently proved in experience, remaining under the most inhumane
tyrant in the world, the Turk, in the most irreligious religion, the
licentious inventions of the Arabian Mahomet.

Thus will the Lord deal with us for sin, Amos 4. 12. and this is the bitter
fruit that springs and sproutes from the cursed root of this black and
poisonous Hellebore: It cast the Angels from heaven, Omnium meorum malorum
causa peccatu^ est. Aug. de tempore.
Adam out of Paradise, destroyed the old world, burned Sodom and Gomorrha, and
turned them to a sulphurous lake of stinking brimstone; cursed the earth,
defiles the land, making Lebanon a Forest, Sharon a wilderness, Carmel a
desert: For sin (mirabile dictu) God disclaimes and disavowes his own
creature, the work of his own hands, the frame of his own wisdom, the care
of his own providence, whom he visites every morning. Math. 25 12. Verily I
say unto you, I know you not. Miserably wretched then is every wicked man, that
has by sin so distamped the Image of God, and molded himself into the
similitude of Satan, that God will never take notice of such a metamorphosed
changeling. And for sin the creature groans, desiring to be delivered and
renewed, which shall shortly come to pass in the conflagration of this goodly
and glorious architecture of the vaulted heavens, the spangled skies, and this
strong pillared earth. And if we demand a reason, why God so hates sin? it
is, Deuteronomy. 32. 4.
Reason 1. because of his own purity, he is of pure eyes, Hab. 1. 13.
and if he look upon sin, it is but as the pure eyed Sun shines upon the
nasty dunghill, and yet remains pure; if he takes notice of it, he puts upon
himself the person of a revengeing Judge, Heb. 13. last verse, a
consuming-fire: clothes himself with majesty and honor, puts off his roabes
of Mercy, and puts on the bloody garments of fury and anger, and glorifies
himself in his Justice.

So odious is sin, that God will not spare it in his most dearly beloved.
The devil from a bright Angel of light, Non ob defectu^ creaturae, quia ipsa
bona est, sed propter peccatum. Stella super Luc. c. 11 Hypothesis facta per
impossible.
is thrust down to hell, not for any defect in the creature, for that is good,
but for sin. The privilege of being mother to the worlds Savior, would not
have pleaded salvation for the blessed Virgin, if she had bin found in the
power of sin without faith and repentance. Nay, if it had bin found in the
spotless humanity of our Savior CHRIST himself, though the very Son and
substance of his love; it had been sufficient in the purity of his Justice to
have bound him for ever under the chains of perpetual darkness. The
venomous poison of the aspe, Plinius lib. not. Hist. cap. 23.
viper, basiliske, Amphisbena, having two heads, as if she were not hurtful
enough to cast her poison at one mouth only, yet they are never hurtful to
themselves: But sin (as the Ivy embracing the Oak, till it have sucked up
his sap, leaving him marrowlesse and dead, and which is an enemy to all plants,
as Pliny says) destroys the subject in which it is nourished, Lib. 16, cap.
34.
and viper-like devoureth the womb wherein it was conceived. Iam. 1. 13. When
lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and sin when it is finished,
brings forth death, the wages and guerdon thereof, Romans 6. last verse.

Reason 2. Reas. 2.
because it is most repugnant, opposite, contrary, As ens and non ens; summum
bonum, and summum malum.
and contradictory to the essence of God, and seeks to its utmost power, not
only to hurt, but even to destroy God, extolling and exalting it self against
him, 2 Cor. 10. 5. of which Job 15. 26. speaking of the wicked man warring with
God, Vide Thom. Aquin. quest. 12. art. 21. and Caietan. super Thom.
he runs upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of his
bucklers, as it were to push him with the horns of his pride, Peltanus de
satisfactione
and profaneness; like the Iron horns of Zedekiah, 1 King. 22. 11. and to
pull him down from the throne of his eternal happiness; Christi. cap. 11.
citante Pineda super cap. 35.
this is Giant-like, Job.
to wage battle with heaven. And yet with Nimrod, Genesis 11. thou buildest but
the Babell of thine own confusion: for who has ever been proud against God,
and prospered? It is Elihu's Axiom in divinity, Job. 35. 6. If thou sinnest,
what do thou against him? What can thou do to the impassible God? but even
as Caligula, Sueton in vita Caligulae.
thunder against the true Jehovah, as he against the fained Jove, till thou be
destroyed with the loud and cloud-rending clappes of true Thunder, Ier. 14.
26. I will power their wickedness upon them.

So we see how hateful sin is to God, and that for it he will pluck off,
even the branches, whom he loves so dearly. Though we stood in his favor, as
Zorobabell, the signet upon his finger, as Iedidia, his beloved; yet if we
sin, he will chasten us; and if we continue in it, he will damn us, he will
deprive us of his word, his worship, and then bring on the maine Ocean of his
anger, la sephus.
as he did to the Jews, when the Christians were remooved from them to Pella;
and make us feel and know that he is not bound to any people or place, but
sin breaks the leagues were it as ^rong as the three fold cord of Solomon, as
unlooseable as the Gordian knot. And so much for the Doctrine, the Uses follow.

Seeing then, Use, 1^
that when the Jews fell away from God, he had the Centiles in store to graffe
in their stead, and the arm of the Lord is not shortened; When any one people
will not bring forth the fruit of the Gospel, but abuse it, he will take it
away, and bestow it elsewhere, it serves to caveat: First, the Minister:
Secondly, the whole body of the people: Thirdly, every particular person.

First then, For the Minister.
to thee that ministrest at the Altar and waitest upon the holy things of God,
1 Cor. 9. 5. that art set in the place of that good and faithful steward,
which should distribute to every one his portion in due season; that messenger
interpreter, one of a thousand, that must declare unto man his righteousness,
and deliver him that he go not down into the pit, Job. 33. 23. If thou decay
in love to God, to his word, to thy brethren, if thou lie in any known sin,
and gross impiety, it is a means to deprive thee either of thy gifts, or of
thy calling, as was done to Judas, when he was found a traitor in his
Apostleship, he was remooved, and the price of blood required at his hands, and
Matthias appointed in his place, Ier. 15. 19.
Acts 1. 26. When Jeremy failed in delivering the Lords message to the people,
either for fear or impetience, the Lord himself becomes a Prophet unto him.
If thou return, I will bring thee again, and thou such stand before me; and
if thou take the previous from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth: Where he is
given to understand, that if he continued in negligence, he should cease to be
a Prophet unto God, which will be sanctified of all, but especially of such as
carry the vessels of the Sanct^ary, and go before the ask. The Kindome of
Assyria, Esaias 13. 3. is said to be sanctified for Gods anger, in the
destruction of his enemies. If then there be a kind of sanctification for the
work of destruction, then much more for that great and glorious work of
edification in Gods Church. Levit. 10. 3
When Nadab and Abihu had broken the commandment of God in offering strange
fire, Moses to satisfy Aaron, tells him that the Lord will be sanctified of
all them that come before him. God has given man two hands, not to build with
the one, and pull down with the other, but to buld with both. Take heed then
of falling away with Demias, least by thy decay in love to religion, thou pull
down the Church of God; and 1 Cor. 3. 17. If any man defile the temple of God,
him shall God destroy, for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are. If
then he spared not the sacrilegious prophaners of his earthly temple, as in
Balthazar, Dan. 5. 1. Helidorous, 2 Mac. 3. 15. and that notorious rob-Church
Dionysins; but brought them to fearful ends: Much less will be spare the
prophaners of his spiritual Temple; but for thy wickedness will in fatuate
thy gifts, remove thy calling from thee, or thee from it, as he did the king
dome from Saul, and gave it to another, or as he dealt with those ungrateful
Iowee.

The world is a Spiritual spittle, and in the Church are some languishing in a
consumption, some sick unto death in a spiritual leprosy; some slumbring in a
deep security, in imminent danger, yet not perceiving it, as the drunkard,
Prove. Plin. lib. 21. cap. 31. and lib. 29. cap. 4.
23. 34. sleeping upon the top of a mast; or poisoned with Aspes, which
causes death sleeping, or with the root Halicacobus: Some wanting a Cordial,
and others a Corrasive; some Moses to lance them, and others CHRIST to heal
them; some a sound from Sinai, others a song from Sio^; some the r^d of Moses,
others the pot of Mauna. Now the Minister here is sent to play the part of a
Physician or Chirurgian, as CHRIST himself Esaias 61. 1. To heal the broken
hearted. Ezech. 34. 16. the office of a Pastor, to seek that which was lost, to
bring again that which was driven away, to bind up that which was broken, and
to strengthen that which was weak; or as Eliphea, testifies of Job. chap. 40
3. He strengthened the weak hands and fee ble knees. CHRIST commends the
half. dead traveller to the Minister, as to an host, to cure his wounds, and
to care for his promise provision, Luke 10. 34. Now if the Physician himself
be sick, how can he cure the disease? How can he heal the plague-soares of
firm, that has the boil of the same pestilence raging in himself? First
then cure and: heal thy self, cast the beams out of thine own eyes, least
God deal with thee, as he did to the Minister of Ephesus, Revel. 2. 5.
confiscate thy Candlestick, and take away thy graces, and leave thee bare and
barren. Therefore be careful to admonish them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble minded, support the weak, be patient toward all men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.

The second is concerning the whole body politic and Ecclesiastical, For the
whole body of a Church or Commonwealth.
both for the Church and common wealth. If the people decay in love to the
Word, to Religion, to holiness and godliness, as sometime backsliding Israel
did; Esaias 1. 6. From the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, there is
no foundnesse, but soars, wound, and putrefying bruises: and live in
drunkenness, profaneness, atheism, infidelity, and contempt of God; this
will procure the removeall of the Gospel, and of all Religion, Hos. 9. 7. The
prophet is a fool, and the man of the spirit is mad; This is a fearful
judgment; and if, we ask the cause, it is for the multitude of thine
iniquity, and the great hatred; for the sin of the whole Church God does
send unsanctified, foolish, ignorant, and wicked Ministers, Ierem. 5. 13. For
the backesliding Apostacy of Israel, the Prophets shall become wind, and the
Word is not in them, Ierem. 14. 14. They prophecy lies in Gods Name. Thus does
God give up men to strong delusions to believe lies, because they love not the
truth, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. Thy sins, and the sins of the Church withhold good
things from thee, Ier. 5. 25. even to take away from thee his Word, as he did
the Arc which was the glory of Israel, 1 Samuel 4. 22. Hear this then ye
prophaners of Gods Name, contemners of his Word, and ye backesliding Apostates
that have turned your Religion into policy, your zeal into luke-warnenesse,
like Ephraim, a cake not turned, Hos. 7. 8. that have a knee for God, and a
knee for Rimmon, 2 King. 5. 18. halting betwixt two opinions, 1 Kings 18. 21.
that can hold the Religion stamped with the Image of the most High, and yet
mix it with the paintings and false complexions of the purple Harlot the Whore
of Babylon. Philip. Camerac. in operibus successivis.
It is recorded of a certain Sultan, which died at the Siege of Zigetum, who
being persuaded by the Muphti a Bishop or Patriarch among the Mahumetan Turks,
not to suffer so many Religions, as were in his Dominions: He answered, that a
Nosegay made of diverse flowers was the sweeter; which may be true in a Posie,
because they may be all flowers; but in Religion they must be all weeds, and
heresies, tares, and the conceits of men, except only the flower, Eusebius.
Eccles.
which is the truth But there is no communion with CHRIST and Beliall, Hist.
lib. 3. cap. 22.
with the truth and falsehood, with God and Baal, with the Gospel and Popery.
Saint John could not endure to be in the bathe with Cerinthus; Ieromes pen was
like a lance charged against Vigilantius, Iovinian, and others; and Augustine
spoke in his disputations against the Donatists, and Manichces, Arians, and
Pelagians, hot coals of Juniper, words armed with aequa fortis, steeped in
vinegar, and could not endure Idolatry while he reigned.

If we rent then the seamelesse coat of CHRIST, and become lukewarm
Laodiceans, Reu. 3. 17. God will spe^e us out of his mouth, abhor us as a
thing that is raw. What ought we to do then, that have by our continual
rebellions, und wicked backslidings even moved to anger the Holy one of Israel?
but humble our selves in repentance, that God in tender compassion may remove
our judgments, and continue his Gospel, the lantern and light of his word,
the mark and character of his love among us, as he has promised, Ier. 18. 8.
If that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil which I thought to do unto them.

Thirdly, For every particular person.
concerning every particular and private person: If any man or woman decay in
love, or want love to God or their brethren, and the practicing of holy duties,
grow sick of a lazy lethargy, or lie in any gross sin, in the knowledge
of his own conscience; it is a means to remove the Candlestick from him in a
fearful deprivation of his knowledge, and the other graces of God in him.

The affection of love in the heart is like the watch of a clock; if it stand,
the wheels stand, and as it goes fast or slowely, the wheels go answerably:
Even so it is in man, if his love to God and to his Gospel increase, so does
his knowledge, and other gifts multiply; but if love be gone, then with Demas
he gives a valediction and farewell to all Religion and piety, his virtues are
in the, waine, if not in a full Eclipse; And so we see a reason of the palpable
ignorance in so many of our people, that have had both Paul to plant and
Apolios to water; that have had the North and the South to blow upon their
gardens, have heard the Gospel plainly and powerfully preached, the year of
Iubile proclaimed by the sons of thunder; and yet are like the deaf Adder,
that stops her ears, some with the foot of their pride, some of
covetousness, etc. which is nothing but the want of love. Heb. 3. 12. Take
heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God, but exhort one another daily while it is called to day, least
any of you he heardned through the deceitfulness of sin. Wherein is showed
the way and the degrees by which a man falls from God. Suggestio
First, sin deceives him by drawing him to commit it; Actio
then follows an accustomed continuance in it, Habitus
and finally unbelief, in many points of religion; Impenitentia.
impenitency, and apostaticall falling away and opposing the truth, as Hierom,
Hugo Cardinalis, and diverse others, have marshalled sin in it is several
ranks, and degrees.

Seeing then we are fallen into the last and worst times, in which the love of
most men waxes cold, and are cast into the declining age of the decrepit
world, wherein the Practice of Piety, which was printed in the days of the
Patriarchs, and Primitive times in a largs Folly, is now contracted into a
volume less than a Tricesim^ quarto, O tempora, O mores! And among whom
(besides the fruitful spawne of innumerable enormities, which are of a late
Edition, molded and framed in the corrupt heart of man, assisted by the
politic malice of Satan) as many sins rule and reign, as ever did in the
times of those despised Jews: Have we not those cardinal and crying sins,
which cry as loud as thunder for vengeance, which are comprised in this brief
Disticke,

Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis and Sodomorum, Genesis 4. 10.

Vox oppressorum-merces retenta laborum. Genesis 18. 21.

Wages detained, Exodus 3. 9.
does for vengeance cry,
Murder, Iam. 5. 4.
oppression, lustful Sodomie.
And besides, Bellua multorum capitum.
have we not sprung and sprouted up among us those several heads of that
cursed Hydra, those foul birds of that unclean Covie, contempt of the
Ministry, Irreligion, Profaneness, Pride, Sabboth-breaking, Ignorance,
Superstition, Covetousness, etc. all which are daily mustered in arms against
us: And were it not the longanimitie, and long suffering of that Iehova, which
in judgment remembers mercy, had long ere this time removed our Candlestick
and crown from among us. Let us then follow the counsel of the Prophet Amos,
Chap. 4. 12. Because I will do thus and thus unto thee, O Israel, prepare to
meet thy God. Every man and woman prepare with the Ninivites to meet your God
by repentance, and sorrow for sin: As every one has had an high hand in
sinning; so let us have a heavy heart in repenting, that we may prevent his
judgments, answer his Word, and agree with God (which by reason of our sins
is become our adversary) quickly while we are in the way to the Judges house,
lest he deliver us to the Iaylor, and so we be cast into prison to pay the
uttermost farthing of our debt.

Seeing Israel which was the root, Use. 2.
nay rather as a natural branch sprung from the fatness of the true Olive;
yet for her relapse from her goodness (as it was threatened to the Church of
Philadelphia, Revel. 3. 11.) another receives their crown and dignity: Learn
hence then Gentile which art grafted in, not to be high-minded, but fear: for
if God in the purity of his justice, spared not the natural branches, but
plucked them off, take heed least he spare not thee, Romans 11. 21. If thou now
enjoyest the Gospel, the Word, and Sacraments, plenty and peace, and growest
secure and wanton, like an untamed Calfe, Ierem. 19. 31. and castest off the
yoke of obedience, behaving thy self unthankfully and wickedly; the woeful
curse of Corazin and Bethsaida hangs over thy head, and it shall be easier for
Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of Judgment than for thee, Matthew. 11. 21. etc.
Let these rebellious Jews be a warning for thee, as Moses, Deuteronomy. 24. 9. warnes
the people in calling to remembrance the example of Miriam, struck with a
leprosy, Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam by the way; or as the
mention made of the theft of Achan, Ios. 22. 20. or as the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrha is brought upon the stage for a token of Gods wrath, Deuteronomy.
29. 33. or as the example of Egypt and Pharao to the Philistines, 1 Samuel 6. 6.
or as the Apostle uses the example of the idolatrous fathers by way of
exhortation to his backsliding Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. 11. shutting it up in
this admonition, All these things happened unto them for examples, and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come: and by
the example of Eva seduced by the Serpent, 2 Cor. 11. 3. Let him therefore that
stands, Phil. 2. 12.
take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10. 12. whereby is given us to understand, Cum
timore and tremore, ne sibi tribuendo, quod been operantur, de bonis suis
gloriantur operibus. Aug. de gratia.
that outward standing and professing of the faith without inward grace, and
the fear of God, issuing out of a godly conversation, is not standing indeed,
but seeming to stand. Take heed then to make thine election sure, for though
salvation belong to all, yet all pertain not to it. Esaias 60. 2. Darkness
shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord shall
arise upon thee. Ioh. 1. 9. Christ is the light of the world, and came to
lighten every one that comes into the world, but every one comes not to him
to be illuminated. Micha, chapter 7. verses 1, 2. complains, that he (speaking
in the name of the whole people) was as the Summer gatherings, and as the
grapes of the Vintage; there is no cluster to eat, like the gleaning of an
Harvest, here an ear and there an ear. So then, Christian, if thou will not
be cut off, be willing to be drawn from darkness to light, and from the power
of Satan unto God, that thou may receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them which are sanctified, Acts 26. 18. True faith is afraid
to fall, and therefore striveth by all means to shun the rocks and shelves
of security, and is far from rejoicing in any outward estate, without the
correspondence of obedience. As a man upon a high Tower, is afraid to fall,
though he be safely environed with battlements; So thou Gentile, though now
thou be in grace, and under the protection of the most High, take heed to thy
standing, lest in the midst of thy peace, the evil one come and sow tares in
thy harvest, steal away thy graces, and leave thee to be cast off with the
Jew; the certainty of thy standing is in the performance of thy obedience. If
ye will hearken and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land.

But for our further instruction, Use. 3.
let us make a Quaere with the Apostle, Romans 11. 1. Has God cast away his
people? God forbid, for salvation is of the Jews, Ioh. 4. 22. The royal
stock of Sem are but like Philemons unprofitable servant, departed for a
season, that they may be received for ever: If the casting them off be the
reeonciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be but life from the
dead? Romans 11. 15. Though they be now in the depth of Infidelity and obstinacy,
yet before the consummation of the world they shall believe the Messiah, as the
Prophets have prophesied, and the Penmen and Notaries of the holy Ghost have
testified, they shall be Choristers of Gods praise.

Gregory the Great, Super Cant. 6. 13.
is also of opinion, that in the often and earnest calling of the Shulamite,
Cant. 6. 13. which signified the people of Jerusalem, so called of Shalem,
peace; is clearly intimated a prophecy of the final vocation of the Jews,
which have been so long forsaken: as also it is evident by eight Reasons
alleged by the Apostle to this purpose.

The first being drawn from the end of their Romans 11.
which was not to their utter perishing in unbeleife, but seeing the calling of
the Gentiles they might be provoked to emulation, God appointing their fall and
rejection not simply, but for the end which is good; else it were against the
divine goodness of God, which never suffers, as Augustine says, August. in
Enchirid.
any evil to be done, but to bring good out of it.



Abraham, If the first fruits be holy, so it the lump, if the root be holy,
so are the branches; but they are, 1 Pet. 2. 9. A chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; which is not meant of an actual
holiness, Aquin super Romans 11.
which was in them, but that they shall be restored to the holiness of their
Fathers.

Fourthly, from Gods omnipotency, who is

So that fifthly, according to likelihood, If

Sixthly, from the prophecies of Esaias chap. 59. There shall come out of Zion the
deliverer, and shall turn away ungodlines from Jacob: and the testimony of
Jeremy, which are the Prophets of God, and have prophesied of their Conversion.

Seventhly, from a distinction concerning the

Eighthly, from a proportion; As you Gentiles God in the world, Ephesians. 2. and by
mercy are now called; so shall they obtain mercy to come out of their
Cimmerian blindness of unbelief; so shall ye both be joined in the unity of
faith, building up the temple of God, perfecting his house, jointly singing
unto God your Hallelujahs (...) praise and thanksgiving.

It must teach us then the precept and the practice of the Apostle of the
Gentiles, Romans 11. 14. By all means to provoke them to emulation, that they
may be saved; as that speech of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32. 21. is applied to us Gentiles,
Who have found him whom we sought not after, Esaias 65. 1. That they are beloved
for their fathers sake, honored with the humanity of CHRIST, Romans 9. 5. for
whose salvation their Paul was so zealous, as for their good, he wished
himself separated from CHRIST. Ought not we then, which are by grace made
partakers of the same root, to feed their dead branches with our living sap,
by opening unto them that JESUS, and worlds Savior, whose sides they pierced,
Zach. 12. 10. and which was the substance of all their sacrifices? Was he not
showed in the old Testament in the Angel, Exodus 23. 20. in Aaron, Exodus 28. 4.
in the scepter, Genesis 49. 10. in the brazen serpent, Number. 21. 9. in the
scape-goate, Levit. 16. 21. in Balaams star, Number. 24. 17. etc.

Was he not seen in the new Testament in his humanity, doctrine, miracles, and
death, all of them (like the finger in a Dial) pointing with John Baptists
Ecce, John 1. 29, at the Messiah, agreeing in his parentage, person, and place
of his birth? as the wings of the Cherubins, which touched each other upon the
Mercy-seate, 1 Kings 6. 27. the one confirming the others affirmation, his
infancy answering the Types; he was seen a Star by the Gentile Prophet,
and found by a star of the Gentiles, Matthew. 2. 10. in Rama was weeping, as
Jeremy had heard, Ier. 31. 15. out of Egypt he was called, Hos. 11. 1. and was
brought up in Nazareth, as was prophesied. His Life was unreprooveable, the
Prince of this world could find nothing amiss, Ioh. 14. 30. his Miracles
sufficiently testifying his Godhead, that even his adversaries confessed it;
his Death as effectually acted, as it was foretold, Zach. 13. 7. I saw the
Shepherd the Lords fellow smitten, and the sheep scattered, his being prized
and sold for thirty pieces of silver, Zach. 11. 12. The purchase of the
Potters field, the piercing his hands and feet, the dividing of his garments,
etc. Two and thirty of which we may see in Matthew, and all fulfilled: and we
may even briefly gather all into one, and let it be him, against whom they
cannot, they dare not except, their own Prophet Esaias of their blood-royall,
Chap. 53. wherein the Jew may plainly see that our Evangelists have recorded
nothing but what was foretold, and to whom can this be applied but to JESUS
whom ye crucified? even his death was acted without the gate as the Bullock
was burnt without the Camp, Levit. 6. 12.

And further, the remooving the Scepter from Judah, Joseph. antiq. Iudaic. li.
14. cap. 26.
which came to pass at the Idumean Herod, entering to the Kingdom by the
favor and furtherance of Antonius, and afterward more strongly seated and
settled by Augustus, when he cruelly slaughtered their Sanhedrim, Cap. Sanhedrim.
as Philo their ow^^ Countreyman does witness; and their ow^^ Rabbis in their
Talmud cry out, We unto us, for the Scepter is now taken away from Judah, and
the Lawgiver from between his feet. This might also be showed by the general
ceasing of the Jewish Sacrifices, the multitudes of Hecatombes among the
Gentiles, which all gave place and died with the great Heathenish Pan, when
this immaculate Lamb was slain; Also by the ending of the year of Iubile,
with Christ himself upon the Cross proclaimed to be ended, Ioh. 19. 30. It is
finished: the ending of the Monarchies prophesied by Daniel, which should have
their full Period when the Stone should be cut out of the mountain without
hands; which ended in that lascivious Egyptian Queen, Cleopatra, all being
brought under the yoke and subjection of the Roman: their own Simeon, in whom
they say the spirit of the great Sinagogue did cease; he testifies, Luke 2.
26, 27, etc. Also, their own Prophetess, Anna of the tribe of Asher, Luke 2.
De Civitate Dei lib. 18. cap. 23.
38. Also, the ancient Sibyls as that Erithraea, which spoke so excellently of
CHRIST, that she seems to Saint Augustine to have been a Citizen of the City
of God, Corn. Tacitus Annal. lib. 6. cap. 3.
which books were had in that reverend esteem, that when Augustus Caesar,
searching up their ancient Prophecies throughout Africa, Sicilia, and the
Colonies of Italy to be brought to Rome, to examine the true from the false:
Suet. in vita Augustis cap. 31.
He caused 2000. to be devoured by fire, yet he preserved the Zibillian Oracles
and caused them to be locked up into golden chests at the foot of the Image of
Apollo in mount Pallatine in Rome; but these are copiously handled by that
Hammer of the Jews and Mahumetanes, De veritate Christianae Religionis.
Philip Morney, Lord of Please and others. Thus must we provoke the seed of
holy Sem to embrace the Gospel, by showing them; that it is in vain to expect
any other to come in great power, but that great mystery is already made
known, which is, God manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen
of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, etc. according to the Scriptures. 1 Timothy
2. 16. That they may acknowledge David's son, and David's Lord, whom they must
kiss in obedience, or perish everlastingly.

Hear then ye sons of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made unto
our Fathers, Acts 3. 25. Hear I say, the kingly David, sweet singer of Israel,
calling you forth of your blindness, to join with the Gentile to praise God
in this Hallelu-jah, you must be one in the bond of the Spirit, and the unity
of peace; be no more the deaf Adder that stops their ears though the
Charmer charm never so wisely, Psalm. 58. 4. This is the CHRIST whose blood
has been so long required at your hands, Matthew. 27. 25. Answer not with your
elders, Mar. 11. 33. We cannot tell, you have had both your Patriarks, and
your Prophets pointing at him, the Vale of the Temple is rent and now you have
us Gentiles to preach him unto you, Luke 23. Heb. 9.

The Lord therefore, for his CHRIST'S sake, the son of his love, and the
engraven Image of his Person, remoove the veil from your hearts that with us
you may have your eyes opened to see the way into the holy or holies, made open
by the great High Priest of our Calling, that you may come at the found of this
silver Trumpet of your own David; that as your diminishing has been the
riches of the world, so your restoring may be life from the dead, and that it
may be in due time accomplished and performed, we shall daily power out our
prayers in the name of JESUS CHRIST, to the Father by the blessed Spirit, to
which three glorious Persons, and but one only wise God, be all honor and
glory for evermore.

Amen.
Here ends the first part, being verse 1.
VERSE, II.
PSALM. 117. 2. For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of
the Lord endures for ever. Praise ye the Lord.
THe tres-noble branch of Iesse king David, having by a prophetical spirit,
not only summoned but enjoined both Jews and Gentiles to the joyntpraising of
God, declaring the boundless compass, and unlimited circuit of the kingdom
of CHRIST, not only King of the Jews as Pilate styled him, John 19. 19. but
even the heathen are his inheritance, linked into the society of faithful
Abraham, by the bond of faith and obedience, elsewhere, as Psalm. 19. 1. The
heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work,
etc. Omnes Creaturae Deum suum esse clamant opificem. Calv. super locum.
Even insensible creatures, as Sun, Moon, Stars, Meteors, Thunder, Hail,
Snow; etc, Psalm. 148. are called upon for the performance of this duty, every
creature be it never so base in the sight of Man, bearing upon it the
workmanship of his hands, even by silence loudly proclaims it is Maker; but he
is praised of Man in a more lively and louder strain, a shriller and sweeter
Diapason, sounding from an heaven-sprung soul, which in the internal,
external, superior, and inferior powers and faculties thereof, does
manifestly bear the Image of God, and the characteristicall badge and stamp
of the Divinity, as Calvin says, is invested and enriched with such a measure
and furnishment of Graces as it pleases the Olimpian love to distribute to
every one, Certa infignia divinitatis in homine. Calv.
as Homer in the twylight of nature could say, the ditty of whose duty, in this
verse. 2. is composed of Gods mercy and truth: li. 1. instit. cap. 5. 5.
and so this brings us to the reason, (...). Hom. Odyss. 6.
for his merciful kindness, etc.

In which are considerable
1. His Mercy. 2. His Truth in performing his promises. 3. The certainty of
both confirmed in the object toward us. 4. The Epiphonema and conclusion of
this Psalm, which is accounted the last of the Jews Hallelu-jahs, which were
appointed to be sung at their Passover, ending in the same cadence in which it
begun: Praise ye the Lord.
Merciful kindness, First Motive.
the first motive injoyning the duty, is a common place, in which, as in a
Maze or Labyrinth, we may loose our selves and make an easy entrance but no
end, for all the ways of God are mercy and truth, Psalm. 25. 9. The Almighty
has stepped no where beneath or above the circle of the Moon, but he has
left plain prints and characters of his mercies, that he that runs may read
them, and that we may take notice of the tenderness of them; sometime they are
expressed in the love of Parents to Children, Psalm 103. 13. As a father
pittieth his children, so does the Lord pity them that fear him; sometime in
the love of Eagles to their young, Is. 49. even exceeding the love of a woman
to her sucking child, verse 15. he has engraven us upon the palms of his
hands, verse 16. sometime in the tenderness of hens to their Chickens, Mat.
23. 37. which how tender it is, we see in the continual care that she has in
hatching, feeding, and (to her power) in defending her young; and yet all these
are but shadows, God is not subject to any attending properties.
in regard of substantial and everlasting love, which CHRIST JESUS the
heavenly Hen has over his beloved ones: Quicquid in Deo est, Deus est, cum
fis misericors, quid es nisi ipsa misericordia.
his love is as himself infinite, for whatsoever is in God, is God, his mercy,
his justice, etc. and all those backe-parts of the mighty JEHOVAH, Exodus 34. 6.
When he is called merciful what is he, but mercy it self in the abstract,
says Savanorola, if they were al gathered together that are in heaven and
earth, and it be demanded of them how they have been saved, they all stand as
a cloud of witnesses to testify Gods free mercies, Quot iusti, tot sunt
miserationes.
and to say with the Church, Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, O Lord not unto us, but
unto thy Name give the praise. Mercies twofold.


Now consider further that the merciful kindness of God is 1. General. 2.
Special.


The general, is his providentiall care over all his creatures, in creating,
preserving, sustaining, and maintaining of them, Psalm. 36. 6. Thou, O Lord,
wilt save both man and beast, Mat. 5. 45. He makes the Sun to rise on the
evil and the good, and sends rain upon the just and unjust, John 5. 17. My
Father yet works, and I work with him, meaning in his general care in the
supporting of the creature, this is called, Psalm 51. 1. Loving kindness or
benignity extending it self to the very Ravens, Psalm. 147. 9. Luke 12. 24.

The special mercy is that, by which he loves his own in CHRIST, redeemes,
sanctifies, and saves them by his free grace, 1 Timothy 4. 10. He is the Savior
of all men, especially of those that believe, this he exercises toward us,
both in giving and forgiving, both which Moses describes at large, Exodus 34. 6.
Merciful, in which he does as it were clothe himself in the affections of
man. Ier. 31. 10. His bowels are troubled for Ephraim, Matthew. 9. 36. His bowels
even earned in compassion, to see the multitude wandering as sheep without a
shepherd, how pathetically he persuades the reformation of his Church, Cant.
6. 7. Return, return, O Shu^^mite return, how passionately he deplores
Jerusalem, Luke 19. 42. If thou had known even thou in this thy day, the
things which belong to thy peace, in a word he rejoices in his own mercy,
Gaudet in misericordia sua, dolet de miseria nostra.
but sorrows for our misery. Gracious, which intimates a forwardness to do
us good, he is never weary in doing it, Iam. 1. 5. he gives liberally to all.
Slow to anger, full of patience, Genesis 6. 3. How long did he wait the repentance
of the old world, in his mercy stopping the course of his deserved vengeance,
Psalm. 95. 10. Forty years long did he suffer the murmuring Idolators, and
Adulterers in the wilderness, Psalm. 106. 43. Many a time did they provoke him
to anger by their Counsels, and yet, Is. 30. 18. he waits that he may have
mercy. Abundant in goodness and truth, noting his disposition by kindness
to win men, and the immutable constancy of his promises, and which is the
inexhaustible fountain of his mercies, he reserves them for thousands, his
goodness is not like the morning dew dispierced and exhaled by the Sun, nor
like the Coffers of the greatest Potentate, which may be drawn dry, but a Lamp
which is fed by the oil of Immortality, and which makes up the measure, he
forgives iniquity, transgression, and sin, no marvel than, if David call
them (in his experience) the multitude of his tender compassions; in which, he
tenderly embowelleth his chosen, as the womb enfoldeth and nourishes the new
conceived Embryo, where he shows mercies he shows them by multitudes; and if
the royal heart of Alexander thought it not honorable to give small things;
how much more than, shall the all-sufficient God give; that exceeds him as much
as the maine Ocean the least riveret, he is ready to forgive, Isa. 55. 7.
Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. Very pitiful and full
of mercy, Iam. 5. 11. The height, length, breadth, and depth thereof, passes
all understanding, Ephesians. 3. 18.

All these compassions and merciful kindnesses may be reduced to a sixe-fold
rank. Six ranks of Mercies.


Agnosce gratiam ejus, cui debes etiam quod non admisisti. Aug.
if his mercy had not prevented us; acknowledge than Gods mercy toward thee,
even in those sins which thou have not committed. If thou see one which is debtor
to me for a sin, and I forgave him, know also that thou art a debtor to me,
because I prevented thee from the like; because there is in every man's
corrupted breast, since the fall of Adam, the Seminary and seed-plot of all
iniquity, springing from the bitter root of that original Corruption, the
match and tinder, the fuel and fountain of every actual transgreson, O
quanta dignatio pietatis, fic ingratum gratia conservare. In Evang. 7. panum
ser. 1.
so that there is no enormitie which the most debauched wretch has committed,
but thou had acted the like if grace had not prevented, boast not thy self
then in this, but with devoute Bernard extol the mercy of the Almighty.

may say, I have sinned, and thou heldest thy tongue, I have transgressed,
and thou have spared me; when thou lookedst upon Zimri and Cosbi slain in the
act of uncleanness, Ananias and Saphira, the old world, Sodom and Gomorrha,
Julian, Herod, with thousands more, the dierfull spectacles of Gods powerful
Justice; have thou not sufficient cause to glorify that God, that has so long
suffered thee to wallow in the puddles of thine iniquity, and has not sunk
thee down to the pit of perdition, but still waits that he may have mercy.

Thirdly, his pardoning mercies, else what benefit Quo diutius expectat eo
discrictius judicabit.
and at last paid home as it shall be with every impenitent, though he enjoy
the sunshine of Gods patience, yet in the end the wrath of God shall burn as
an Oven, as Tophet against him; though now he see the hand of Gods justice
behind his back, clouded and veiled in his daily continued mercies; Quod
defertur non aufertur.
yet the conclusion will prove a tragical Catastrophe, though he pass with a
slow pace, yet he goes in order, (...). Basil.
though with leaden feet, yet with Iron hands, but this fear is taken away by
these pardoning mercies, by which in the blood of Christ he makes us as clean
as if he never had been poluted, Psalm. 32. 1. Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord imputes no sin.

Fourthly, are his renewing mercies, by which he in the fruits of faith and
repentance, sanctified in their souls; bodies and spirits, not like the black
Apostata, who after his cleansing is repossessed with seven spirits worse then
the former, or the Dog returning to his vomit, or the Sow to wallow in her
mire, and which Adam potuit non mori, nos non possumus mori. Aug.
which are his corroborating mercies; whereby he continues in the state of
grace, not falling and backsliding with Adam in the state of mutabilitie, but
as mercy brought him to it, so it continues and keeps him in it.

Beatitude, Isa. 64 4. As eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2. 9. Use. 1.


This unmeasurable extent of Gods mercies serves first to urge upon us the
drift of the Prophet in this place, viz. To praise God for his mercy, the whole
work of our salvation goes under this Title, 1 Pet. 2. 10. Which in time past
were not the people of God, but are now the people of God, which had not
obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy; to what part soever we look,
the whole frame of it is made of mercy, if we begin at Gods election, the
foundation and groundwork of all, and pass down to the last period of all,
which is glorification, and ask from what root each part sprung, this only
Mercy must answer all; Mercy in choosing mercy, in sending CHRIST, in
calling, justifying, sanctifying, strengthening, preventing, preserving, and
the admitting of us to an Inheritance immortal and undefiled, 1 Pet. 1. 4. all
from mercy, so that the burden of our song must still be with David, Psalm. 132.
1. For his mercy endures for ever. In the parable of the profuse prodigals
return, the whole stream of his Fathers carriage toward him, is nothing but
mercy, when he was yet a far off, his father saw him, had compassion on him,
ran to meet him, fell on his neck, kissed him, etc. In the whole work,
there is nothing but mercy, Luke 15. 20. etc. So that light and darkness,
God and the Devil, hot and cold, and not in a line of greater opposition then
mercy and merit in the work of man's salvation, which Antichristian Doctrine
is like a Centaure half man, half horse, or like that brood of Nilus, half
frog, half earth, or the minotaure, half bull, half man, contraries in a
remiss degree may admit intention and remission, opera requiruntur necessitate
presentiae non efficientiae.
as heat and cold in tepide luke-warmenesse, but in the highest degree they
cannot. So (though we grant with Saint Augustine, Aug.
good works to be necessary in regard of their presence, Fides apprehensive,
opera declarative, Christ uc effectivae justificant.
not of their efficiency, and with Bernard, that they are the way to the
Kingdom) Yet in the case of Justification, Romans 3. 28. Romans 4. 6. and Romans 6.
23. Considered in their highest degree, Works the cause of life everlasting.
even to the very sufferings of Martyrs, Romans 8. 18. they can no more stand
with mercy then Dagon of the Philistines is able to confront the holy Arc of
IEHOVA, Rhem. annot. super
1 Samuel 5. 3. By which we see the Papist, 2. Tim. 4. 8.
like an unskilful Empiricke in Physic make a Potion for a sick soul,
Ruard. Tapperus in explic. artic. Lovan.
as he that went into the field to gather herbs, but found a wild Gourd, and
put it into the pottage, while the eaters cried out, Death in the pot, 2 Kings
4. 39. So do they temper the soules-salving herb of grace, with the poisoning
Gourd of humane merit, dealing with the Church of God, as unkindly, as
unnatural Parents, or Nurses giving their children a stone for bread, and a
Scopion for a fish, as the Philistines with Isaacks wels, stopping them with
earth, Reward of Favor. Debt. Vis excidere gratiam tunc jacta merita tua. Aug.
in Psalm. 31.
Genesis 26. 15. Choking and damming up the fountain of Grace, which ought to be
open to the house of Jacob, Zach. 13. 1. Changing the reward of favor and
promise, Col. 3. 24. into their own, of debt. Nay, further, it is the corrupt
and dangerous conceit of many who would not be accounted popish, but seem to
magnify the free mercies of God, which yet will be saved by well-doing, good
meanings, and good prayers, like the children of the Jews, who marrying with
the Ashaodites, spoke half in their language, Neh. 13. 24. which is an
impeachment to their sufferings, which trod the wine press clean, Isa. 63.
which will not give to others, nor communicate this his glory with others, Isa.
42. 8.

It is only mercy without merit, that must lift a man from the gates of
despair, when the angry brow of the Almighty is bended against him for sin,
Non diaphorecus sed grumosus sudor. Christi.
as we see in David, Psalm. 51. etc. and our Savior Christ standing in the
gappe of Gods wrath (being but our surety and pledge) yet his soul was heavy
unto death, trickling down those thick drops of blood, in his miraculous sweat
in the Garden; thou may for a while with David cast the dark cloud of
security over thy sins to hide them, as the fish Sepia casts up a black liquor
to hide her self, but woe be to them that seek in deep to hide their
counsel from the Lord, their works are in secret, and they say, who sees it?
Isa. Ita gravis est culpa conscientiae ut sine, judice ipsa se pumat. Ambr. l.
2. de penit.
29. 15. Eccles. 23. 18. He that searches Jerusalem with a lantern, will
find thee out, and rouse up thy slumbering Conscience, and then so heavy is the
sin of conscience that without any more evidence it passes Judgment upon it
self, Pro. 18. 14. A wounded spirit, who can bear? even none but God. In all
other troubles, miseries, and molestations we wrestle with men or devils, but
here (impar congressus) weak man with his Maker, brittle clay with it is
Potter, sinful man with holy God, which is of purer eyes then to look upon
evil, Hab. 1. 13. and a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. In other things, man is a
friend and favorite to himself, as Peter persuades CHRIST to pity himself,
but here he is his own enemy, and often in the rage of his conscience, his
own executioner, as in Judas and Pilate, Iere. 20. 4. Rehold, I will make thee
a terror to thy self, thy memory, reason, every sense and faculty of thy
soul, is a Gorgonian-hell-^urie, to torment thee. Now in this case when a man's
bones is full of the sins of his youth, Job 20. 11. His heart broken with one
breaking upon another, Job 16. 14. His conscience upon the rack, his God
writing bitter things against him, Cor meum a te, inquietum est donec redeat ad
te. Aug. li. 1. Confess.
Job 23. 26. Then comes the mercy of God to comfort him, all other comforts of
works, merits, satisfactions, etc. are miserable comforters, Job 16. 2. And
will consume as a rotten thing, and as a garment that is moth-eaten; the soul
of a Christian is like Noah's Dove, which finds no safety, till returning to the
Arc of Gods mercy.

Comfort thy self then in Gods mercy, which will not suffer thee to be
over-yoaked with thy sins, plead with him in the receiving of Adam, Manasses,
and the whole troop of reconciled sinners, and though thine adversary Satan
write a book against thee, answer cursed Cain disabling Gods mercy, Mentiris
Cain. Aug.
Genesis 4. 13. with Augustine, Thou lie Cain; for greater is Gods mercy, than
man's iniquity, and say to thy disconsolate spirit, Why art thou so sad my
soul, Psalm. 11.

And as we ought, Use. 2.
and in duty are enjoined to give thanks for all things, so are we chiefly
to sing our Ha^^elu-jahs unto God, for the performance of the promised Messiah,
and that in the practice and phrase of the Priest Zachary, Lu. 1. 68 Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people, etc.
And with old Simeon in his Cygnean dying Hymn, Blessed be thou, O Lord, for
our eyes have seen thy salvation, L^ke 2. 30. That fountain of living waters,
Iere. 2. 12. In regard of whom all other things are but the broken Cysternes of
vain and disconsolate hope. The refreshing waters of Gods free mercies,, the
purchase whereof is without money or prize, Ecce quam antea vocaveat a quam
nunc appellat vinam and lac, quae sunt res pretiofissimae. Tertull.
Esa 55. 2. least you think it too dear, and because water, if you think it
not worth the labor, it is wine and milk, whose worth and necessity you well
know, that true Aqua vitae, which whosoever drinks shall never thirst, but it shall
be in him a well of water springing up unto everlasting life, John 4. 14. He is
our Bethlehem and house of bread, the living bread that came down from heaven,
Ioh. 6. 35. He is a ship of safety which bears us by the comfortable goal of
his love, Socrat. l. 4 c. 16 Theodor. li. 4. cap. 18.
and the gentle Zephirus of his mercy, from the shelves and rocks of black
despair, so that though immodest. Sozom. li. 6. ca. 18.
Modest as General to the Emperor Valens the Arrian, burn the ship wherein
the Christian Legates were embarked, seeking to destroy the Confessors and
professors of Christianity, which though they perished in their wooden bark,
were sure enough in the heavenly Arc by CHRIST. He is that unspeakeable gift
of God, for which we must give thanks, 2 Cor. 9. vlt. And if thou know the
gift of God, John 4. 10. Which is the gift of all gifts, which is given to us,
Esa. 9. 6. In comparison of whom all other are but as the drop of a Bucket to
the whole Ocean, in whom, appear the bowels of Gods love, and the inscrutable
depths of his mercy in him, through him, and by him (while we were sinners and
enemies) to bring to pass that wonderful work of our Redemption, Ioh. 3. 16.
Romans 5. 8. In him by this we see the fullness of it, 1 John 4. 9. And as
Bethlem to Jury, and Scicilia to Italy, were accounted their granary for
their fruitfulness, the Poets faining Ceres to keep residence there; so may
our Savior CHRIST be accounted as the storehouse and Cornu-copia of all good
things to his Church, Col. 2. 3. In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, the fullness of the Godhead bodily, ver. 9. In him we are
complete, ver. 10. Knowledge and wisdom are in men by revelation, in Angels
by vision, but in him by union; of whose fullness we all receive, John 1. 16.
Thy being, well-being, and eternal being, have their dependence on him: this
consolation of Israel, Eusebius. li. 1. devita Constantini in hoc vince.
this expectation of the Gentiles, this Noah to comfort thee, Genesis 5. 29. This
crucified Lord, showed to Constantine to comfort him in his expedition, against
the Tyrant Maxentius, with a promise of victory, is opposed against all thy
fears and discontents; if finne press and oppress thee, he is thy
righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30. If the curse vex thee, he is thy blessing, Genesis
12. 2. Galath. 3. 8. If weakness pinch thee, he is thy strenght, Phil. 4. 13.
2 Cor. 12. 9. If the great debt of thy sins lay hold on thee, charging to pay
that thou owe, he is thy payment, Matthew. 17. 27. If damnation make thee
afraid, he is thy salvation, Acts 4. 10. If death, he is thy life, John 14. 6.
If Satan, he hathover come him, Heb. 2. 14. If hell shall open her mouth upon
thee, he has victoriously Sampsonlike borne away the gates, quelled and
quashed the power of it, Hos. 13. 14. So that in and through him only, thou
art more then a Conqueror. Be not like the Horse or Mule that have no
understanding, nor like the sons of the earth, the cockered Darlings of
unstable Fortune, who gaping after the transitory things of the world, can
only now and then, in a carnal humor send forth a short ejaculatory
Thanksgiving for their temporals which they possess, but seldom or never for
CHRIST JESUS, which they possess not, without whom, they must be content to
perish for ever. This is that rich pearl bestowed upon the Merchant, resolving
above all things to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, setting
sail for the Cape De bona Speransa, fraught and bound for the New Jerusalem;
than let thy mouth from thy heart) the fountain of all true praise, be as this
silver Trumpet filled with Hallalu-jahs for this heavenly and unspeakable gift.

Thirdly, Use. 3.
this Doctrine just in the phrase of another Baptist preaching in the
wilderness of Judea, cries unto us in a more then necessary exhortation,
especially in these last and worst days, Repent for the Kingdom of God is at
hand, Matthew. 3. 2. The selfsame holy use which the Spirit of holiness draws
from the Doctrine, Romans 2. 4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance and long suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? 2 Peter, Chapter 3. verse 9. The Lord is not slack
concerning his promises, as some men count slacknesse, but he is long suffering
toward us, not willing that any, should perish, but that all should come to
repentance; Turn ye then unto the Lord, your God, for he is gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness, and repents him of the evil,
Joel 2. 13. and that you may rightly turn, find ease and refreshing for your
souls; Consider, that as in Jacobs ladder, which reached from earth to heaven,
there were certain steps for ascending and descending, so are there certain
degrees in descending to this all-curing Bethesda of repentance.

Hagar, Genesis 21. 15. when her bottle was emptied, or like the Prodigal, Luke
15. which by his want is forced to a consideration of his estate, retorting his
thoughts into himself, is deeply affected, with the solid apprehension of his
own misery, In se revertebat. Ierom.
verse 17. and in this perplexed case concludes against himself; that if he
remains as he was, his case was desperately hopeless, and he must perish
for ever; upon which, he resolves with himself, to go home to his fathers
house, by repentance, seeing the gate of Mercy opened to all true penitents;
wicked men have but one spiritual eye, by which they see the horrid pitfall of
their misery, A penetent person has two eyes.
as Cain, Judas, etc. but the penitent has two, with the one he sees his
misery by sin; with the other, his hopeful comfort by Gods mercy, and thus
his fear becomes filial, Psalm. 130. 4. Thou art merciful, and worthy to be
feared, drawing the Argument of his sonnelike obedience from that mercy, which
he fears to miss; the wicked man's service (if ever he have any) springs from
a terror of judgment and wrath, which is only servile, the penitent bears not
the image and superscription of a Pharisaicall Iusticiarie, Luke 18. who begins
with gloria patri, instead of miserere mei, his motto, I thank thee, O God,
that I am not like other men, but the portraiture of the poor Publican,
perplexed, and knocking upon his breast; Crying, Lord be merciful unto me a
sinner.

The second degree, is Sorrow, which arises

And here we must distinguish Sorrow which is twofold; Sorrow twofold.
first, a worldly sorrow, which is a dessembled, hypocritical repentance, as
in Ahab, Judas, Esau, etc. Secondly, the other is a godly sorrow for sin,
proper only to the godly man, and the true badge of the penitent, both which
we see, 2 Cor. 7. 10. Godly sorrow works salvation by repentance, not to be
repented of, but the sorrow of the world works death; the former arising from
the mercy of God, as being sorrowful that he has offended him, as David,
Psalm. 51. 4. Against thee, thee only have I sinned and done this evil in thy
sight; the gracious favors which were bestowed upon him, as his exhaltation
from a poor ruddy-faced Shepherd, to sit upon a Princely throne; his several
deliverances from the Bear, the Lion, the Champion of the Phlistines, and the
sundry treacheries practiced against him by his Master Saul, hunting him as a
Partridge upon the mountains, establishing his kingdom, etc. with infinite
more, being called into David's remembrance and made the matter of his retired
meditations, with his own ungrateful ungracious rebellions, do cause his
eyes to distill like a Lymbecke, and his rocky-stony-pumise-dry heart, to
overflowwith the Tears of a truely-sorrowfullpenitent, and now his heart being
hot within him, as at other times upon other considerations Psalm. 39. 3. He
breaks silence, and in the grief of his soul complains of the ill requital
with which he had recompensed the Lord of his merciful kindness. The like we
may see in that pattern of penitents, the profuse Prodigal, Luke 15. The
sinne-loden-citizen woman, Luke 7. 47. Coming attended with shame and sorrow,
lavishly washing the feet of her Savior with tears from her souls
stillatory, that must wash not only her feet, as was said to Peter, John 23.
9. but also her hands and her head; this has been, is, and must be, the course
of every saved sinner to retire, and return by weeping cross; thus breaking
the heads of Dragons in the water, washing away great sins by great sorrow:
What shall then be said of the preposterous course of the world, doing all by
contraries; like that Nation, who in a cross emulation of their neighbors,
whose custom in curtese is to put off their Hats in saluting one another;
these (because they will be contrary) put off their shoes at their meetings;
Hysteron-proteron, in repentance.
so in this maine matter you shall see the wicked man play cart before horse,
and in stead of sorrow for his sins, brag and boast of them, as if the
Peacocks pride lay in his black feet, or the Thieves glory in their halters,
to boast of strength, to quarrel, and drink wine, Hab. 2. 15. To boast of
lying, stealing, cozening, policy, etc. with the bloody Poligamist, Genesis 4.
23. I have slain a man in my wounding, and a young man in my hurt; which
Scripture, although Catharinus, think inexplicable, Hi^ron. Epist. 125 ^^d
Da^^^ vide Willet super locu^.
and upon which Origin writ two whole books, and with diverse have diversely
interpreted; yet with Calvin, it is most likely to be a brag, and an insolent
boast of his bloody strength. What is this else, but even to be proud of that
which should be (and at length will be) the matter of our shame, and the
confusion of our faces, Phil. 3. 19. They glory in their shame.

The third degree in repentance after our humiliation, Zebul, Judge. 9. 39.
Took men to be but the shadows of the mountains) yet truly, Isa. 55. 7. Let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
turn to the Lord; the reason follows, and he will have mercy upon him, and
will abundantly pardon; the like. Hos. 6. 1. Come let us return unto the Lord,
the reason moving; for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten,
and he will bind us up: and this assurance of mercy and willingness to
forgive, arms the sinner with boldness, to solicit the throne of Grace; so
that he which unfainedly repents, believes, and prays for pardon, Repentance
and prayer being inseparable Companions, Eccle. 3. 12. Examine thy self than
with what boldness thou prayest, filling heaven and earth with the Abba,
Father, how thou come to God as thy father, in the name of CHRIST as they
Redeemer, by the power of the Spirit of Adoption: as by Gods mercy in the
assurance of thy faith interessed in all the promises, being drawn hereto by
the cords of love, and the bands of mercy; and this has been the pathway, in
which all the high Saints and servants of God have traced and trodden to their
Celestial home, it being Gods own precept, Psalm. 30. 15. Call upon me in the
time of trouble, etc.

Joseph makes his advancement, the argument of his chastity, Genesis 39. 8. He
answered his Mistress, behold my Master woteth not what is with me in the
house, and he has committed all that he has to my hand, there is none greater
in this house than I, neither has he kept any thing from me, but thee,
because thou art his wife, how then can I do this great wickedness and sin
against God? Three things stay Joseph from committing this sin; first, the
fear of God; secondly, the love of his Master, in regard of his liberality;
thirdty, the duty of the wife toward her husband, as learned Mercerus has
well observed. Mercerus super cap. 39. Genes. Peterius in genesin.
Or first, the reverence of Gods Majesty, seeing and beholding all things;
secondly, the consideration of his mercy and benefits received; thirdly, the
fear of judgment, as Pererius, he knew all the honors of Egypt could not buy
of the guilt of one sin; a good heart will rather lie in the dust, then rise
by wickedness in offending a merciful God, and thus it is grounded, 2 Cor. 7.
1. Upon Gods merciful promises, Having therefore these promises, dearly
beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God; The same Apostle, by the same
Apostolical spirit, exhorts to renovation of life by the same reason, Romans 12.
1. I beseech you Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your bodies
a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
service. Then beloved, let the merciful kindness of God, which every hour
thou triest upon thee and thine, even in thy food, raiment, liberty, friends,
breathing, etc. besides those inestimable treasures of his love in thy daily
preservation, etc. draw thee to repentance in newness of life, to stamp upon
thee a new creature, Turn not the grace of God into wantonness, Jude 4. but
know, that the grace of God has appeared to teach us, to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to walk honestly, soberly and righteously in this present
world, Tit. 2. 12. We are delivered from the fear of our enemies, to make our
obedience without fear, Luke 1. 74. being under grace then, let us give up our
members weapons of righteousness, Romans 6. 19. Seeing all the mercies of God
like so many remembrancers, cry unto us for this duty; let us not despise
(undervaluing and vilipending) the mercies of God, Simon Magus Basilides,
Eunomius, and the Gnostics.
in living after our own hearts, and following our own crooked ways, as
those Heretics of old, which sprung up from the malicious seed of the
Serpent, immediately after the Apostles, have wickedly taught; else ye heap
up wrath against the day of wrath, and make the holy Gospel of CHRIST JESUS,
no better, then the Turks licentious Alcoran, which is fraught with nothing
but the merchandise of the corrupted flesh, large promises of Epicurisme in
Paradise.

But Christians must not so learn CHRIST back again by repentance is the
better way, loosing the Herculian gordian knot, and unweaving with Penelope the
web of thy sins, else can we not hope for peace; For there is no peace to the
wicked, Isa. 48. 22. Our iniquities have made a division betwixt God and us,
Isa. 59. 2. which must be broken down by repentance; if thou ask, being in
the Gibeonitish rags of thy sins, as Iehoram asked Iehu, Is it peace? is it
peace. 2 Kings 9. Grace and peace inseparable Companions.
18. Shall there be peace betwixt God and thy soul; the answer retorts it
self upon thee, What have thou to do with peace? so long as thou want
Grace, and lie polluted; prostituting thy Soul and Body to all
profaneness. What wicked man ever had peace? Let Caine, Achitophell,
Antiochus, Epiphanes, Nero, etc. With the whole garrison of Scorners be brought
upon the stage, and they will answer, they never had peace; because they never
had renovation by Repentance. Come then while the Lord is near, and seek him
while he may be found. Isa. 55. 6.

Seeing the merciful kindness of God is so largely extended to all Creatures,
Use. 4.
but more and most especially to Man, it teaches us to be his followers and
imitators in this, and as he has propounded himself an exampler and pattern
in other things to be followed, Omnis actio Christi est nostra instructio.
as in his Holiness, Levit. 9. 2. Cap. 20. 7. Be holy for I am holy. Every of
his moral actions being our instructors, so he would be imitated in this act
of Mercy, Mat. 5. 45. Do good to them that hate you, that you may be the
Children of your Father which is in heaven, who causes his Sun to shine both
upon the bad, and the good, and this our duty of mercy consists in two things.
Act of Mercy wofolde.
1. In giving, 2. In forgiving.

First, in Giving, that is compassionately and pitying, administering to the
necessity of our brethren, taught unto us in the Communion of Saints: As
citizens of one Corporation, branches of one Vine, members of one body, all
under one Head, the body of CHRIST. Colos. 2. 17. so to sympathise in
affections, as to have a sensible feeling of our mutual wants, like Peter's new
converts, Acts, 2. 44. which is not Anabaptisticall, denying all propriety of
Goods or Lands to any Man, nor all to be meum, tuum, Common, but as a Christian
tendering one another good, and a supportation of their wants, as Act. 11. 28.
when Agabus signified by the spirit, that their should be Dearth throughout the
World, the Disciples every man according to his ability, determined to send
relief to the brethren which dwelt in Judea. Heb. 13. 3. Remember them which
are in prison, as bound with them, and them that suffer adversity as your
selves being in the body, for if one member suffer, all the members suffer with
it. 1. Cor. 12. Aelian. lib. 13. de varia, hist.
26. And a Righteous man even pittyeth inferior creatures, he regards the
life of his Beast. Prove. 12. 10. Like Xenocrates, an Heathen Philosopher, whose
pittyfull heart succored in his bosom, the poor Sparrow, eagerly pursued of
her Enemy the Hawke.

Be then exhorted to this duty, there are great numbers of poor Lazarusses
which lie at thy Gates, bearing the image of CHRIST in their naked bodies, give
unto them not sparingly, that thou may reap liberally, for thy harvest must
answer thy Seede-time, an Almoner is like an Archer, Simile.
which aims at the mark in the midst of the white, the White he sees, the
Mark he sees not; the mark he cannot hit which he sees not, unless he hit
the white which he sees, so we cannot hit God the mark which we aim at,
unless we hit the white which is Man. 1. John 4. 20. If we love not our
Brother whom we have seen, how can we love God, whom we have not seen,
those that abound with Gods blessings, must be like the full end of an
houre-glasse-emptying themselves into the needy? Greg. Nazianzen monodia in
Basil. mag.
Gregory Nazianzen regestring the life of great Basil, commends a Zenodochium,
or house of Harbor, which he built for strangers above the Egyptian Pyramides,
the famous Sepulcher of Mansolus, or the famous Collossus of Rhodes, or any
other wonder in the world; so thy mercy showed to the poor, shall make thy
name like an odoriserous perfume made by the art of the Apothecarie, smell
after thee to bless thine increase in all things, the plowman shall touch the
Mower, Ecce misericordiam actiuam, praesta mihi passiuam.
and the treader of grapes him that sows seed, Amos 9. 13. Thy mountains
shall drop sweet wine, and all thy hills shall melt, cast then thy bread upon
the waters. Eccles. 11. 1. And when thou make a Feast call in the lame and
the blind, Luke 14. 13. and like Elisha, Semen Eleemosynae magis multiplicatur
in sterili, quam pingui terra
power thy oil into empty, not full vessels. 2. King 4. 4. The seed of alms
grows better, thrives and multiplies more abundantly in a poor then fat
Earth, let the feeble hearts of the Saints b^e comforted by thee, Philemon 7.

The second, is showed in forgiving, the p^ecept of which is laid down Ephesians. 4.
32. Forgive Stella sup. luc^
one another as God for CHRIST'S sake forgave you; when our Savior CHRIST had
laid it down in that methodicall Prayer commended and commanded to his Church,
Mat. 6. 12. And that under pain of excommunication from God retaliating upon
us the same measure we offer to others, knowing our backward perverseness in
performing those duties of love, especially this, of forgiving, he begins a
fresh Sermon, Verse 14. Drawn from the law of equity, by which we shall be
measured, If you will not forgive men their trespasses, no more will your
heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. In the parable of the unmerciful
servant Mat. 18. 34. How sharply does our Savior reprehend him? O thou wicked
servant, I forgave thee all that debt because thou desiredst me, should not
thou also have had compassion on thy fellow, as I had pity on thee; and his
Lord was wroth and delivered him to the tormentors, etc. Pro. 19. 11. It is the
glory of a man to pass by offenses. Yet not in a foolish pity, as Ahab with
Benhadad. 1. King. 21. letting him escape whom the Lord had commanded to be
slain; or to take away the sword from the secular Magistrate, the Kings own
Son borne of his Grace and soveraignety; for he is appointed to punish
offenders, In the law as well Peace offerings as meato offerings.
whose ordinance is from God. Romans 13. 4. of such, Deuteronomy. 19. 13. Their eyes
must not spare the offenders, whose escapements by their negligence shall be
required at their hands, but of revenge for private wrongs to take the sword of
Justice into our own hands how dare we when God has threatthreatned (by the
mouth of truth it self) that their shall be judgment without mercy, to him that
shows no mercy, Iniurias illata^ raro iure sed feraro vindicant, Munster.
and he that forgiveth not, must never be forgiven; how many woes then lie upon
this Iron age, wherein we live, how many of those barbarous Scythians which
seek no justice but by bloody cruelty, sword and revenge to right themselves,
say not then, I will recompense evil, but wait upon the Lord and he shall
save thee, Joseph and David both honorable the one in pardoning his Brethren
Genesis 50. 21. the other his enemy.
Prove. 20. 22. How many are there whose hearts are as hard as the nether
millstone, and whose hands are withered like the hand of Jeroboam, which they
cannot stretch forth to give any thing. If they give, it is for their own ends
and not for the affliction of Iosoph, Amos 6. 6. 2. Sam. 19. 23.
Which with many more, shows that we are but empty barrels, sounding, but
holding no liquor, our professions like the bird with the great voice, but
almost no body, and as we know not how to give, no more do we how to forgive;
our private grudges, heart-burnings, and continual suits (which makes one
cluster of humane Law more esteemed, then the whole Vintage of divine Law)
proclaim that our profession is naught but policy, our cases in Law, more
worth than the cases of Conscience.

Lastly, Use. 5.
this doctrine serves as a Counterplea to a false Challenge, made by the
wicked and unregenerate Man, daring in his presumptuous security to challenge
those mercies of God, as his own by free Charter, like the Devils lay claim
to the whole World, Mat. 4. 9. All these things will I give thee, pretending
them all to be his own free Lordship, but Dan. 4. 21. It is Jehovah the most
high God that bears rule over all the Kingdoms of Men, and gives them unto
whom he will. Athenaeus in dipnosoph. li. 12.
Or like the deep Lunatike, who dreams of Kingdoms, and greatness, being
poor; or like the Fool in Athens, who challenged all the Ships in the port,
and all the riches that came to the City to he his, when in the mean time he
had scarce a rag to cover himself withal; or like Isaiahs Dreamer, Isa. 29.
ver. 8.
dreaming of eating and drinking, but waking, his soul is empty, hungry and
thirsty; Or like Charles the 7. king of France, being by our victorious English
and that warlike Edward named the Blacke-prince, almost expelled, and expulsed
his whole Kingdom, was called King of the poor Biturgians, Rex Biturigum.
a King without a Kingdom. So do the wicked claim an interest in Gods
mercies: CHRIST indeed is sufficient for all, but not efficient to all, Ioh. 1.
12. To as many as received him he gave power to be called the sons of God. He
came to all, but all receives him not; The mercies of God Psalm. 120. Are from
ever lasting to everlasting. Great are thy tender mercies, Psalm 119. 156. but
it is upon them that fear him. Simile.
Mal. 4. 2. Upon such the Sun of Righteousness shall shine with healings in
his wings, as the Sun is cheerfully pleasant to eyes that be found, so it is
troublesome to the sore; so is CHRIST JESUS in his rising: and even as a half
blind man passing over a narrow bridgevsing spectacles, Stell^ super Luc.
which make the bridge seem broader then it is, the blind man being thus
deceived falls headlong into the water; So by the spectacles of corrupt
natural reason and presumption which the wicked man looks through, Scias
oportet quod quem ad. modum misericors est it a iustus et rectus.
the mercy of God which is the bridge is made too broad and his justice shruck
too narrow, leaning upon the one and forgetting the other till he tumble down
into the brimstone Gulf of perdition, so that thou must know, says Stella,
that as he is merciful so is he just, and of most exact integrity. Zeph, 3. 5.
The just Lord is ia the midst of his Temple, he will do no iniquity, every
morning does he bring his judgment to light; Grauissime.
Therefore does he punish most heavily in regard of the weight and greatness
of sin, Iustissime.
most justly because of the holiness of his Law, Certissime.
and most certainly because of his integrity and truth: In this regard
Nehemiah Chap. 9. 33. acknowledges, Thou O lord art just in all that is come
upon us; for thou have dealt truly, but we have done wickedly; Mercy and
justice walking in a just Parallel with God, Misericordia ct justicia
parigradum in deo currunt.
humble thy heart than and examine thy self, if thou lie with Moab corrupted
upon the lees and dregs of Swearing, Lying, Stealing, etc. Thy claim to Gods
mercies is naught, thou art in the gall of bitterness, having neither part nor
portion in this business Act. 8. 21. Be ye not deceived. 1. Cor. 6. 9. The
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. No unclean thing is written
in the Book of the Lamb. Reu. 21. 27. Be thou then obedient to the Heavenly
vocation, and the mercy of God shall embrace thee on every side.

The second motive, The second motive,
inioyning us to the duty of praise, is drawn from the truth of the Lord, that
is, the steadfast mutability, and the unchangeable constancy of his promises,
the most certain and continual testimonies of his Grace in sending CHRIST,
and in him performing all those Covenants betwixt him and his people. The
several acceptions of the word truth.


Sometime truth is taken as opposed to all the outward Leviticall ceremonies,
only shaddowing the Messiah to come. Ioh. 4. 23. The time shall come when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth, sometime for
sincerity in our conversation, Ioh. 3. 21. he that does truth comes to the
light, an Israelite in whom is no guile. Ioh. 1. 47. Sometime for the rule of
Gods law, Romans 2. 8. Disobeying the truth, and obeying unrighteousness; and 1.
Pet. 1. 22. Your selves are purified by obeying the truth.

Sometime for the sincere doctrine of the Gospel, Gal. 2. 5. that the truth of
the Gospel might continue with you.

Sometime for Justice Prove. 20. 28. Mercy and truth preserves the King.

Sometime for such a truth as depends not upon Opinion which may err, but for
that Metaphysicall truth, which is affectio Entis, and such I take it to be
here, and so in God it cannot fail, so taken, Romans 3. 7. If the verity or
truth of God, has more abounded through my lie, and so upon the premises this
doctrine builds it self. There is nothing more certain to come to pass in a
due and true performance, Doctrine.
then the truth of all Gods promises.

We need not stand to prop the truth, of this truth, upon any weak
foundation of man's building, Reas. 1.
for his truth is himself, Exodus 34. 6. abundant in goodness and truth. Man
may be said to be true, merciful, just, but God is truth mercy and justice it
self in the abstract; so the Prophet here brings his truth in the second place
as the sure performer of his merciful kindness, whatsoever, says Calvyn, He
does promise by his mercy, Lib 3. Instit. cap. 4. quunque misericorditer
pollicetur etc.
he does faithfully perform, because his mercy and truth are vndissolubly knit
together, they go hand in hand, and cannot be separated; and as he cannot lie
nor deny himself, Tit. 1. 2. No more can his truth fail, Number. 23. 19. God is
not as man, that he should lie, or the son of man to repent, his truth is
confirmed, strengthened, veryfied, and so corroborated toward us (for so the
word translated great, Signifieat, aucta, confirmata corroberata verificata.
in the Original signifies) that if we would we cannot put it from us, but it
will overcome us to acknowledge it, if the Lord speak it even to the
miraculous continuing of the Meal in the barrel, and the Oil in the Cruse,
1. King. 17. 14. Even in the preservation and maintenance of the Patriarch
Jacob, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy the least of thy mercies, Hessus super
Psalm. 117.
and of all the truth which thou have showed unto thy servant, here is finem
non habitura fides, his truth is even decked and clothed with constancy and
firmness, we cannot object against him as the Poet against Jason, Ovid Epist.
and in him against unstable Man.

Mobilis AEsonide vernaque incertior aura,
Cur tua polliciti pondere verba earent?
Inconstant son of AEson, fickle wight
and more unconstant then the wind in spring,
How is it that thy words are grown so light,
to want that weight should be in promising.
He deserves not with Antigonus, to be called (...), (...).
who promised much and performed little, neither with Thaeaginus, to be called
smoke who promised much being very poor, neither with Hermodorus will he sell
his words, he does not, Deus fecit cbirographum, promissorum non debendo sed
promittendo in verbis dum sedit. Luc. ser. 31.
will not, cannot, equivocate with man in the truth of his promises as he that
promised centum oves, and performed centum ova, he has given us an
handwriting and obligation of promises, made himself our debtor, not by owing
but promising, says the great Bishop of little Hippo the heavenly Augustine,
that we cannot say unto him, give that thou owe, but we must pray unto him,
for what he promises; his promises are not like the golden shows, nor showers
of the World, who like Satan, Mat. 4. 9. promise what they cannot perform,
inverting the words of the wise Phocion, Magna non, promittenda sed facienda
hominibus. ser. de prud.
who would have great matters performed not promised, as Stobaeus witnesses,
but they promise golden mountains, the opulency of Lidian Craesus, which in
performance prove but moale-hills. Among the sons of the earth, some indeed
perform that which after ward they repent, as Joshua did to the Gibeonites,
Ios. 9. 23. some promise what they can do but mean it not, as Jacobs sons
to the Sichemits, Gen 34. 26. Some promise willingly but give unwillingly, as
Herod John Baptists head to Herodias, Mar. 6. 16. Some promise but after deny
it, as Laban dealt with Jacob. Genesis 29. 23. as is complained Cap. 31. 41. Thou
have changed my wages ten times, but the promises of God are to the faithful
in hope, without hope, above hope, and against hope, In spe, extra spem, supra
spem contra spem.
the father of the faithful proved all this to be true, Romans 4. 18. Who
against hope believed in hope, that he might be the Father of many Nations, the
ground of whose Faith, was the promise according to that which was spoken, so
shall thy seed be, Genesis 15. 5.

This was accounted unto Abraham for righteousness, Lib. 5. de Abraham cap. 3.
says Ambrese, because he believed and required no reason, so the truth of the
Lord endures for ever.

Because he has made his truth as strong as the brazen pillars of eternity,
Reas. 2.
to encourage his servants wholly to rely upon him, expecting the performance
of his promises, he made them before the foundation of the World, inact them in
the great Parliament of Heaven before all time, Ephe. 1. 5. they were and are,
firm, stable, great and precious, to make us partakers of the divine nature,
2. Pet. 1, 4. performed in time when the time of promise came, which God had
sworn to Abraham, 2. Things required in faithfulness both in God 1. Ability,
given a word of prmoise. Romans 9. 7 in Isaac shall thy seed be blessed,
purposed salvation for us before the world began, 2. Tim. 1. 9. Purchased
inheritance of promise, Romans 4. 21.
Heb. 6. 12. be not sloathfull, 1. These. 5. 24. Willingness,
but followers of them, which through Faith and patience inherit the promises
adopted, Deu 32. Isa. 49. 7. 8.
as children of promise, Gal. 4. 28. Now we brethren as Isaac, Heb. 10.
are the children of promise, drawn Covenants of promise, Heb. 11.
Ephesians. 2. 12. The spirit of truth the Scrivener of them. 2. Tim. 2. 13.
Ephesians. 1. 1. Pet. 5, 7.
13. And sealed with the spirit of promise, having set not only his hand, 1
Ioh. 3. 1.
but the signet of his right hand, Isa. 45. 15.
the character and engraven image of his own person, Amen. The truth of the
father, 2. Cor, 10. 10. All the promises of God are yea, and Amen in CHRIST,
which is the truth it self. Reu. 3. 14. These things, says the Amen the true
and faithful witness, the new convenant drawn, Ier. 31. 31. And the
counterpane thereof. Heb. 8. 8. Are of more force and virtue then all the
bills, bonds, and obligations be they never so curiously and cunningly framed
in the winding M^ander of a Ploydons brain, Heaven and Earth shall pass
ereone jot, or title of these can perish; nay if there were neither book,
record, ink or paper in the world, they are written more surely then with a
pen of Iron, engraven more firmly then with the point of a Diamond by the
spirit of Gods grace, and adoption in the heart of every believer; and further,
we have not only his bond and counterpane thereof, but for our better
assurance we have his oath, Genesis 22. 16. I have sworn by my self, as much as
if he had said, let me be no more God, if these things be not performed, thus
Isa. 45. 23. sometime for this purpose, he swears by his Soul, Ier. 51. 14.
Amos 6. 8. by his Name, Ier. 44. 26. by his Holiness, Amos 4. 2. by his right
hand, Isa 62. 8. so to swear by himself his Name, Holiness, etc. are all one
(contrary to Philo the Jew, Lib. 2. de Allegoris legiss.
who would have God to swear by himself, and man by his attributes) thus God
for our assurance deals with us like a debtor, who for the certainty of
payment pawns his Faith, Truth, Soul, and sometime his God, and this promise
was so Sacred even in the light of Nature, that Adesilaus King of the
Lacedaemonians, Que promise non servate Deos sibi hosts reddidisses.
thanked Tissiphernes for breaking his promised truce, because by this breach
he had incurred the anger of the Gods; if thus inviolable in Man, Plutarch.
how much more in God, who will not falsify his truth, nor alter the thing
that is gone out of his mouth, Psalm. 89. 33. and whose truth of promise is so
confirmed in his CHRIST, Romans 15. 8. It was the worthy resolution of the
Prophets long before the actual incarnation of CHRIST, and the real
performance of that great mystery, 1 Timothy 3. 16. that he would perform his
truth to Jacob, Mic. 7. 20 that he is the Lord Iehova and changes not, Mal. 3.
6. and that he is faithful, 2 Timothy 2. 13, so that his truth endures for ever.

And that we may be the more assured of this turth for our third Reason, Reason
3
let us look a little into the all sufficiency of his power, and launch our
selves into the main Ocean of his omnipotency, Psala. 1 35. 6 Romans 9. 19
Prove. 21. 30
David tells us, Psalm, 115. 3, he has done whatsoever pleased him, he has
potentiall power, by which he is able to do more then he will. As of stones to
raise up children to Abraham, Aposse ad esse non valet, consequentia in Deo.
Math. 3. 9. to send 12 legions of Angels to rescue our Savior CHRIST from the
Cross, Math. 26. 53. to built a thousand worlds, etc. But his will is the
limmit of his power, In his actual power by which he mightily works in the
daily preservation and gubernation of his creatures, he works not with
weariness, irkesomenesse or tediousness, but without all impediment, not as
Man in the sweat of his face, but in the whole Hexameron and work of
Creation, he only spoke the Word and they were made successively in order, by
his word only he causes the thunder, which is his glorious voice, the Hindes
to calve, and the whole course of nature to be continued in her several
species without controlment, so that whether we respect his principal promise
in sending CHRIST. the desire of all nations, or his inferior less
principal, all are surely sealed duly to be performed unto us, and the truth
of the Lord endures for ever.

But it may be objected against the faithfulness of Gods truth, Object.
Genesis 12. 7, he promises to give Abraham the land of Canaan, but he inherited
it not as the protomartyr witnesses, Acts 7. 4. God brought him in but gave
him no inheritance in it, no not the breadth of one foot.

Resp. Answer
Though Abraham did not personally possess it, yet he may be said to inherit
it two ways. First, mystically as it was not only a fertile fruitful and
country in Asia (as Scicilia to Italy) but likewise it did Typically shadow
the Kingdom of Heaven, the celestial Canaan, the Church Tryumphant, and this
did Abraham inherit in his own person, Sinus dicuntur loca maris a procellis
and turbine ventorum Liberima Stella. super Luc. 16.
called his own bosom, Luke 16. 23. into which all the faithful are gathered
as into a sure haven, out of the raging storms of the glassie Sea, the brickle
world, Rev. 4. 6. So that God in the performance of his promises, though he
give not the samething, yet he give something equibalent, as to Iosia, 2 Kings
22. 10. Though he gave him not long life, the promised portion to obedient
children Exo. 20. 12. yet he gave him a more excellent thing, taking him from
the evil which presently upon his death fell heavily upon his people, and
giving him a better life in Heaven.

Secondly, 2.
he may be said to inherit it, though not in his own person, or his immediate
seed, yet in his posterity, 430 years after the promise was made, as the
Apostle proves, Gal. 3. 17. so though not to the same parties, yet to their
successors the truth of God is surely performed, the godly man's patience is
expected, for Hab. 2. 3. the vision is for an appointed time though it tarty,
wait for it, which shall surely come and not stay, thus Psalm. 97. 11. Light is
sown for the the righteous, not in the harvest, but in the seed time, thy
harvest is but in hope, as the husbandman casts his seed into the ground,
and is content to stay the time of the reaping, so must we wait for the
promises. And though yet he has not gathered the dispiered of Jacob his
ancient people, yet the time shall come when the Shulamites shall return and
the spirit of grace shall be powered upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, Zach.
12. 10. CHRIST himself the coin or corner stone and to join together those
two great seeds, A Corner is an inclination or bowing of 2 lines, the one to
the other and the one touching the other, not being directly joined together.
the Jews and Gentiles, as by a corner two walls, (which otherwise were broken
a sunder) are joined and made one and the building perfected, Ephesians. 2, 20. and
thus of the truth of all his promises revealed to his Church from time to time,
sealed by the infallible witness of the Spirit of truth, even to Peter's
vision, Acts 10. 19 are and shall surely be performed: Euclid. lib. 1. Element.
so the Doctrine is confirmed against all Atheists that doubt of any of the
particulers and say, Mat. 21. 42.
2 Pet, 3. 5. Where is the promise of his coming? Psalm. 118 22 1 Pet. 2. 7
and against all those by whom the way of truth is blasphmed and evil spoken
of, let God be true, and every Man a liar, Romans 3. 4.

To teach us to make the truth of God in his promises, Use. 1.
the ground work of our comfort, steadfastly settling our faith and full
assurance thereon, Charitas adoptionis veritas promissionis, po test as
redditlenis.
devote Barnard in the consideration of this truth was even ravished in an holy
ecstasy, saying O the wonderful love of God, in our adoption, the truth of
his promises and his power in their performance, we must believe with Abraham,
(believing above hope) though in man's reason they seemed to be frustrate, as
those millions of Nations to issue out of half sacrificed Isaac, and with
faithful Paul, who in his dangerous voyage to Rome (a great tempest arising,
neither Sun nor Stars appearing for many days, and being hopeless of all
safety) Acts 27. 20. saw by the vision of his faith, and comforts the
Mariners, that there should be no loss of any man's life, but only of the
Ship, and with David, Psalm. 77. 2 ^n the day of my trouble I sought the Lord,
etc. when his Soul was full of anguish, refusing comfort, ready to enter the
Port of black despair, verse 7. Will the Lord cast off for ever, and will he
be favorable no more, has he forgotten to be gracious, etc. yet he checks
himself, Verse 9. This is mine infirmity and weakness. So must we^ in the
midst of our fiery trials, when the old Serpent, lays the strongest siege at
the Castle of our faith, seeking by the roaring Cannons and murdering
Bassaliscoes of diffidence and distrust, to weaken our hope in the truth of
Gods promises. And to shake our faith (the anchor of our Soul, only able to
stay it in the swelling surges, and boisterous waves of all temptations and
crosses) Heb 6. 19. But let thy faith, which is the ground of things hoped for,
and the subsisting of things which are not seen Heb. 11. 1. grounded upon the
truth of God, which purposed, framed, confirmed and inacted, thy happiness in
the starrie coast of Heaven before the foundation of the world, counter-guard
thy heart against all the deepnesse, strength, power and policy of Satan,
build thy self upon the rock, Mat. 7. 24. Which is CHRIST, 1 Cor. 3. 11. and
We are stones built upon him, 1 Pet. 2. 5. say of this truth as Gamaliel in
such a case, Acts 5. 39. This is of God, it cannot be destroyed or frustrated,
be not faithless, but believing, sink not with Cephas in the pit of
diffidency, Mat. 14 31. but let his truth be thy supporter in all thine
adversities, let thine help stand (not upon the sandy foundation of thine own
weakness) but in the name of the Lord, Psalm. 121. 2. Rowse up the self with
the cripple at the beautiful gate of the Temple, Act; 3. 8. for He that trusts
in the Lord is as Mount Sion which cannot be remooved, Ps. 125. 1.

Secondly, Use. 2.
out of the steadfastness of this truth learn further, that in it are
considerable, 2 things Hos. 2. 23. First, on Gods part, Thou art my people,
Secondly, on our part, Thou art my God, he promises, confirms and
performs happiness, we holiness, he glory, we duty, he heaven, we
obedience, he to be a father, we to become children, he is tied to us by
oath, and we are bound to him in the strayte irrepealable condition of vow; if
we want not in obedience, he cannot in performance, and if we expect his
performance, let us look unto our own part which is obedience, which if we
should do with the reflecting optique and perspicill of true judgment, and
consider the crookedness of our paths, he backwardness of our obsequence,
and the perverse carriage of our lives, we may with our tongues say with Saul,
to Samuel, 1. Sam. 15. 13. Blessed be thou of the Lord: I have fulfilled the
Commandment of the Lord, but it might justly be retorted against us, and
sheathed in the inmost closset of our consciences in Samuels reply? What
means then the bleating of the Sheep in mine ear? and the lowing of oxen
which I hear? Thus might it be replied to our pretended holiness and
obedience, what mean those troops of Blasphemers, Atheists, Drunkards, Liars,
etc. which like the frogs of Egypt, cover the whole land, and yet
presumptuouslie daring, claim the promises of God, and scarce bearing the
outward face of Christians, yet are impudently bold with the gaine-saying
Jews, to clear themselves, and say, Mal. 3. 8. Wherein have we trespassed?
When in the mean time our consciences testify, that we have wearyed the
Almighty, pressed and oppressed him as a Cart with sheaves, Amos, 2. 13. with
our enormous transgressions, and rebellions committed with an high hand, Number.
15. 13. seated in the chair of the scornful, Masked with brasenfaced
impudency that we blush not, Ier. 8. 12 with a blockish benummednesse, a
calumne and brawny dullness of heart, that we cannot enter into the chambers of
our heart in the consideration of our ways, not once crying in the remorse of
soul, Alas, what have I done? Ier. 8. 6 the very trial of our countenances
testifying against us, Esaias 3 9. that we can lay no sure ti^l to the Covenant
and promise of Mercy, because we ^ilfully tre^^ under foot the vow of
obedience but even that God in the rigor of his justice, 1 Samuel 3. 11. should
make our two ears to tingle, and our bellies to tremble, Hab. 3. 16. and not
to be merciful to such an one, Deuteronomy. 29. 19. that adds drunkenness to
thirst, blood to touch blood, Hos. 4. 3. heaping one sin upon another; as one
wave of the Sea follows in the neck of another, where is now the
correspondence of this obedience, when thou have dealt thus falsely in Gods
covenant. Psalm. 44. 67. When thine ears and thine heart are uncircumcised, thy
neck not used to the yoke, thy rebellions grown so sinewie and strong, that
they cannot bow, and the promises of mercy for all this being made the
Argument of thy security, like the Sycamoore, the more wet it receives, the
dryer it is, so thou, the more mercy the less obedience, what part of Gods
truth can thou claim, but that of his justice, even to be brayed and brayned
with the fool in the mortar of his wrath, though thou be in no damage like
other men, but flo wrish like a green bay tree, as David, and that thy breasts
be full of milk, and the collops of prosperity appear in thy flancke as Job,
and though thou lie upon beds of Ivorie, and stretch thy self upon thy
couches, eating Lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of
the stall, chaunting to the sound of the vial, and inventing to thy self
instruments of Music, like David, as Amos says, Chap 6. 4. Yet it shall not
go well with the wicked, he that sowes iniqui^y must reap affliction. Qui
mali sunt habent mala, qui boni bona, Plaut. in Pseudol. in prolog.
Prove. 11. and he that sows righteousness shall reap a sure reward; it is
thy goodness not greatness, thy obsequious obedience only holds plea in this
case, Bonis, been, malis, male. Plato.
though thou post thy wickedness upon the wings of the silent night, and hide
thy sins in the secret cavernes and subteraneous cloisters and valts of the
earth, yet the Lord will search Jerusalem with a lantherne, The eyes of the
Lord are upon thee, Apertio and opertio occulorum in deo Aug in Psalm. 11
Hab. 2. 20. and his eye lids consider thy ways, Psalm. 11. 4. though he now
wink and seem to sleep, considering with his eye lids, the crookedness of
thy ways taking leisure and respite ere he bring them to light, yet he goes
with thee all this while (as he did with the old world 120 years, and a long
time with Sodom and Gomorrha) as a public notary, marking thy courses, till
thou run thy self to perdition, then opening his eyes which seemed shut,
seazing upon thee with this dierfull redargution, Psalm. 50. 21. These things
have thou done, I held my tongue, thou thoughtest wickedly, that I was even
such a one as thy self, but I will reproove thee, Scelerum patronus and
approbator, Moller super Psalm.
and set before thee, the things which thou have done; all the time of Gods
patience, wicked man dreams of nothing but peace, making God the approoving
Parron of his villainies, and if he were not acknowledged, Heb. 11. 6. To be a
rewarder, both of the righteous and of the wicked, rendering to the one honor,
glory and immortal life, and to the other indignation, wrath, tribulation and
anguish, Romans 2. 7. he might justly be reputed as the wicked themselves, Si
deus impunitos dimitteretmalos fimilis injustorum inveniretur. Haimo sup. Psalm.
50
but it is as possible to change and alter the nature and essence of God, as
for the obstinate unjust person to escape the instruments of death prepared for
him, Psalm. 7. 12. Even the just shall rejoice when he sees the vengance, Psalm.
58. in the performance of this truth. Consider then, what danger it is to wear
the livery of disobedience, to tread upon the eggs of a Cockatrice, to hatch
their poisonous eggs which who so eats, dies, and that which is crushed,
breaks into a viper, to weave the Spiders web, Isa. 59. 5. to have any
thing to do with the unfruifull works of darkness, but to inherit shame
and confusion. Be ye then like the kine of Beth-sheemosh, drawing the Arc, 1 Samuel 6. 12. though their calves lowed to them and they to their calves, yet
being yoaked to the Arc they could not turn back; so resolve with thy self,
that though thy calves, thy brutish affections cry after thee, and thy
deareling sins like so many swarms of Bees, troops of beloved friends, Aug.
lib confession.
or dearest children, (as Augustine confesses of himself upon his conversion
from a dissolute Manichey) incompasse thee on every side for reentertainement,
yet being tied to the A^ke by thy covenant of obedience, refuse, renounce,
shake them off, and cast them away as Ephraim his Idols. If thou will needs
follow thine imaginations which are evil, Genesis 6. 5. and suffer thy self to
lie sottishly chayned in the inchaunted Castle and fools Paradise of sin,
Pitching thy tents in the Bethaven and house of vanity, drowned in the
Soporiferous Nepenthick dregs of the cyrce and bewitching corruption of thine
own heart, silencing the thoughts, and vailing the eyes both of sin and
punishment, the very visions of thy head will one day make the afraid, Dan. 4.
2 an evil conscience will be unto thee as Jobs messenger, Ioh 1. 19. a
disasterous nuncio to torment thee, Prove. 28. 1. cause thee to fly when no man
pursues thee, smite thee with astonishment of heart, Deu. 28. 28. Lev 26. 17
give thee the oil of sadness in stead of gladness, cause thee to say of
laughter thou art mad, when the best of thy comforts is bu^ from the teeth
forward, Riusus. sardonicus Adag.
with Nero thou may est change thy chamber, but not thy chamber fellow, for
the eyes which sin has shut, punishment does open, the whole world of the
damned sufficiently testifying, Occulos quos culpa clausit, paena aperget. Aug.
as we see in Bal tazar, Dan. 5. in the time of Gods silence, what a Jolly
fellow he was, God gave him a Kingdom, Majesty and honor, all Nations
tremble before him, he put down and exalted whom he would, securely carrowfing
with hi Queens and his Concubines, his Princes, and proceres, in the sacred
bowls of the Temple, praising the Gods of gold and silver, but the God in
whose hands his breath was, he regarded not, his counsels and hests he obeved
not, tell me now when his countenance ch^ngeth, and his knees knock one
against another, what an unquiet house is here when his Judge is but writing
against him with a little finger, thus it is with wicked men in the time of
their disobedience and Gods patience, Simile.
as cold congealeth together things of quite contrary natures, as wood, stones,
Iron, etc. till the fire come to dissolve them, so the soul of man has frozen
together sins of all sorts, and because man is Sathanically blinded, God has
appointed the fire of his judgment to dissolve them, letting them see what a
horrid confusion, they have brought upon their own heads, and what a confused
Babel and disordered heap of enormities, they have piled and compiled
together, against the day of wrath, the just Judge of the world is not like
Phillip of Macedon, Plutarch in Apophtheg.
who heard the poor woman's cause while he slept, and so gave sentence against
her, but true and just in all his sayings, whether they be Menaces or Mercies,
even the word which I have spoken unto you shall judge you at the last day,
Calvin super Psalm. 117
John 12 48. Eodem constanciae and firmitatis elogio, ornabitur clementia and
veritas, The mercy and truth of God are commended in the same title of
constancy and stabilitie, both grounded upon himself; if he be thy Master,
then where is thy dutiful fear, and if thy father, then where is thy filial
obedience, Mal. 1. 6. If thou expect his promises look to thine own vow,
squaring thy obedience by the rule of his law, which must be thy compass,
Cynosure, and loadstarre to guide thee, to the inherritance which is sealed by
his promises in Heaven, to be the happy portion and guerdon of all obedience,
respected more than sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15, 22. Eccles. 4. 17. Hos. 6. 6. Ier. 7
22.

This unmeasurable truth of God teaches us, Use. 3.
as dutiful children in this matter to imitate the father of truth in our
awful and lawful oaths, our promises and simple asseverations, let truth be
the character and image of the inward affection of our hearts, Sermosit viva
latentis affectio effigies. Calv.
and our tongues the true ambassadors of our Souls, the mouth and the mind
are coupled together in an holy Marriage, Math. 12. 34. Out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks; and does a fountain send forth at one
conduit, bitter water and sweet water, Iam. 3. 11. so when the tongue speaks
that which the heart never thought, it is conceived in Adultery, and he that
brings forth such bastards, offends not only the rule of charity, but
infringes the inviolable bond of chastity, Incomparabiliter, pulchrior est
veritas Christianorum, quam Helena Graecorum.
makes a dangerous breach in that moral verity, which is incomparably more
beautiful among Christians, than the farre-admired Helena, was accounted among
the Grecians, for she crowns all those that dye her Martyrs: Martyrs qui pro
ea viriliter ad mortem pugnaverunt, coronavit. Aug.
The King is strong, women is strong, wine is strong, but the truth is above
all, it lives and conquereth for evermore, 1 Esd. 4. 38.

Fidelity in keeping promises, is a fruit of the Spirit, and called Faith, Gal.
5. 22. a property of him that is qualified, to dwell in Gods Tabernacle, and
rest upon his holy Mountain, Psalm. 15. 4. It is Gods own precept, Ephesians 4.
15. Put away lying and speak truth every man to his neighbor, it is our
armor of proof, able to abide the fiery trial, to make truth our
proposition, honesty our assumption, and conscience our conclusion. In this,
we are like to God himself, whose ways are mercy and truth, he whose soul
is fraught with this, may safely with undaunted boldness, launch forth into
the depth of his enemies, set sail and direct his course to the haven of
Heaven, to the father, the God of truth, Psalm. 30. To the Son, which is truth
it self, John 14. 6. and to the Spirit, which is the spirit of truth, 1 John
5. 6.

What shall we say then of these spurious brats of Satan, which bear his
image and superscription, in their lying, dissembling, false swearing,
undermining, ledgier-dumaine, etc. which have the deepenesse of craft in the
center of their hearts, whose sin of lying goes not alone like the Rail, Da
mihi me^dare^ and ego ostendam tibi surem. Erasm.
but like the Partridge in covies, coupled and yoaked with the Thief, as his
fittest copesmate. Zach. 5. 4. Let our Savior CHRIST be the Herald, to derive
their base pedigree, and lyneall descent, John 8. 44. You are of your father
the Devil, he was a liar from the beginning, so are ye, as like as one apple
to another, and how many of these Cratians, Tit. 1. 12. which are (...) always
liars, Irijahs and false accusers, Iere. 37. 13. bearing in his tongue the
image of his patron, which is called, an Accuser, Rev. 12. 20. How many
covetous lying Gehezies, which bear the mark of their infamous leprosies to
their graves, 2 Kings 5. 25. how many dissembling Ziba's, 2 Samuel 16. 2.
undermining the honest hearted Mephibosheth, how many like the false and
perjured Elders against the innocent Susanna, in whose gray beards, and grave
heads should have shined the luster and splendour of truth and honesty, yet
filled with in continency and perjury. How many of such false witnesses (as
were suborned against our Savior CHRIST, Math. 26.) And those perjured
wretches, which out of their venomous hearts and mouths, belched out those
false accusations, and foul aspersions upon the sincere Narcissus sometime
Bishop of Jerusalem, Niceph. Eccl: Hist. lib. 5. cap. 19.
Al which three were shortly after rewarded with the due desert of perjury; how
many of those monsters of men, who in the days of that Virag, the mirror of
Fame of more than famous memory, Queen Elizabeth.
have not only multiplied, and variated, strange and hell-bred plots, and
Jesuitical more than Italianated complots, against her Sacred person, crown
and Kingdom, like those monsters in Africa, every day a new conspiracy, but
even after her death to cast the venom of their more then malicious spite upon
her immaculate Virgin soul, that rests with her God.

-- Nec mors mihi finiet iras,
Saeva sed in manes manibus arma dabo,
It is not death can end my endless wrath,
But Spite shall rake her ashes, Envy says.
Hence then thou sublimated malice, among the infernal Spirits, her
incorruptible part is gone to God that gave it, how many of those dogged Doegs,
1 Samuel 22. How many Ananiasses and Saphyraes, Acts 5. with thousands more,
which like locusts, cover the surface of the Earth; is not the Star
Wormwood, fallen into the glassie Sea of this world, and has poisoned it, the
whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. There is none that does good,
Apud Hypocritarum sensum omnis simplicitas in crimine est Gregor.
no not one, Psalm. 14. 3. Truth is parted from the Sons of Men, Psalm. 12. 1.
Every man is a liar, Romans 3. 4. the abstruse Hypocrite thinks all simplicity
faulty, and truth scarce warrantable.

Learn then beloved from aged Eleazer, 2 Macchab. 6 24. who going to his death
because he would not eat Swines flesh, unlawful to the Jews profession, was
counseled, for the saving of his life to dissemble and feign the eating
thereof; but he considering his age, his gray hairs, his Godly education, etc.
answered, It becomes not our age in any wise to dissemble; So a Christian
bearing in his crest, the Arms of Heaven, being a Knight of the conquering
order of Saint Vincent, and of the red Cross, must not defraud his brother in
any matter; for God is the avenger of all such things, Three things concur in a
lie, 1 Untruth in ye matter, 2 A purpose to deceive, 3 Taking pleasure in it.
Pet. Martyr.
1 These. 4. 6. neither dissembling in matters of Religion, which is a capital
lie, nor in civil affairs, as being pernicious; nor in the least kind, which
may be officious; for none of these are justifiable, being laid in the balance
of Gods truth, Quisquis esse aliquid genus mendatij quod peccatum non sit,
putarit seipsum decipit, He that thinks any the least kind of lie, to be no
sin, deceives himself, for No lie is of the truth, 1 John 2. 21. for the
several kinds of lying and dissembling, Vide August. in Enchirid. ad laurent.
read at large, Augustine de mendacio ad consentium.

Further, that we may be drawn to love the Truth, let us consider the
Judgments of the true God against the enemies of his truth, Psalm. 5. 6. He
will destroy them that speak lies, Vnum sinum cordis, habet in quo videt
mendatium alterum in quo concepit verit^tem. August.
him that in the one closet of his heart, sees a dissembling lie; and in the
other Cabinet conceives the Embryo of truth, Psalm. 55 23 Bloody and deceitful
Men shall not live out half their days. Wisd. 1. 11. The mouth that belyeth,
sleyeth the Soul. John makes it a mark of Reprobation, Revel. 21. last, Whose
portion is the flying Book of Judgments. Zach. 5 4. and Revel. 22. 15. Liars
are the black guests entertained in the same rank with Murderers,
Adulterers, Witches, Dogs and the Devils Machivistians, which must be without,
and have their portion in utter darkness. August. de conflict. vitij and
virtutis.
Nec artificioso mendatio nec simplici verbo opertet quenquam decipere, quia
quomodo libet mentitur quis occidet animam suam, We must not deceive either by
artificial Lying, or by pretended Simplicity, for by what means soever a Man
does lie, he destroys his own soul. Ambrose.
Turpis est omnis fraus etiam in rebus vilibus, Dissimulation in the least
things is abominable. See the all-just God, justly punishing Vladislaus a
Christian King of Poland and Hungary, Knolles in his History of Turkey.
because he broke a Truce, dissembling with Amurath the 6. an irreligious
Turk, with a great overthrow of 30000. at Berna; a just revenge for perfidious
dissembling: The like may be seen upon equivocating Arrius, Hist. Tripartit.
lib. 3. cap. 10.
who being called to the Council of Constantinople, that there he might
renounce his Heresy, Terror eum subito ex quodam conscientiae secreto
constri^xit, and cum formidine secuta est ventris effusio.
deceives those Fathers by a paper in his bosom, in which he had written his
Heresy, swearing he believed as he had written, meaning (in a divelish
mental reservation) his heretical position which he kept in secret; but see
the justice of God following him at the heels, for presently after by the
loosnesse of his Belly in the sudden terror of his Conscience, Vide Niceph.
sin lying now at the door, he empties his very bowels into the draught, do
dogmatibus Arianorum. lib. 8 c. 7. Eccles. Hist.
so taking his last farewell of the world; a just judgment upon perfidious
Equivocators and enemies of the Truth. And I would to God, that the maintayners
of mental reservation cunningly contriving their mixed propositions, partly
mental partly vocal, seeking hereby to delude the truth, would look upon and
consider these Examples, upholding that Monster, which no doubt was first bred
and brought to light, from the dark Cells of the State-undermining Jesuits
these Assassionates, as they have several and sundry, many and manifold
policies; especially in the Elders and Fathers of that Order, See a Book de
abstrufioribus Iesuitarum studijs.
as has been discovered in their subterranious vaults in their several
Colleges; so have they likewise several Names in every new Christened
Country, Pap. Masson. in Paulo, 410.
they are Christened by a new name, called Ignatiani in Spain, Theatin^ in
Italy, Iesuini Campania, Scosiotti in Ferrara, Presbyteri, in St. Luciae in
Bononia, reformati Sacerdotis in Mutina, with many more. And as in their names
so in their natures, ambiguous; for being asked what a Jesuit is, they
answer? Lib. 2. cap 17.
Every Man; they have two Souls in one body, Lib. 3. cap. 26.
as is confessed in their Catechism; besides all these, and their several
projects, in themselves, -- Centum add catenas effugiet tamen hac sceleratum
vincula Proteus. Horat.
and their dark Disciples, what tortuous Leviathans are they in their
amphibolous, amphibious, enigmaticall, ennuciations, and mungerill
propositions, like so many Colourchanging Camelions, as doubtful as Proteus or
Vertumnus:

Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?
In what strong Chain, can any tie,
this Changelings face to know him by?
We may well say of their Labyrinth-like windings, and crooked Heterogenials,
as Jerome sometime spoke of the dark abstruse riddles of Iovinian, Has literas
nemo p^eter Sybillam legate.
No man can read these Letters except the Prophetess Sybill, or as Martial
in the like case, None but some learned Apollo can unfold these Mysteries,
these Maeanders; Non lectore tuis opus est sed Apolline scriptis in Pseudole.
or as Plautus in the like case, Has equidem pol credo nisi Sybilla legerit,
interpretari alium possi neminem, Act 1.
which hollow equivocating has translated upon them, the ancient infamy of
the Spartanes, called by Andromache, Kings of Liars; and that which Apuleius
lays upon the Scicilians triple-tongued: Siculi trilinge^
these be the Gibeonites, the Iebusites, the Jesuits, only in Hypocrisy,
bearing the name of JESUS, (though often shadowed under the wings, and
shrouded as poisonous Vipers in the bosom of Kings) have showed themselves,
Henry, the 4. of France, slain by the Jesuits plots, etc.
to be the only underminers of States and Kingdoms, advancing themselves by
perverting the Truth against the God of truth, who will smite them for whited
Walls, and painted Sepulchers; but leaving them to themselves, let us which are
the children of Light, love the Truth, and when all Liars and dissemblers shall
have their portion with the Father of lies, the Truth which makes not ashamed
shall translate us, and carry us upon his unconquered wings, from these dirty
and dusty Cottages of clay into everlasting habitations, to the innumerable
company of holy Angels and hie Saints for ever.

Now follows the object of Gods unutterable Mercy and uncontroleable Truth,
The Object.
Toward us; which though David seem to speak in the person of the Jewish
Church and Nation, the Patriarchs and Fathers of that time, who had already,
and did continually taste of his favors, though not so fully as we do, they
having in promise, we in full performance that great mystery God manifested in
the Flesh, Calcata majestas, incarnata divinitas. Bernard.
the matriculation and incarnation, of our blessed Savior JESUS CHRSIT; yet no
doubt, he had an eye unto all succeeding Generations both of Jew and Gentile,
which were Gods elect and chosen, and in time to be brought into his Chambers,
Cant. 1. 4. To be made partakers of his Mercy and Truth; as when he stood
arraigned, he stood not in his own place but in ours, making his personal
appearance on our behalf; so in his resurrection, the whole Church arose in
him, Ephesians. 2. 6. he has raised us up together, and made us fit together, in
the heavenly places in CHRIST JESUS, where we plainly see the Mercies and
promises of God, Christus est veritas p^tris, Jacob. de valent. super locum.
especially this concerning the promised seed, called The truth of the Father,
were performed to the fathers, before and after the flood, in the work of
redemption and salvation, and now confirmed in the same title unto us, who live
after the incarnating of that immortal word from which we gather this truth.

There is but one way of Salvation and Happiness to the Fathers, Doctrine.
and also to us, and that by the same JESUS CHRIST.

For confirmation of this, we see the unchangeable purpose of almighty God, in
gathering his Church, Hebr. 13. 8. JESUS CHRIST, yesterday to day, and the same
forever, Romans 15. 8. Now I say that JESUS CHRIST, was a Minister of the
circumcision, for the truth of God to confirm the promises made unto the
Fathers, Ephesians. 2. 14
etc. Rev. 13, 8. The Lamb slain from the beginning of the world, 1 John 2. 7
which though manifested in the latter times, 1 Cor. 10. 3
and afternoon of the world, like a Roe or young Heart; coming skipping over
the Mountains of Bether, Cant. 2 vlt. yet all the holy Men and women from
Adam, inclusively, were saved by his blood, many of which, as Noah, Isaac,
Joseph, etc. were tipes and shadows of him, the Ceremonies and Leviticall
sacrifices, tending to little other purpose, but to nourish them, in hope of
the Messiah, the slaughter and death of which beasts, was to acquaint them,
with the mystery of redemption, which stood as under a veil shadowed in the
ancient complement of the Law, John 8. 56. Abraham saw my day and rejoiced,
Prosuit antequam fuit.
Luke 1. 47. that he might show mercy toward our Fathers, They and we are
saved by one and the same Grace, by one and the same Faith, in one and the same
Christ.
Acts 26. 6. the Apostle Paul's religion, was concerning the hope of the promise
made unto the Fathers, Cephas the Pillar of truth, Acts 15. 10. joyneth the
Fathers faith with ours, we believe even as they, so to them that lived before
his Incarnation, he was crucified in the sacrifices, and to us he was
likewise crucified in the word and Sacraments, Anglican. Confess. art 7.
Galath. 3. 1. CHRIST JESUS, evidently set forth and crucified among you, not
in Roods, Masses, and Crucifixes, but in his Holy and Sacred Ordinances.

To confirm and teach us, in the first place, that no length of time is able
to disanull, Use, 10
abrogate, or make void, the counsels of the Ancient of days, or extenuate
and make less, the worth, efficiacie, and powerful enargie of CHRIST'S
sacrifice, the same which was Preached to Adam in Paradise, Genesis 3. 15.
promised to Abraham and David, and the Church of the Jews, foretold by all the
Prophers concerning CHRIST belo^gs to us; by faith they looked upon CHRIST as
up to the Serpent in the wilderness, John the 3. 14 as he was to be
crucified, by faith we look upon him as he is crucified, like the two
Cherubins, at the two ends of the Mercie-seate. having their faces one toward
another, and both upon the Arc, Exodus 25. 18. So the age primitive which is
past, and all our after-gatherings of all-measuring Time, look either on
either, and both upon CHRIST, there is no other way, nor has or can be
Salvation in any other, Acts 4. 12.

Secondly, Use, 2.
it serves to comfort every true believer though never so base, dejected,
rejected, despised, and dispited, though he lie among the pots, Psalm. 68. 13.
or behind the Ewes with young, Psalm 78. 72. though he be Lord and Master of
few or none of these outward things, as Lazarus, Luke 16 yet is he by CHRIST,
called to the same Salvation, admitted into the same fellowship, made partaker
of the same Heaven, with those ancient worthies, Mat 8 11. sitting down with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of happiness.

The contrary whereof, viz. a deprivation and loss of that Heavenly Vision,
called by the Schoolmen Pena damni, Damnati scient gloriam beatorum, sed solum
in confuso.
is an aggravation of the misery, and material point of the torments of the
damned, Luke 13. 28. Ye shall see Abraham, Isaac, S^ella sup Luc. cap. 13.
and Jacob, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God, thou may justly
here, say with David (being the man whom the King will honor) 1 Samuel 18. 18.
in the acknowledgement of Gods free mercy and truth toward thee? Who am I? and
what is my life? or my fathers family in Israel? that I should be not only
son in law, but even lawful heir to the King of Kings, to enjoy the same
glory with those famous Patriarks and Worthies; what shall then become of all
those, that neglect so great Salvation, who being invited to this heavenly
banquet, of mortal Ambrosicall junckets, do still lie grovelling in the myeric
and nastie sinkes of Iniquity, eating the filthy dust of the earth with the
Serpent, Genesis 3. 14. selling themselves with Ieroboa^^, to do wickedly, souls
and bodies with Esau to hell, for a mess of Pottage, or with Demas for a few
of the transitory temporals of the world; but if we expect the same happiness
with the Fathers, we must go the same way, and tread in the same steps, not
expecting to enjoy the poisonous pleasures of sin, and the felicity of Gods
chosen, with Moses, Heb. 11. 25. refusing to be called the son of Pharaoes
daughter, choosing rather to suffer affliction, with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasure of sin for a season, esteeming the rebuke of CHRIST,
greater riches then the pleasures of Egypt, for he had respect unto the
recompense of reward, knowing if he had the one he must miss the other; thus
our Savior CHRIST endured the Cross, despised the shame for the joy that was
set before him, Heb. 12. 2. Thus the Christian Hebrews, in the Primitive
Church suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, the reason is rendered,
they knew in themselves that they had in Heaven a better and more enduring
substance, Heb. 10. 37. or as David, Psalm. 106 5. That I may see the good of
thy chosen and rejoice with thine inheritance.

Here is propounded unto thee, that double pathway of Hercules, Hercules
hivium.
the one the straight footpath of Virtue, which ascending may seem hard and
difficult:

Non est a terris mollis ad astra via:
Fair virtues war, hard and uneasy is,
that leads from Earth to endless happiness.
The other is broad, easy, and even, which is the enchanted way of sinful
pleasure:

Facilis discensus Averni: Virgil. Aeneid. 6.

The often-troden path of filt hy Vice,
is easy, plain, and leads from Paradise.
Thus tracing the Patriarchs in the footing of holy Duties, Religion and
Piety, there is laid up for thee, a Crown of immortality; but traversing thy
steps, in the pleasing ways of voluptuousness, thou shall be sure to find
nothing, but horrid pains, tumultuous horror, fiery chains, scorching
darkness, tormenting Devils, and a full draught of the scalding Cup of the
unmeasurable wrath of an angry incensed and revenging God, who is a consuming
Fire. Heb. 12. 29.

Seeing the Fathers received the Promises assuredly having the mercies of God,
Use 3
confirmed and performed unto them by their Faith, Heb. 11. 33. even to their
several deliverances, even that from Babels Captivity, which long expected
enlargement, was unto them as a dream, Psalm. 126. 1. and preventing his
servants, believing on him, as David, with blessings abundantly, Psalm. 21. 3.
So will he deal with us, if we have Faith, Ephesians. 3. 20. For he is able to
do for us exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think, promising to
hear our Prayers, even while we ask or speak; as he did with Cornelius,
Act. 10. 4. or Daniel, chap. 9. 23. While they are yet speaking I will hear,
Isa. 65. 24. So by Faith we must receive the Promises.

Hence we see the apparent reason and cause, why so many, after so long
Preaching of the Word, receiving the Sacraments, and frequenting Gods holy
ordinances (which he has made as the instruments, to work and nourish Faith
in us, and the Conduit-pipes to convey his Graces unto us,) do still receive
so little profit, remaining obdurate, and hardened in profaneness, Idolatry,
ignorance, etc. and are not healed of the sinne-wounds of their Souls, nor
obedient to the heavenly vocation, that the Minister may justly take up his
complaint with the Prophet, I have labored in vain, and spent my strength in
vain. Isa. 49. 4.

When men go from the word of Exhortation, as Caine from Gods own admonition,
Genesis 4. 7. Worse then he came; or, as Judas from CHRIST, fuller of Satan than
before, Ioh. 13. 27. Our hearts are not opened, Act. 16. 14. Our ears not
boared, our eyes not illuminated; but like the deaf Adder, or like the poor
Beggar, wanting his hands, Simile.
that he can receive no alms; or like an empty vessel cast into the Sea,
which can receive no liquor, because the orifice is shut. Even so unbelief,
frustrates the promises of God, we may ask, pray, and receive nothing;
because we want Faith, Iam. 1. 6. the Word is unprofitable unto us: For,
because of the unbelief CHRIST did but few Miracles in Galilee, the two Olive
branches cannot empty the Goldenoyle out of themselves, through the two golden
pipes, because they are stopped, Zach. 4. 12. And this is that which Satan
once strove to bring our Savior CHRIST unto, to distrust the providence of
God, Math. 4. 3. causing the stones to be made bread; and this is that, by
which he works upon the weakness of man, to distrust Gods care over him,
bringing him by this means, to the shame of stealing, (...) fit '(...).
and from this distrust, even to the height of Apostasy, Heb. 3. 12.
for this God will destroy us, Unbelievers placed in the vantgard of the cursed.
Iudeth, 5. Let us then, 2 Cor. 7. 1. seeing we have such promises, not loose
the performance of them through unbeleife, taking heed least at any time,
Revel. 22. 8.
there be in any of us an evil heart of unbelief, Heb. 3. 12. but learn to
say with the man in the Gospel, Mark 9 24. I believe, Lord help my
unbelief, and with the Disciples, Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our Faith, and if
oppressed with deadness of heart, stir up our faith with David, Psalm. 42.
11. Why art thou cast down my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within
me, for he that believes shall not make have. Isa. 28. 16. says makes not
ashamed, Sub Clypeo fidei and subfidio virtutis.
Isa 26. The just man shall live by his faith, Hab. 2. 4. All things are
possible to the believer, he may remoove mountains, he is an omnipotent
creature, as Barnard says, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things, by faith thou
receivest the pro. mises, thine eternal life and happiness, have their
dependence thereon, John 3. 16. he that believes in the Son has
everlasting life, but if ye will not believe, ye shall not be established,
Isa. 7. 9.

Seeing this Mercy and truth of God is confirmed, and upon our faith so assured
toward us, Use 4.
that it cannot be frustrate, as it has served to comfort us, so now it serves
to confute and confound that uncomfortable Antichristian principle, bred in
Popery, strongly affirmed, confirmed cannonized, Council. Trident Sess. 6. cap.
9. Canon, 13. 16.
and ratified by the counsel of Trent, prop and pillar of that cursed
Idolatry of the Beast, agreed upon by those Italianated Machiavels, viz. that
A man must doubt of his Salvation so long as he lives, as much as if one should
say, we must doubt, of what God has promised in his mercy or ratified in his
truth, confirmed by oath, and sealed unto us in the blood of his Son, by the
witness of the Spirit, Rom 8. 16. 1 John 5 10. Ephesians. 4. 30. making them all of
none effect? what is this, but to believe the father of lies, before the three
witnesses in Heaven, and the three in earth, 1 John 5. 7. What is this, but to
teach the sin of Infidelity, which above the rest, is like the fourth beast,
Dan. 7. 7. dreadful, terrible, excedding strong, and had great Iron teeth,
this even pushed against the truth of God, with the horns of blaspemie? What
is this, but to set a man's conscience upon the rack? and to give into the
hands of a desperate man, swords, Pistols, halters, the engines of his own
destruction, and even to cause the hands in this distraction of mind, in this
deep point of Salvation, to imbrue themselves in their own blood, as never
being sure of Gods mercy and truth toward him, in the pardoning and forgiving
his sins, when he can never by the doctrine of his Religion, say with David,
I put my trust in the Lords mercy, nor with Thomas, my Lord, and my God, nor
with the faithful, Isa. 25. 9. Lo this is our God, we have waited for him,
but his soul perplexedly hangs tottering betwixt hope and despair.

Consider with Augustine, Nomen sub quo nemini desperandum est.
that the name of JESUS, is a name under which we must not despair, Augustine.
Moritur Christus pro indigenis pro indignis.
he spreads his arms on the Cross to embrace both Jew and Gentile; Deus
tibi de hoc mundo recedenti promisit immortalitem, and tu dubitas? hoc est Deum
omnino non nosse, Augustine.
Christum credentium Magistrum peccato incredulitatis offendere, God has
promised thee immortality, when thou go out of the world, and do thou
doubt? What is this but not to know God, and to offend CHRIST, Ciprianus de
mortalitate.
the Master of the faithful, with the sin of Infidelity, the merciful God
has shed abroad his love in our hearts, that he might beget and bring forth
our love to him again, from the reflection of his own, Amor Dei amorem Deo
parit. Bernard.
non credit in deum qui non in eo solo collocat totius suae foelicitatis
fiduciam, he believes not in God, who puts not the trust of his whole felicity
(for this life and a better) only in him.

What a comfortless doctrine is this, which strives to blind the eyes of
faith, Ciprian. de dupl. martyrio.
CHRIST came to preach no such, he was preached by the Angels, to be a
Gospel, and glad tidings of great Joy to all people, Luke 2. 10. and Zach. 6.
12, Rejoice O daughter Sion, for thy King comes unto thee, etc. we must
rejoice in him as men do in harvest. Isa. 7. which we cannot do, so long as
the doctrine of our religion, teaches us to doubt of Gods mercy and truth,
cheer up thy self then, performing thine obedience, not from the spirit of
mere bondage, but with David, Psalm. 119 chearefully run the ways of Gods
commandments, make thine election, peace, and reconciliation, sure in CHRIST,
and being justified thou have peace with God, by faith; Romans 5. 1.

The fourth and last thing considerable in the reason, Conclusion.
is the conclusion of the Psalm, the first and last string of this well tuned
Harp, beginning and ending in the same cadence of an holy and heavenly duty,
Praise ye the Lord.

Which are considered two ways, -- 1 As they are repeated, 2 As a duty
enjoined.


Repetitions used diversely.
we see here not an idle Crambe bis cocta, but a necessary repetition,
warranted by the Spirit which indicted it, and David that writ it; where
observe, that repetitions are used in the Scriptures in diverse respects.
Sometime in prayer, for the better stirring up of our zeal and fervency thus
used by CHRIST himself, Math 26 39. 42. and chap. 27. 46. My God, my God, and
Psalm. 143. 1. Sometime in matters of Prophec^, and that most usually in the
Coetaneall and Prophets Amos, Isa, and Hosea, the same vices, the same false
Prophets, and the same Idolatry is taxed, Mich 1. 3. the same vices in the same
words with Isa 26. 21. and the same concerning the mountain of the Lord, Isa.
2. 2. has Mich 4. 1. And not only among them of the same time, but also of
many ages and generations distant, Post captivitatem Babilonicam.
as Jacobs Prophecy, Genesis 49. 10. repeated many hundred years after, Hag. 2.
8. Zach. 2. 8. borrowes that from Psalm. 17. 8. and the like, Zach 9. 9 from Isa
62 11. so Zach 9. 10. from Psalm. 72. 8 and Zach. 11. 9. from Ierem. 15. 2. The
promise concerning the pouring out of the Spirit of grace, Zach. 12. 10. from
Joel. 2. 28, the destruction of the Idols which is threatened, Zach. 13. 2. from
Ezech, 30. 13. All these to settle our faith in the certainty of the Scriptures
in this united concordance and harmony of the writers thereof, all agreeing in
the Analogy of faith, like Pharaohs dream repeated, Mercer super Genesis
Gen 41, 32. to make him know it was established with God, and he John (...)
that which we have heard from the beginning which we have seen and handled
etc. To this end the God of nature, has given unto man two hands, two ears,
two eyes, that if the one fail in the object, the other should not, or to put
us in mind, with an earnest desire to perform our duties, which brings us to
the doctrine, Doctrine.
viz.

Repititions are not always vain Battalogies and superfluous Tantologies, Verba
totius inculcata, vera sunt, vita sunt, sana sunt, plana sunt. Aug. de
adulterijs conjugijs ad Pol. lib. 2 cap. 4.
but often times lawful and warrantable, for the better stirring men up to
their duties.

The Prophet Isa desires for the teaching of knowledge to them that are wayned
from the milk and drawn from the breasts, Chap. 28. 10. Precept upon precept,
precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little and there a
little, Phil 3. 1. It greiveth not the Apostle to write the same things unto
them, and Jude, 5. I will put you in remembrance, though you once knew this,
etc. There is no new thing under the Sun, Nibil dictum quod non dictu^
prius. Terent.
says the Preacher, nothing spoken which has not formerly bin upon the Stage,
what are the Prophets, but Expositors of Moses the great Prophet, the new
Testament of the old, and our Sermons Comments upon both. Men under the
Gospel must be like the clean beasts under the law of Ceremonies, to chew the
cud in in an holy meditating and repeating of things taught and delivered for
their good.

Reason, Reas. 1.
1. because of the dullness of Man's apprehension, and his memories weakness in
retension, Numquam satis dicitur, quod non satis dicitur, D. Hu^phrey in
prefatione partis. 1 Iesuitismi.
those lively powers and faculties of the Soul, superior and inferior, being
so craysed and broken by the fall, Ephesians. 4. 38. our cogitatitions darkened and
estranged from the life of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man understands
not the things of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. He thinks, nor can think of himself a
good thought, Romans 8. 7. he submits not, nor can submit to the law of God,
Phil. 2. 13. he wills not, nor can will things ple^sing to God, Luke 13. 11.
He has a Spirit of infirmity, etc. so that view him in his naturals, and
they are mere privations, a mixture and composition, whose ingredients are
weakness and frailety, which causes us to stand in need, to have things
often repeated, that they may leave the better impression behind them. The
learned Doctor of the Gentiles, dealt so plainly, that he dares affirm both
to the learned and ignorant, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that perish; to this end the Minister is called a Nurse, 1 These. 2. 7.
which half cheweth meat, ere she give it to her child, and in teaching it to
speak, to the right framing of its vocal Arteries, does of ten (Parrat-like)
repeat the same words; so must we as Babes, chewe, eat and digest, the root
of our instruction. Jonas Sermon was the same for three days together, Yet
forty days and Ninivie shall be destroyed, Iona. 3. 4.

As mea^e from the mouth is commended to the Liver and Stomach, Simile.
then to the more tender and slender inwards in the first Concoction, next the
nutritive, Kecker lib 3 Phyfi. cap. 12
being segregated from the excrementitious parts; in the second concoction, it
is committed to the Mesaraicke veins, and thence in the third concoction,
dispierced secretly through the conduits of the outward veins to every part of
the body, nourishing the blood, arteries, sinews, flesh, etc. Even so the Word
of God must be committed to the outward ear, then to the intellectual parts,
thence to the heart and so to work upon the will and the affections, as to
pull down every imagination and high thing, that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, by little and little to bring them into subjection, to the
obedience of CHRSIT; which is not done all at once, but by working the Ear to
like, the Memory to retain, and the Heart to digest.

Here are instructions; Use ^.
first, for the Minister, than for the People; For the Minister.
the Minister who is Gods mouth, and Messenger unto the people, must not only
teach new things and unknown, but also ^epeat and bring to remembrance, things
old and known, Plain Preaching the b^st.
beating upon the same nail, to drive it the deeper, and make it the faster;
and for this let the Apostle Peter be our warrantable pattern, Jude, a brief
of the second Epistle of Pet. and Mark, a compendium of Math. etc.
2. Pet 1. 12. I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of
these things, though you know them, and verse 13. I think it meet so long as
I am in this Tabernacle to stir you up by putting you in remembrance; Divines
had in all ages their introductions to Religion, as Clemens Alex^no^inus his
Paed^gogus, Lactantius his Institutions, Ci^il his Ca^ichismes, August: his
Enchiridion etc.
and for this end, he writes this second Epistle, Chap. 3. 1. So Timothy must
stir up the gui^t of God in him, 2 Timothy 1. 6. Least those gifts should lie
dead in him, and give no light, as fire under many afhes; So though thy
repetitions be thought penurious and poor, yet will they stir up the
dullness of the memory and understanding, and this thy plainness (if in the
evidence of the Spirit) is the way to save them that believe, 1 Cor. 1. 18.
called, The Preaching of the Cross, openly and plainly crucifying CHRIST
before your eyes, Gal. 3. 1. describing him in your sight, as it were painted
upon your walls. This is that two edged sword dividing betwixt the marrow and
the bones, Heb. 4. 12. That true prophesying, which judges men, discovering
the thing of the heart, causing them to say, The Lord is within you, 1 Cor. 14.
25. This is the mighty Scepter in CHRIST'S mouth, by which he smites the
Nations, conquers the prophanehearted Gentiles, Isa. 11. 4. That which shakes
heaven and earth, Hag. 2. 5. all other are unsavory, humane, and small more of
the pride of the flesh, than of the Grace of the Spirit.

Which serves to show what mettle we are of, which like the Pharisees out of
Moses chair, hunting after the vain breath of Man's praise, more than the true
rewarding praise of God, Obs^urum per aeque obscurum.
John 12. 41, soar in such an Eagles pitch upon the wings of human
Rhetorique, and the dark abstruse mysteries of Schoole-invention, that we
wrap up CHRIST, and the way of Salvation in such swaddling bands, Herculian
knots, inextricable nice distinctions and Sphinxicall riddles, that Oedipus
himself, might stand amazed, and the Disciples in astonishment might say, What
mean these things?

Like many of those 38 Expositers upon Aquinus, leaving him as dark as they
found him, where we see little else but Tomes upon Tomes; what is this, but the
policy of Satan, working in the swelling wisdom of the flesh, to obscure the
way to Heaven, this was not the precept of God, Ier. 15 19. Thou must not turn
to the people, Ap^anon alta.
but they to thee, nor approved of our Savior CHRIST, Bernard.
John, 5. 44. Ye believe not, because ye seek glory one of another, nor
Paul's practice, Gal. 1. 10. Do I preach God or man? or seek 1 to please men?
etc. and 1 Cor. 14. 19. I had rather speak five words in the Church by my
understanding, that by my voice I might teach others, then ten thousand words
in an unknown tongue; empty thy self then of this thy Delphick obscurity, let
thy Trumpet give a certain sound, least thou shut up the Kingdom of Heaven
with the Pharisees, and neither enter thy self, nor suffer them that would
enter. Use. 2.


To teach the people to be content to hear the same things repeated, For the
People.
and to be fed more than once with the same kind of meat, while thou art a
Babe in the old, thou must not desire new, and as the Minister must not gild
and blanch over, the word of God to please thy humor, Hottaman in his treatise
of the Ambassador.
and as a good Ambassador, of whom a Lawyer speaks, must not be like a Stage
Player, to change his person, but constantly stand to the will and pleasure of
his King and Master, and must not say with Issachar, Gen 49. 14 Ease is good
but must feed the flock whereof the Holy Ghost has made him over-seer, Act.
20. 28. and feed the lambs if he love Christ, John 20. 17. Giving to every
one his portion in due season, and that in that evidence and plain
demonstration of the Spirit; so thou art to hear, Est natura hominum novitatis
avida. Plin.
not as in the exchange, only strangenewes from foreign Nations, or as those
newg fangled Athenians, but putting off this itchinrhumor, here to have thy
understanding informed, thy will reformed, and thy life conformed to the laws
of God, and thine obedience performed unto CHRIST, that the word may work
alteration to purify thee, mollify and open thy heart, convert thy soul,
season thee with grace, dissolve the works of darkness, heal thy wounds of
sin, make thee fit for Heaven.

And here come justly to be taxed, besides those convicted Recusants, who have
shaken off the yoke of obedience, and (given their names to the Beast) all
those that negligently frequent the congregation, accompting more of loss and
dung, of ease, pleasure and profit, then of the Word, which is able to turn
Wolves into Lambs, Sinners into Saints, Isa. 11. 6. A congregation gathered
together in the Church, Tertullian in Apolog.
says the father, Are like an army of fighting men, armed by prayer and
praises against the spiritual enemies of their souls, where the word offers
it self to be thy loadstarre, to CHRIST, thy Jacobs staff to scale Heaven,
thy lantherne to light, and the heavenly Manna, to feed thy soul, in which
place, and upon which ordinance, CHRIST promises a blessing, My house shall be
called the house of Prayer, and where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them; take a pattern of the servants of God,
the primitive Church, Acts 2. 46. the Prophetess Anna, Luke 2. 37. and the
Church in St. Augustins time, which he compares to Ants, because they were always
about the Church, as the Ant is about her hole or home; and let not God for
this negligence, deprive thee of his Grace, and bring upon thee that fearful
curse, I^desinenter maledicite. lunius. Trewel.
which is due to those which do his work either negligently or not at all,
Judge 5. 23. Curse ye Meroh, said the Angel of the Lord, Curse ye bitterly
the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord against
the mighty.

The second sort, 2 In Moral.
are not negligent comers, but heedlesse hearers, hearing line upon line, but
returning without profit, the Scripture, says Gregory the great, is like a
River, in which the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant swim; or like an
Apothecaries shop, in which are Potions, and Pills, Corrasives and Cordials, fit
for every occasion, Homil. 24. in Act.
for every disease; but as Chrysostom says, when the Minister prays or
preaches, one walks, another talks, another sleeps, while the Devil
rocketh him in his cradle, like Jonah securely in the sides of the Ship, in the
midst of the tempest, without profit or desire to be instructed, returning as
a door upon the hinges, at night in the morning station; whereas the word
should be as the laver of Brass, to Aar^n and his Sons, to wash thee
withal, Exodus 30. 18. and thou should be with the servant in the law,
boared in thine ear, Exodus 21. 6. Thy flesh circumcised, thy heart instructed,
the fallow ground ploughed and broken up, Ierem. 4. 4. The soul hammered, Ier.
23. 29 and thou wholly framed, as a signet fitted for a man's right hand, Ier.
22. 24. When this axe is laid to the root of the tree, Math. 3. 10. take heed
then to thy feet when thou enterest into the house of God, Eccles. 5. 1. least
in the end, thou be taken for an unprofitable servant, and in the fearful
case of Ierusalems negligence, and heedlesnesse, How often would I have
gathered thee, as a hen her chickens, and ye would not, Math. 23. 37.

A third sort are such, as are displeased with Aquafortis of reproof, but
presently as Ahab with Elija, they account their Minister their enemy, 1 Kings
21. 20. or as the same Ahab spoke of Michajah, He never Prophecies good unto
me, 1 Kings 12. 8. And for all this, what has the righteous done? How has
the Minister offended thee, when he wounds thy self-love, and the pride of
thine heart, and when with the axe of the word, he is hewing and fitting thee
as a lively stone for Gods building; we see in the Law, Deuteronomy. 19. 5. If a man
hewing timber in the wood, should by chance let his axe fall from the helue and
hurt a man, he was to go to a City of refuge for his safety? Why should it
not then plead the pardon of thy Pastor, when by chance, by the sword of the
Spirit he rubbs thy galled sores, touches thy Dalilah, thy Herodias, thy most
beloved sins, and tells thee plainly, Thou must not have thy brothers wife,
thou must leave her, or leave thy Heaven and happiness.

Consider further that every man being as a brand taken forth of the fire, all
the Placentia pleasing words, comforts, and cordials, cannot cure him, till he
be lashed with Moses, and driven out of himself into CHRIST, let not then the
poisonous love of sin, stop thine ears, causing thee to say of it, as Abraham
of Ismael, Genesis 17. 18. O that Ismael, my carnal pride and prophainnesse might
live in thy sight; or conceit of it, as Lot of Zoar, Genesis 19. 20. Is it not a
little one? Such a sin is but a peccadillo, a little one, a small oath, an
officious lie, a slight excuse, these are with thee, but small matters,
whereas thou must give an account of every idle word, the Devil, like a
cunning Nimrod and hunter, spreads his nets of pleasure, profit, self-love,
etc. To drive thee out of love with the word, to esteem it base, or needless,
and so to banish it as the Gargasites did CHRIST, or troublesome, and contrary
to thy peace, as Amazia, Amos, 7 12. Go thou Seer and fly into the Land of
Judah, So moralized by Gregory, l. 1 cap. 5. pastor. curae.
and there eat bread and prophecy; but know beloved, as in the Law of Moses,
Deuteronomy. 25. The elder brother dying, the younger was to marry his widow, so to
raise up seed unto his deceased brother, so by preaching, and teaching,
reproving, and exhorting, must the Minister (as a younger brother) unto CHRIST;
he is the Ambassador in CHRIST'S stead, to woo and win men to be reconciled
with God, 2 Cor. 5. 18. Suffer then the words of exhortation and reproof,
rejoice with Zacheus Luke 19. 9. Because Salvation is come to thine house, let
the word win thee, that thy Minister by thy profiting, in the careful
discharge of his office, may answer unto God, having brought Benjamin back,
John 17. 12. Of all those whom thou have given me, I have not lost one.

Secondly, The second consideration.
consider these repeated words, as they contain and enjoyne a duty to be
performed, Hallelu jah, we saw it in the portall of the text, and find it
again in the end (as it were reviving a duty, which is and has been,
forgotten of so many, in praising God for his manifold mercies and truth,
continued from him the Creator to the creature, in creating, preserving,
maintaining, spiritual and temporal protection, with the sending of CHRIST
for our redemption, where we see, two things, 1 The matter of the duty. 2 The
manner.

The matter to be performed, The matter.
is Thankesgiving, commanded Psalm. 50. 15. 1 These. 5. 18. Confirmed unto us, in
the practice of Gods children, Exodus 15. 1. 2. Judge. 5. 1. Luke 1. 68. And as
it becomes Saints to be obedient, so to be thankful, Psalm. 33. 1. The
Israelites are upbraided with the contrary, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. and Hezechia
rendered not again, according to the benefit done unto him, for his heart was
lifted up; therefore the wrath of God, was upon him, upon Judah, and Jerusalem.

The unthankefull person is not worthy of the bread which he eats, Non est
dignus dandis qui non agit gratis pro datis. Greg.
he is unworthy to be rewarded, which returns not thanks for the reward, In
vitat ad magna, qui gratanter suscipit modica. cass.
this causes God, to shut up heaven against us, making it Brass above us, and
the earth Iron under us, Epist. 4
whose hardness and unseasonable fructifying, may sufficiently convince us of
unthankefulnesse, he stops up the channels of his love, and the boundless
streams of his favors; because our hearts are dammed up with Ingratitude;
Cessat cursus gratiarum ubi cessit recur sus.
he would have open thanks for secret mercies, Bern. ser. 35 on Cant.
as Rivers come from the Sea, closely through the cranies and silent p^ssages
of the earth, but return openly, giving manifest notice of their
thankfulness to the God of the Sea, all being his own. Gratia^ gratia parit.
Sophocl. in Oedip.
Hag. 2. 9. No benefit but should be the mother of thanks, Colos. 3. 15. What
can we either think, or speak, or write, which may be more acceptable to
God, then Thankesgiving, s^^th divine Augustine? What can be spoken more
briefly, In Epistola ad Marcellinum.
heard more chearefully, understood more joyfully, or done more fruitfully, it
is the Music which Saints and Angels make in heaven, Rev, 5. 9. and 19. 1. 3.
and should be the burden of all our mirth; it is salt to season all our
sacrifices, the want whereof, God will not dispense withal, Ingratu^ si dixe.
ris omni^ dixeris Ingratum fi amas, nihil amas. Plaut. in Psa.
Ephesians. 5. 20. Giving thanks in all things, at all times, and by all means;
the contrary has been condemned, as the poisoning of a vipor, not only in the
School of Grace, but even in the Academie of Nature; an ungrateful person, to
be a short Epitomie of all odible, and avoy dable things, Romans 1. 18. Collos.
2. 7. 1 Timothy 5. 4. 2 Timothy 3. 2. as one unworthy to participate of any man's
love. Then praise the Lord O my Soul, and be not unmindfull of any of his
benefits etc. Psalm. 102.

To stir up our hearts to a conscionable performance of this duty, Use, 1.
he that Gulon-like, devoures Gods blessings, even to the eating of his daily
food without giving thanks, Genesis 31. 1
eats not to God* Romans 14. 6, lives not to God but to his belly, Genesis 40. 23
Exodus ^. 8 Exodus 17. 3
is like Pharaohs butler to Joseph, Laban to Jacob, Judas to CHRIST, the new
Pharaoh to the Israelites, and the Israelites to God: how can we be thus
unmindfull of him, that howerly is so mindful of us? let our tongues cleave to
the roof of our mouths, and with the father of John Baptist, be dombe, let us
be beasts with Nabuchadnezar, till we learn in a thankful remembrance to
acknowledge the most high; let us perish with ungrateful Jerusalem, Chorazin
and Bethsaida, Sodom and Gomorrha; If it were so punished in the poor
Gentiles, having only the purblind light of Nature to guide them, only
reading their lessons in the dark volume of the Creatures, to be given up to
strange sins and strange Judgments, Romans 1. 21. for their Ingratitude? what
shall then become of us, which have not only that, but the daylight of the
Scripture, and of the Spirit? Do we so requite the Lord, O stubborn and
unthankful generation that we are, CHRIST condemns it with admiration, in the
ten Leapers, Interrogatio sit in detestationem vitij ingratitudinis Stella
super cap. 17. Luc.
Luke 17. 17. Are there not ten cleansed? We do not wonder at ordinary things,
because every day obvious, but we are amazed at a Centaure or Monster, at any
thing deficient or superfluous in Nature, because extraordinary; So we do not
admire the ordinary sins of men, Ignotum invisum and vitium maxim repugua^s
naturae.
because we see them daily; but we gaze at an ungrateful person, because he
is hateful, and almost unknown to Nature it self. Stella ibidem.


It was a Custom among the Romans, That if a Servant made free, became
unthankful, to be adiu^ged to his pristine bondage. GOD from time to time, to
moove us to this Duty, has caused his Mercies to be kept in remembrance, as
a pot of Manna in the Arc, and also the fragments of his miraculous banquet,
Iobn 6. etc. Be not then like churlish Nabal, like Horse or Mule, that have no
understanding, but let thy tongue, that so long has been mute and silent,
become the well-tuned Cymball of praise, and the silver trumpet of
Thankesgiving; this is thy Heaven upon earth, and when the Word, Prayer, Faith,
and Hope, shall cease, it shall remain, Blessing and Honor, might and
Thankesgiving, be unto our God for evermore. Revel. 7. 12.

Having finished the matter, The m^ner of praising God.
which is both the prescript and postscript, the Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and ending of this Psalm; let us see in the last place, the manner how this
duty must be performed, and laid down, Collos. 3. 16. Teaching and
admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual songs, singing
with Grace in your hearts to the Lord. Where note:

First, that the service of God, among Christians,

Secondly, a Monastical and Heremiticall life,

Thirdly, that there is an excellent use of singing Psalms.

And lastly, to what end, with the uses.

First, against which it has been long objected, by the whole College of the
professors of prophainnesse, that in Religion, there is no mirth but only deep
lumpish melancholy to be found; here we see the contrary, and that even under
the law, Spiritus Calvinianus est spiritus melancho^cus.
which might seem the saddest time of Gods service, yet was it performed in
the Temple with Organes and Instruments of most ravishing m^sicke, which as yet
did but shadow to us, and give a taste of that great joy, which afterward
should follow under the Gospel, Which is glad tidings of great joy, Luke 2.
11. first chaunted and tuned, by those heavenly Choristers, the Angels, the
like in every service, Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling, Psalm. 95. 1. O come let us sing unto the Lord, let us rejoice to the
rock of our Salvation; chearefulnes and thanksgiving, is required in all
things. Go thy way then, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart, for God accepts thy cheerfulness in thy works, let thy
garments be always white, and let thy head want no ointment, Eccles. 9. 7.

We see indeed, the man that looks through the spectacles of Nature, soaring
upon the laging wings of earth, sees no further or higher then earths
happiness, cannot rejoice in Gods mercy, in electing, adopting* etc. or any
other things spiritual (which are and ought to be, the dittie of all our
music) because they are to him, no more then parables, or paradoxes, but he
joyeth rather in carnal things, which though they content the flesh, they
crucify CHRIST, and grieve the Spirit, like foole-drunken Nabal in his feasts,
1 Samuel 25. 26. or Belshazzar, I^olatrously carrowsing, Dan. 5. 2. making
himself merry with Sacrilege, or like effiminate Heliogabalus, the helluo who
in his feasts to make himself merry withal, had eight bald-pated guests, as
many lame, as many blind, as many bleer-eyed, as many gouty, as many deaf,
etc. which he called his make-sports, and mirth movers. Or to rejoice in
Scurrilous jeasting; baudy songs, which are not urbane and civil, but beastly
and irreligious, setting us in as great danger as Jobs children, dishonouring
both God and our festival merr^ments; or as the covetous money-monger, who
locks up his God, his joy, in his chest, and in the comfort of his heart,
worships it every morning, with his orysons, as the Persians the Sun, or the
inhabitants of Calecut, the Div^ll; or rejoicing with the Adulterer, to see the
darkness, Prove. 7. 7. Ier. 5. 8. These rejoice and delight themselves, as it
were with the poisonous excrements of Satan, which is sin, Ge^ner. de volatile.
as the Scarrabee in the filthy ordure of beasts, feeding and fatting
themselves for the time, like le^^e Witches, with the Devils leaner banquet,
Plin. lib. 21. c. 13. Natural. hist.
or as the Pselli and Marfi in Ital^e, feeding on poison.

All these merry hearts shall be turned from their forbidden commons, as lean
as Pharaohs kine, for with Ephraim, Hos. 7. They are as a Dove deceived,
without heart, forced with Solomon to confess, their mirth is mad, Eccles.
2. 2. I said of laughter its mad, and of mirth what does it? But ask the godly
man, who has tasted the first fruits of the Spirit, and how gracious the Lord
is, and has drunk a full draught at the fountain of mercy, he rejoices in
nothing but CHRIST and him crucified, ouerjoyed and as it were rapt in an
ecstasy, in the fight of heavenly things, as Stephen, Acts 7. 56. and Paul, 2
Cor. 12. And David dances before the Arc, rejoicing to see the peoples
forwardness in Gods service, Psalm. 122. 1. And the Martyrs have joyfully gone
singing, to be devoured of that furious Idol of the Persians; the godly man's
delight is to exercise himself with David in the law of God, Psalm. 1. 3. and
with King Alphonsus, reading over the Bible, 14. times every year. These and
such, are joy to the Sain^s of God; for even as wicked men do often feel in
their conscience^ and souls, the very fl^shings of hell fire, out of which,
they often make a desperate leap, as the Fish out of the pan into the fire; so
the Godly man contrarily, feels the sparks and reflections of Gods love
toward him, dropping from the fountain of life, The Sun of righteousness,
which brings healings in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. he only enjoying the
comfortable presence of God, which is the matter of all joy, Psalm. 16. vlt.
Zeph, 3. 5. These and such fill our bellies with mirth, and our mouths with
laughter, more comfort in this fasting, than others feasting; in this weeping,
than others singing; more comfort in Gods countenance, than in all the corn
and wine, Psalm. 4. 6. the lusts and licentious liberties of wicked men, which
have madness a spiritual bedlam in their hearts, while they live, and in the
end go down to the dead, Eccles. 9

ver 1. and Praise the Lord in the great congregation, and in the congation of
Saints, etc. It stands to condemn the solitary and sequestered life of
Anchorites, Heremit^s, and Monastical votaries, whose life has been so much
admired, and commended, by lerome and others of the Fathers, and is in such
esteem with the Papists at this day, as accounted meritorious, and a state of
perfection; like the dream of the Esseni among the Jews, where we see how
they have forgotten that of God himself, Genesis 2. 18. It is not good for man to
be alone, and as the God of Nature, has appointed in the body natural, one
member to be an helper unto another; so wisely disposing their offices, that
one of them cannot say unto another, I have no need of thee. 1 Cor. 12. 10. So
in the body politic and Ecclesiastic, one to be unto another; As the
healthful blind man to the weak lame man, Simi^^.
the one employing his strength, the other his sight in their journey. Man is
not made for himself, in his kind of life, a man may in some sort be hindered
from doing evil, but he is likewise kept from doing good, He cannot rejoice
with them that rejoice, Romans 12. nor praise the Lord among his Saints; or be an
instrument for a public good, or as a candle upon a candlestick to shine to
others, his life is hid under a bushel, and Cloystered in a desert, sequestered
from the society of men; as if the law of Nature had enjoined us, to have our
conversation with Birds and Beasts, damming in a preposterous stopage, that
light which should have done good to the world, and which by it, may be rightly
challenged of thee, as it was with Saint Francis, Bucchius de conformitate
Franciscu^ and Christi.
Paulus Thebanus, and Simeon Stiliotes, those famous, or rather infamous
Anchorites, which as the Papists are bold, or rather impudent, Vide Perkins his
demonstration of the problem, title Monks.
to say of some of them, They transgressed no one jot of the Law; some of them
compared with CHRIST, and in many things (according to their blasphemy)
exceeding him: What is this, but flat impiety, gross superstition, not
warrantable by the word of God, where one day it shall be said to these
will-worshippers, Who has required this at your hands? Isa. 1. 12.

James 5. 13. Is any merry, let him sing Psalms, it is Gods ordinance, binding
all sorts of men to the practice thereof, Make a toyfull noise unto God all ye
lands, Psalm. 66. 1. and 92. 1. and 135. 3. God allowing us, no other recreation
to shoulder out this, as most do, and this we ought to do, as our daily
exercise, in our families, Psalm 101 1. 2 I will walk in my house with a
perfect heart, in our Churches and congregations, where and when Christians
meet together, 1 Cor. 14. 26. Ephesians 5 19. Singing and making melody in your
hearts with Psalms, etc. Now consider further, that we may tune up a pleasant
harmony, as a sacrifice of rest and acceptance, to the God of Jacob.

Four things are required in our spiritual singing.

First, we must not babble them over Parrotlike Psalm 47. 7 1 Cor. 14
gallops over his Ave Mary's, and Pater Nosters, but with understanding, that
we may teach and admonish either our selves or others with profit.

Secondly, we must sing with grace in our Tim 1. 6.

Thirdly, we must sing with our hearts, not Psalm. 47. 7. Sing ye praises with
understanding, Psalm. 118. 27, Bind the Sacrifice with cords to the horns of
the Altar; hence we are said to prepare our hearts, 1 Cor. 14. 14 Thus David
bids his Lute, Grinaeu^ super col. 3. 16.
his Harp, his glory, his tongue, to awake, Ps. 57. 8. he would not have his
heart sleeping, while his tongue is walking and waking, for --

Non v^x sed votum, non musica chordula, sed cor,
non cantans sed amans cantat in aure Dei.
It Is not thy voice but vow,
not well tuned harp^ but heart,
Not sound but solid love,
mirths in Gods hearing part.
Cramerus, In tertia class scholae Propheticae, and vaticinio sexto, ex Psalm.
22
that if our doxologies and thankesgivings be acceptable, they must begin from
God, as the first mover and primus moter of his own praise, they must be of
God as the matter and argument of all our songs, they must be with him, as the
end and scope of all our Hosannaes of mercy, and Hallelu-jahs of praise; thus
making him the efficient, material, formal, and final cause of all our
service, joined together by the Prophet, Ps. 86. The Spirit of God makes ou^
pipes to g^^^. Macarius ho. 47.
4. R^ioyce the Soul of thy servant, etc. First, in that he would his soul to
be made joyful, he desires God to move it to that duty. 2. Where he calls
God, he shows the matter of his Psalmodicall melody. God is the bellows, we
the Organs. Athenagoras, orat. pro Christ.
3. The listing up of his heart unto God, he intimates his end and mark. And
lastly, to whom he dedicates his Music.

To teach all Christians a conscionable diligence in this duty, Use 1.
all creatures in their kind, bless their Crea^or, even they that want
tongues, as Sun, Moon, Stars, etc. Psalm. 148. The unreasonable creatures
give with their tongues obedient testimonies thereof; the Birds of the air
sing, beasts of the field make a noise, even the hissi^gs of Dragons in the
deep, are Psalms of praise unto God. Praise thou the Lord the^ with the best
member thou have, which is thy Torgue, the Eye is to see for all, the Ear to
hear for all, the Hand to work for all, the Nose to smell for all, and the
palate to taste for all, but the Tongue in the highest office is to sing
pr^ises to God for all, its every man's duty, as a I must pray unto God, so all
must praise God, and as CHRIST JESUS carries up thy prayers, being perfumed
upon him, the true Altar on which they are offered, so will he do thy Psalm^s
of praise, being winged with holy devotion, this is thy heavenly melody, the
mirth of thy family, aromaticall perfume of thy ch^mber, an holy homage to God,
the sacrificed calves of thy lips. If thou have then been a Mute and
tonguetyed in this duty, (though thou be opposed therein, by th profane
world, and Sathanstand at thy right hand, as he did against Sacrifizing
Iehoshua, Zach. 3. 2.) be now as a speaking vowell, or at least a consonant, to
Stentorize the praises of thy God, even with a loud voice, Psalm. 34.
Continually while thou live, Psalm. 104. 33. Before the morning watch, Ps.
119. 147. At midnight and seven times a day, ver. 164. Thy mouth daily
rehearsing his righteousness and Satvation, Psalm. 7. 15. Let his Statutes be thy
Songs in the house of thy Pilgrimage, Psalm. 119. 54.

Learn to tune thy voice here on earth, that thou may have a place among the
Psalmodicall quier of Heaven, acquaint thy heart with spiritual mirth, sing
David's Ps^lmes, that thou may have David's spirit, it thou will not sing unto
God, Qui fecit linguam vt necessaria^, postulet ut creat^m.
take heed least in his justice, he deprive thee of thy blessing of peace,
mirth, and liberty; either taking away thy tongue, which he made for the same
purpose, and the service of which, he requires; or cause thee to sing his
songs in a strang^ land, as he dealt with the Jews, Psalm. 137. for their
unthankfulness.

Lastly, Use, 2.
this reproves the usual vanity of flesh and blood. First, in vain lays,
which are sung to the world. Secondly, lascivious B^llads, which are tuned to
the flesh. Thirdly, Satyricall libels to the Devil. All which, are to ex^lt and
strengthen, the three Goliha's, and great enemies of man's Salvation, even to
sing praises to the cur^^d Trinity of H^ll; Fumus and somes luxuriae and cibus
Diaboli:
these are the fuming and fomenting nourishment to Luxury, the Bellows to
blow the embers of lust, the Palate-pleasing meat of the Serpent, their
original from ^odome, not S^on; from Bedlam not Beth'lem; from Bethaven not
Bethel; from Jericho not Jerusalem; from the Taphouse not the Temple, the
well-befi^ting accoutrements and vain garb of the children of vanity. And yet
we see the world admiring, flesh and blood inventing, the Devil brewing and
b^o^ching, the Sons of the earth ex^lting, and defending these hell-bred
Sonnets, having the packet of their brains so full fraught with them, that
they have left no room for the Lords Psalms? What is this bu^ to b^il^ up the
Kingdom of darkness, and to make ungodly Proselites, for the great Cham and
Prince thereof. These be Satan's watchful Vaites, Viv^hant ut latr nes; sed
honorab^antur ut Martyrs Epist. 63.
which though they be esteemed, as Augustine spoke of the Donatists (who in his
time lived as Thieves, but were honored as Martyrs) yet here they are
condemned, as the spu^ious off-scowring of men, not praysers of God, but Organs
and Organous provokers and movers to all uncleanenesse.

And this is a Loidoramastick to libellers, whose malicious tongues and pens,
writing in blood, (as Draco writ his laws) are set on fire by Hell, whose
mouths are like the gate of the Temple called Shallecheth, out of which they
cast the filth of the Temple; So they the foul aspersions of shame upon the
persons of the Innocent. Pie debes D^^mino ex ultars, si vis mundo insultare.
But consider beloved, and learn by insulting over these, rightly and holily
to praise God, let ^o filthy communication proceed out of your mouths, least
the Mouth, the Messenger of the heart, bewray an ancleane fountain, Evil
words corrupt good manners. Rolloc. super Coll. 3. 16.
1 Cor. 15. Ratio habenda est Sermonis cum non sit in eo parum momenti ad
animu^ afficiendum aliquo modo vel ad mores corrigendos vel corrumpendos. Thy
words work not in vain upon the affections of the hearers, but either correct
or corrupt their man^e^s It is only the Word of God, which is eternal life,
John 6 68. which ministers grace to the hearers. Learn then to speak the
language of Cannan, Isa. 19. 18. for a word fitly spoken is like Apples of gold
in pictures of silver, Prove. 25. 11.

Then to conclude this Treatise of praising the Lord, Hugo Card.
with Hugo, because he is,

Creator ad esse,
which gave us our being,
Conservator in esse,
preserving us in that being,
Recreator in been esse,
restores us being fallen, into a better,
Glorificatur in optimo esse,
will glorify us with the best being of all, at
the day of the Lord JESUS.
To whom with the Father of mercies, and the Spirit of comfort and consolation,
be ascribed and given, all Praise and Thankesgiving, both of Nation and People,
Jew and Gentile, now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

