The Edict of the French King, for the appeasing of the troubles of his Realm.
Published at Paris in the Court of Parliament the eleue^th of August. 1573.
Printed in French by Federic Morel the Kings ordinary Printer, with the Kings
Privilege.

PRINTED AT LONDON by Henric Bynneman.

The Edict of the French King for the appeasing of the troubles in his
Kingdom.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of France, to all present or to come
greeting. Our intent has always been and is, after the example of our
predecessors, to rule and S. Bartholmew. 24. of August. 1572.
govern our Realm, and to receive of our subjects the obeisance to us due,
rather by gentle and loving manner, than by force. Wherefore our most dear and
well-beloved brother the King of Polonia, having full understanding of our will
and pleasure, has (following the commandment and special power that we
have sent him for that purpose) appointed and deputed certain of the chief
personages of our privy counsel being with him, to hear and understand the
complaints, griefs, and supplications of the Mayor, shiriffes, and
Councellers, dwellers and inhabitants of our Town of Rochell, Gentlemen and
others that are there abiding. And for as much as it is so, that now in the
end our most dear brother the said King of Polonia, according to our pleasure
and good will, has (by the advice of our most dear and well-beloved brethren
the duke of Alencon and king of Navarre, and our most dear and well-beloved
Cousins the Prince of Conde, and Prince Dauphin: the Dukes of Longueville, of
Guise, Neuers, and of Vzes: the Lords of Montluc, Count of Rhetz, of Biron, of
Villequier, of the Chapel Aux Vrsins, of Losses, of Vauguyon, of S. Supplice,
of Malicorne, of Suze, ye Gra^dprior of Champaigne, and other great and notable
personages being with him) made agreement with the said inhabitants of
Rochell, Gentlemen and others retired thither, upon the points and Articles
that shall be hereafter specified, as well for themselves, as for the
inhabitants of our Towns of Mou^tauban, and Nismes, the Gentlemen and others
retired into them, and others our subjects, for whom they have made suit.

We let you understand that, considering we can not do better than to follow
the counsel which is given us by our said brethren, Princes and Lords before
said, who for the zeal they have to the honor of God, with the experience
they have in many things, and the affection they bear toward the well
ordering of our affairs, have more knowledge than any other in those matters,
what is meet and necessary for the profit and commodity of our Realm. We by
the advice and counsel of the Queen our most honorable Lady and mother, of
our most dear and well-beloved Cousins the Cardinals of Lorain, and of Guise:
of our most dear and faithful Chancellor: of the Lords of Moruillier of
Lanssac, of Limoges: of the presidents, first of Thou, and Seguier, the Lord
of Foix, the president Hannequin, the Lords of Cheuerny, of Ma^de and of
Roessi, all Counselors of our said privy Council for the matters and causes
beforesaide, and for other good and great considerations thereunto specially
moving us) have said, declared, decreed and ordained, and do say, declare,
decree, and ordeine, by this our present Edict, and our will and pleasure is as
follows.

I. First, that the remembrance of all things that have happened by occasion of
the troubles and stirs in our said Realm, since the 24. of August last
paste, shall remain wholly quenched and appeased as things that had never
happened: neither shall it be lawful or permitted to any of our atturneys
general, or any other person either public or private, in what time soever
or for what occasion soever it be, to make any mention there, nor any process or
suit thereupon in any Court or jurisdiction.

II. Forbidding also all our Subjects of what estate or quallitie soever they
be, that they renew not the memory thereof, nor to contend, nor to revile,
nor provoke either other by reproching them with things that be past, in
disputing, rehersing, quarelling or doing outrage or offense one to an other,
in word or in deed, but to forbear, and to live peacibly together as
brethren, friends and fellow Citizens, upon pain to them that shall do the
contrary, to be punished as brekers of the peace, and disturbers of the common
quiet.

III. We ordeine, that the Catholic and Romish Religion be set up again,
and established in all places and quarters of this our Realm and country
under our obedience, where the exercise of the same has been left off, and that
it may be freely and peasibly exercised without any trouble or let, upon the
pains aforesaid: and that all those which during these present wars, have
entered upon houses, goods and revenues belonging to the Churchmen and other
catholics, and such as hold and occupy the same, shall leave unto them the
full possession and peasible enjoying thereof, in all freedom and safety.

IIII. And for to give occasion to our subjects, abiding and inhabiting in our
said Towns of Rochell, Montauban, and Nismes, to live and remain in rest, we
have permitted, and do permit to them, the free exercise of the Religion,
called reformed, within the said Towns, the same too cause too be exercised
within their own houses, or place to them appertaining (except always
public places) for them, their families and others that will be there present.

V. And to alothers of the said religion (called reformed) which have continued
therein until this present; we do permit to retire into their houses where
they may be, and remain throughout all other parts of our Realm, to go and
come, and to live in all liberty of conscience: And to the Gentlemen and
others, having high Justice, which in like manner have hitherto remained till
this present in the said Religion, bering Arms with the said inhabitants, in
the said Towns, since the said 24. of August last paste, we do also permit
to live in the same liberty of conscience in their houses, and there only to
baptize and marry after their accustomed manner, not having any assembly
(besides the kindred, Godfathers and Godmothers) above the number of ten
persons, and that not within our Court, nor within two leagues about the same,
nor in the Town, Prouostship and Vicountie of Paris, nor within ten Leagues
about the same Town.

VI. We charge our Baylifes, Seneshalles, ordinary Judges, or other
Substitutes, each one in his liberty or jurisdiction, to provide for the
burial of the dead bodies of them of the said Religion (called reformed) in
the most commodious manner they can, and without offense.

VII. If any of the said Religion have been constrained to make promis and
bond, and to give assurance to change their Religion: we have discharged the
same, and declare the same to be adnulled, and of none effect or value.

VIII. The Scholars, sickmen, and poor, of what religion soever they be,
shall be indifferently received into the universities, common schools,
hospitals, houses for sick persons, and Alms houses.

IX. We do permit to al our Subjects being of the said religion, that they may
sell or alienate their goods, and go freely with all their money and other
moueables, whither it shall seem them good, or to enjoy the commodity and
benefit thereof, in what place soever they shall resort unto, be it within or
without the Realm, so that it be not in the lands of such Princes, with whom
we may have wars.

X. Our said Subjects of Rochell, Mountaban and Nismes, and other before
named, shall remain quit and discharged of all sums of money, goods, debtes,
arrerages of rentes, profits and revenues of ecclesiastical persons, and
others which they shall sufficiently make apparent to have been by them taken
or levied, since the said. 24. of August, so that neither they nor their
committies, nor those that have furnished them with any thing, or delivered the
same unto them, shall any ways be charged nor condemned therefore at this
present, nor for the time paste, nor at any time hereafter.

XI. Likewise they shall remain acquitted and discharged of all Arts of
hostility, leuying and conducting of men of war, coining of money, casting
and taking of ordinance and munitions, making of powder and Saltpeter, Prizes,
Fortifications or enterprises upon Towns, pulling down of Churches, houses or
other places, prizes of Ships, Galleyes and goods upon the Sea, establishme^t
of Justice, and Judgments, and the executions thereof, as well in cases civil
as criminal, voyages, intelligences, treaties, and dealings had for their aid
and conservation, and generally of all that has by them been done, wrought or
committed to that effect, as well within as without our Realm, since the
said. 24. of August, as well as if the same were particularly expressed and
specifyed, so that for none of the things before named or others past and
done, shall be imputed to them or to their posterity any crime of rebellion,
disobedience or Treason.

XII. We do declare, that we hold and repute all those aforenamed for our
good, loyal and faithful subjects and servants, so that they do (...)
swear unto us all obeisance and fidelity, and do leave off and desist wholly
from al such associations as they have within or without our Realm, and that
they do not hereafter make any gatherings of money without our permission, nor
enrolmentes of men, congregations, or assemblies, other than those which are
above to them permitted, and that without Arms, upon pain to be rigorously
punished, as contemners of our commandments and ordinances.

XIII. All prisoners taken in war, or others that be holden in prysons,
galleyes, or elsewhere, for the cause of religion, and by occasion of these
present troubles, shall be enlarged and set at liberty without paying of
ransom, not meaning hereby, that the ransomes which are already paid, may
be asked again of those that have received them.

XIIII. Those of the said religion shall not be ouercharged, or burdened with
any charges ordinary or extraordinary more than the Catholics.

XV. We have declared and do declare, all defaults, sentences, judgments
arrestes, processes, seysures, sales, and decrees made and given against those
of the Religion called reformed, which be or have been within the said Towns
of Rochell, Mou^tauban, and Nismes, since the said 24. of August last paste,
which have been given without hearing the parties, or their Proctors by them
appointed, since the said 24. of August last paste, also the execution of the
same, as well in cases civil as criminal, shall be void, revoked, and
adnulled. And the Processes shall remain in the same estate as they were
before, and the foresaid persons shall enter again upon their temporal goods,
what so ever seyzures, sales, and judgments have been made by us or
otherwise, without making any recompense for the same.

XVI. And touching heirs, widows, and other having any right or title from
such of the said Religion, as are deceassed within the said Towns, that have
bin there or born Arms for them, in what part of our realm soever it be
since the said 24. of August, we permit to them to reenter into the possession
and enjoying of the goods left by the said persons deceassed, and we do
maintain them in their good fame and reputation.

XVII. All officers of the said towns of Rochel, Mountauban, and Nismes, as
well pertaining to the Crown as others, of what religion soever they be, that
have been put out thereof by reason of the same religion, and of these present
troubles, shall be set again in their estates, charges and offices: and other
officers of other Towns and places shall observe our declarations thereupon
made and published.

XVIII. And to the end that Justice be ministered without any suspicion to our
subjects of the said towns, and others that be retired into the^ since the
said 24. of August, we have ordained and do ordeine, and our will and pleasure
is, that all process and differences moved, or to be moved between the parties
of contrary religion, as well on the part of the demaundant, as the defendant,
what matter so ever it be, civil, or criminal, shall be heard at the first
insta^ce before our Baylifes, Seneshals, and other our ordinary Judges,
according to our ordinances. And where any appeal shall happen in any our
Courts of Parliament, there shall be provided for them by us only, within the
space of one year, (accompting from the day of the publication of these
presents,) Judges unsuspected, such as shall seem best to us (except always the
court of Parliament of Toulouse) in respect of those of Mountauban: and in the
mean time they shall not be constrained to appear personally.

XIX. And for as much as many particular persons have received and suffered so
many injuries and domages, both in their goods and persons, as hardly they can
forgette the remembrance of the same, so sone as were requisite for the
execution of our intent, we willing to avoid all inco^ueniences, and to give
some mean for those that might be in some fear, that upon their return to
their houses they should not be at rest, til such rancour and enmity might be
assuaged, have granted and do grant to them of the said Towns of Rochel,
Mountauban, and Nismes, that they shall enjoy their Privileges both ancient
and lately granted, and their authorities of jurisdiction and other rightes,
in which they shall be mainteyned and preserved, without having any Garrison,
neither shall be made there any Castles, Fortes, or Citadels, without the
consent of the inhabitants of the same Towns. Who for a demonstration and
surety of their obeisance, observation and mainteyning of our will and
intention, shall deliver for the space of two years, four of the principal
Burgeses and inhabitants of each of the said Towns, being of the said
Religion called reformed, the which shall be by us chosen out of those that
they shall name unto us, and those to be changed every three months, or in
such other time as shall seem good unto us, and they shall be put in such
Towns and places as shall please us to appoynte within fifty miles off at the
farthest from the said Towns, except in our towns of Paris and Toulouse And
to the end there be no occasion of complainte or suspicion, we will set in
the said Towns for governors, good men and well affectioned to our service,
such as shall be unsuspected, willing nevertheless, that the keeping of
their Towns, Towers and Fortresses, shall remain in the hands of the said
inhabitants, according to their ancient Privileges.

XX. We will likewise, that incontinent after the publication of our present
Edicte made in our Camp and Army, Arms shall be altogether generally laid
down, the which shall remain only in our hands, and in our most dear and
most well-beloved brothers the King of Polonia. We do ordeine that the forces
as well by land as by Sea, shall be withdrawn from before the said Towns,
the Fortes made as well of the one part as of the other, shall be raced and
ouerthrown: the free traffic and passages shall be open again in all the
Towns, Borrowes and Villages, Bridges and passages of our said Realm: the
Forces and Garrisons which have been placed by occasion of these present
troubles (since the said 24. of Auguste) in Towns and other places, houses
and Castles, apperteining to our subjects of what religion so ever they be,
shall depart incontinent, to leave unto them free and entire enjoying as they
had before they were dispossessed of them.

XXI. Such moueables as shall remain in their nature, and which have been taken
by way of hostility since the said 24. of August last past, shall be
restored to them to whom they belong, so always that they pay to the buyers the
price of such as have been sold by authority of Justice or by other commission
and public commandment. And for the execution of the aforesaid, the
withholders of the said moveable goods shall be constrained and subject to
restore them incontinent and without delay, notwithstanding all objections or
exceptions, to yield and restore them to the owners, for the price which they
paid.

XXII. And as touching the profits of immovable goods, as well each man
shall enter again into his house and shall enjoy on. each part the fruits of
the collection of this present year, notwithstanding all seasures and lettes
made to the contrary, since the said 24 of August, as also every one shall
enjoy the arrerages of the said rentes, that have not ben taken up by us or by
our commandment, or the permission and ordinance of us or of our Justice.

XXIII. Like-wise that al titles, writings, instructions and evidences which
have been taken away, shall be rendered and restored on either part, to those
to whom they belong.

XXIIII. We also ordeine that those of the said Religion shall be subject to
the politic laws of our Realm, that is to say, the Halydayes shall be
kept, and they of the said Religion shall not work, sell, or make any show
on the said days with open shop: and on fasting days in which the use of
flesh is forbidden by the Catholic and Romish Church, the Butcheries shall
not be open.

XXV. And to prevent all doings to the contrary that may happen in many of our
tomus: The Bayliffes, Seneshals, or their Lieutenants, shall cause the
principal inhabitants of the said Towns to swear to the mayntenaunce and
observation of this our pesent Edicte, and the one side mutually to give
assurance to the other, and to bind themselves interchangeably, and by
public Act, to answer to such disobediences as shall be committed against
the said Edicte within the said Towns, by the inhabitants of the same, or at
the least, to bring forth and deliver the offenders into the hands of the
Justice.

We also charge al our well-beloved and faithful people holding our Courts of
Parliament, Chambers of our accomptes, Courts of Assistance, Bayliffes,
Seneshals, Prouostes, and other our Justices and officers to whom it shall
appertain or their Lieutenantes, that they cause this our present Edict and
Ordinance to be read, publyshed, and registered in their Courts and
Jurisdictions, and to keep, maynteine, and inuiolably to observe the same in
all points: and that all those to whom it shall appertain, may enjoy, and
fully and peasibly use the content thereof. Ceassing and causing to bet ceased
all troubles and empeachmentes to the contrary, for such is our pleasure. In
witness hereof, we have signed these presents with our own hand, and to the
end it may remain a thing sure and stable for ever, we have to the same caused
to be set our Seal.

Given at our Castle of Bollogne, in the Month of July, in the year of
grace, 1573. and of our reign the thirtenth. Signed, CHARLES.
And more lower is written, By the King being in his Council. Signed, DE
NEVF-VILLE
And sealed with a Labell of read and green silk, and with green wax, with
the great Seal. Read, published, registered, and the kings Attorney general
being there upon heard, at Paris in Parliament, the. 11. of August. 1573.
Signed, DE HEVEZ.
Collation has been made with the original. Thus Signed, DE HEVEZ.


