A CONTINVATION Of a former RELATION CONCERNING THE ENTERTAINMENT given to the
PRINCE His Highness by the King of SPAIN in his Court at MADRID.

LONDON Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for William Barret. 1623.

A CONTINVAtion of a former Relation, concerning the entertainment given to the
Prince his Highness, by the King of Spain in his Court at MADRID.
ON Tuesday the 18. of March, being the second day after his Highness entrance
into the Palace, diverse Ambassadors and Graundes of Spain, desired leave of
the Prince to come and kiss his hands. And that day the Duke of Infantado, and
the Duke of Cea, Grandchild to the Duke of Lerma, came accompanied with diverse
Noblemen and Caualleros of their own Families, to see him, and to offer him
their service; after dinner the Prince went abroad, and ran some courses at
the Ring.

On Wednesday the 19. the King being accompanied with his Brothers, Don Carlos,
and the Infant Cardinal, came to visit the Prince in his lodgings, from
whence they all went into the Kings quarter, where he was entertained with
music, and saw many rare and curious pictures.

The next morning being Thursday, the King came again into his Highness
lodging, and conducted him by a private way to his Coach, with whom entered Don
Carlos, the Infant Cardinal, the Lord Marquess Buckingham, the Conde of
Oliuares, the Marquess of Carpio, and the Earl of Bristol: they went about
four leagues from the town to hunt the Wolf, where they found many hundreds
of the country people driving the mountains, who brought near unto the
several standings of the King and the Prince, where they were placed with
their Pieces, some Wolves; but they had not the fortune to kill any. That day
his Majesty and his Highness dined abroad in the fields upon the ground, and
spent the rest of the day with shooting in their pieces.

Friday the one and twentieth of March, being the day whereon the late King of
Spain died, was spent by the King and those of his Court, in devotion and in
performance of such Ceremonies as are usually every year done by them there in
remembrance of his Obsequies.

The next day the Cardinal Spinola, and diverse others, Ambassadors and
Graundes came to kiss the Princes hands in the morning. After dinner the King
accompanied with his Brothers, and the Conde of Oliuares, came into the Princes
quarter to visit him, with whom he went down into the Gardens, from whence
taking Coach, they passed into the fields to see some flights of the Earl of
Bristolls high flying Hawks: And afterward they ran sundry courses at the
Ring that day.

On Sunday the 23. of March, the Prince remained private in his lodging till
toward the evening, and then he walked into the Gardens. The Conde of
Monterey feasted the Lord Marquess of Buckingham, the Earl of Bristoll, and
Sir Walter Aston, at dinner that day, and presented the Lord Marquess with
diverse Crystal vessels of great worth. And toward night there arrived the
Earl of Carlisle, the Lord Viscount Andouer, the Lord Montioy, with others.

The next morning the Prince was visited again by the President of Castile,
and the Presidents of the other Counsels, who came to let him know, that since
the time that the King their Master had given them charge to receive and obey
all such Consultas and Commands as shall come from his Highness, there had
been a stay made of all businesses in their Courts, for that hitherto his
Highness had not been pleased to dispose of any thing; In regard whereof they
said they had taken the boldness to put him in mind thereof, and to beseech
him to believe, that the Order which they had received from his Majesty was not
complementall, but really desired and intended. And therefore they humbly
entreated the Prince, that he would vouchsafe to give some speedy order for
the dispatch of bufinesse, and the bestowing of such places as were then, or
should hereafter happen to be void. In the evening of the same day, there was
running at the Ring, and at the Esta Firmo; his Highness breaking many staves
very well, and with great applause.

The day following being Tuesday, the King carried his Highness abroad a
hunting to the Pardo, where they spent all the day, and had no very good sport,
yet they saw many Stags and Boares: They did eat together upon the ground in
the open fields with very good appetites.

The six and twentieth, the Prince spent in dispatching away a Messenger from
thence hither. On which day there arrived at Madrid the Marquess of Inojoca,
who was governor of Millan, and now Vice-King of Navarre, from which place he
was sent for, to prepare himself to go into England, as Ambassador
extraordinary to the King our Sovereign. The more to honor him in this
employment, beside his personal merit, he was sworn a Counselor of State,
he is to depart within few days.

Thursday the seven and twentieth, was the first day of a Parliament held in
the Kings Palace, at which his Majesty was present in the morning. After dinner
he came unto his Highness, and took him into his own lodgings, where they
spent part of that afternoon in conversation, and in beholding diverse Masters
of defense, who played at several weapons before them.

The next day, after dinner, his Highness passed away the time awhile in a
Garden adjoining to his lodgings: and about four or five of the clock he was
by the Conde of Oliuares conducted to a window in the Palace, to see diverse
Fencers play; and from thence to the Kings Armory, where (amongst many others
which were both rich and curious) he saw the Arms of the Emperor Charles the
fifth; and of the French King, Francis the first.

The nine and twentieth of this month was his Majesty's Birthday, which
caused much bravery and gallantery in the Court. In the morning of this day,
the Prince sent the Earl of Bristoll unto the King, to give him the En hora
buena, as also to the Queen and to the Infanta, to congratulate with them (as
is the custom of that Court) that his Majesty did on that day cumplir An^os:
The same day the Lord Marquess of Buckingham had his first audience of the
Infanta, who received him and those that went with him, with much courtesy. In
the evening the King having with him the Queen, the Infanta, Don Carlos, and
the Infant Cardinal, attended on by the whole Court, went in a solemn manner
to visit a Monastery of the Descalsas, wherein lives the Infanta Dona
Margarita, Daughter to the Emperor Maximilian, and great Aunt to his Majesty.
His Highness to see them went privately in a Coach, and was conducted in such a
manner, that at their going thither, and returning, he saw them pass by in
four several places.

The next day being Palm Sunday, his Majesty and all the Court passed through
some parts of the Palace, in a solemn and public procession, the which the
Prince likewise beheld from a secret place. In the afternoon the King and the
Prince met to see the fencing again, with which they entertained themselves
some time. And this day his Highness gave one thousand pounds sterling, to be
bestowed and distributed in the Holy week in alms, upon prisoners and other
poor people of Madrid, which was greatly esteemed, and has done him much
honor with all sorts of people there.

On Monday the Genoa Ambassador with all the Hombres de Negocios of that State,
which were in Madrid, came and kissed his Highness hands. The rest of that day
he spent in reading Spanish and in private.

Upon the second of April, the Prince having with him the Lord Marquess of
Buckingham and the rest of the English Nobility that are there, went toward
the Pardo to see the Earl of Bristols Hawks fly, where they met the Kings
Hawks, which were made especially for the Kite and the Crow: But the day
proving windy and unfit to hawke in, his Highness went to hunt, at which he
had much good sport, and killed two wild Boares. In the evening, as he
returned, he was met upon the way by the Conde of Oliuares, and the Conde of
Monterey, who waited on him to the Palace.

The next day being Wednesday in the Holy week, the public and solemn
exercise of devotion began, and the Procession, and the disciplinants which
every year do usually pass through the streets, and likewise (as their
custom is) close by the Palace, so that the Prince beheld them out of his own
Chamber window. That day his Highness stirred not abroad, but about the
evening he was visited by the Conde of Oliuares from his Majesty.

On Thursday his Highness went privately and saw his Majesty wash the feet of
the poor, and perform other ceremonies usually done upon that day. In the
afternoon there passed by his Highness window a greater Procession then had
done the day before.

Good Friday was spent by that King in hearing Sermons, and in devotion; and
toward the evening when the great Procession was to pass by, the Conde of
Oliuares, the Conde of Monterey, and others of the Counsel of State, came to
the Prince his lodgings, and attended him all the time it was passing by, and
afterward his Highness went down to walk in a Garden.

Satterday the Prince spent all the morning in private within his lodging, and
in the afternoon desiring to give his Majesty the buenas Pascuas, as the use
is there, he could not be permitted: But toward the evening his Majesty
accompanied with his two brothers, came into the Prince his lodgings, and gave
him the buenas Pascuas, where they sat and discoursed a good while.

The next day being Easter day, the Prince having desired leave to repay the
Visit and the buenas Pascuas, was accordingly about four a clock in the
afternoon, brought by a private way unto the King, with whom when he had
been a short space, and performed that complement, he intimated a desire to
do the like unto the Queen, and was presently conducted by his Majesty, being
also privately attended by all the Grandes and great Ministers of the Court,
from his own side, unto the Queens, which is on the other side of the Palace,
and there he found the Queen and the Infanta together, attended by all the
Ladies of the Court; This being the first time that he had personally visited
the Infanta. There were four Chaires set; in the two middlemost sat the
Queen and the Infanta; on the right hand of the Queen sat the Prince, and on
the left hand of them all sat the King. When the Prince had given the Queen
the buenas Pascuas, and passed some other complements of gratitude, for the
favors he had received from her since his coming to the Court, he rose out of
his Chair, and went toward the Infanta, who likewise rose up to entertain
him; and after fitting courtesies on both sides performed, there passed some
discourse betwixt them, such as was fit for the enteruiew of two such Princes,
in which it pleased the Prince to command the Earl of Bristoll to do him
service as Interpreter. The Prince then retired himself to his Chair, and
sat down again by the Queen, with whom he performed some short complement.
Afterward they all rose up, and with much courtesy took their leaves: in all
which things the Prince his comportment was so natural and suitable to his
quality and greatness, that he gave thereby just cause to the Spaniards
highly to honor him, as it appears they generally do. From the Queens side he
was conducted by his Majesty, in the same Equipage that he came thither, unto
the Kings side, where when he had entertained his Highness a while, with
beholding from a Window certain Masters and Gentlemen that exercised Fencing
before them, his Majesty then led him to another window that looked upon a
large place before the Court gate, and telling the Prince that he would only
go and see the Queen, took his Brother Don Carlos with him, leaving the
Infant Cardinal with the Prince, to expect his return. But before much time
was passed, there appeared about threescore of the principal Nobility of that
Kingdom in the place before the window, who were all very richly apparrelled
with Embroyderies, and being on horseback ran two and two together their
several careeres: they had all their faces discovered, save only the King,
Don Carlos, the Conde of Oliuares, and the Marquess of Carpio, who had vizards.

On Easter Monday his Highness dispatched hither another messenger, at whose
departure (God be thanked) he enjoyed perfect health, having been continually
from time to time exceeding much caressed and esteemed by that King, who
delights extremely in his company, and greatly honored by all the Court for
his brave and Prince-like Comportments.

FINIS.

