THE GENTLEMAN USHER. By GEORGE CHAPMAN.



AT LONDON Printed by V. S. for Thomas Thorppe. 1606.

THE GENTLEMAN USHER.
ACTVS PRIMVS,
SCAENA PRIMA.
Enter Strozza, Cynanche, and Pogio. Strozza. HAste nephew, what, a sluggard?
Fie for shame, Shall he that was our morning Cock, turn Owl, And lock out day
light from his drowsy eyes?


Pog. Pray pardon me for once, lord uncle, for I Will be sworn, I had such a
dream this morning: me thought one came with a commission to take a Sorrel
curtoll, that was stol^e from him, (...) he could find him. And because I
feared he would ^ay claim to my sorrel curtoll in my stable I ran to the
Smith to have him set on his mane again, and his tail presently, that the
Commission-man might not think him a curtoll. And when the Smith would not do
it, I fell a beating of him, so that I could not wake for my life til I was
revenged on him.


Cyn. This is your old valor nephew, that will fight sleeping as well as
waking.


Pog. Slud Aunt, what if my dream had been true* (as it might have been for
any thing I knew) there is never a smith in Italy, shall make an Ass of me in
my sleep, if I can choose.


Stroz. Well said, my furious nephew: but I see
You quite forget that we must rowse to day
The sharp-tuskt Bore: and blaze our huntsmanship before the duke.

Pog. Forget Lord uncle? I hope not; you think belike my wits are as brittle
as a Beetle, or as skittish as your Barbary Mare: one cannot cry weh^, but
straight she cries tihi.


Stro. Well ghest coosen Hysteron Proteron.


Pog. But which way will the dukes grace hunt to day?


Stro. Toward Count Lassos house his Grace will hunt, Where he will visit his
late honored mistress.


Pog. Who Lady Mar^arot, that dear^ young dame? Will his antiquity, never
lean his iniquity?


Cyn. Why how now nephew? turned Parnassus lately?


Pog. Nassus? I know not: but I would I had all the dukes living for her sake,
I Would make him a poor duke in faith.


Stro. No doubt of that, if thou ^adst all his living.


Pog. I would not stand dreaming of the matter as I do now.


Cyn. Why how do you dream nephew?


Pog. Mary all last night me thought I was tying her shoostring.


Stro. What all night ^ying her shoostring?


Pog. I that I was, and yet I ti^d it not neither; for as I was tying it, the
string broke me thought, and then me thought, having but one point at my hose,
me thought, I gave her that to tie her shoo with all.


Cyn. A point of much kindness I assure you.


Pog. Whereupon, in the v^rie nicke me thought the Count came rushing in, and I
ran rushing out, with my heels about my hose for haste.


Stro. So, will you leave your dreaming, and dispatch?


Pog. Mum, not a word m^re, I Will go before, and overtake you presently.

Exit.
Cyn. My Lord I fancy not these hunting sports,
When the bold game you follow turns again,
And stares you in the facel: et me behold
A cast of Faulcons on their merry wings,
Daring the stooped prey, that shifting flies:
Or let me view the fearful Hare or Hind,
To^t like a music point with harmony
Of well mouthed hounds. This is a sport for Princes,
The other rude Boares yield fit game for Boores.

Stro. Thy timorous spirit blinds thy judgment, wife,
Those are most royal sports that most approve
The huntsmans prowess, and his hardy mind.

Cyn. My Lord, I know too well your virtuous spirit,
Take heed for Gods love if you rowse the Bore,
You come not near him, but discharge aloof
Your wounding Pistol, or well aimed Dart.

Stro. I Mary wife this counsel rightly flows
Out of thy bosom, pray thee take less care,
Let Ladies at their tables judge of Bores,
Lords in the field: And so farewell sweet love;
Fail not to meet me at Ear^e Lassos house.

Cyn. Pray pardon me for that: you know I love not These solemn meetings.


Stro. You must needs, for once
Constrain your disposition; and indeed
I would acquaint you more with Lady Margaret,
For special reason.

Cyn. Very good, my Lord. Then I must needs go fit me for that presence.


Stro. I pray thee do, farewell.

Exit Cyn. Here comes my fri^nd.

Enter Uincentio. Good day my Lord; why does your grace confront
So clear a morning with so clowdie looks?

Vin. Ask'st thou my griefs, that know my desprate love
Curbd by my fathers stern r^alitie:
Must not I mourn that know not whether yet
I shall en^oy a stepdame or a wife?

Stro. A wife prince, never doubt it; your deserts
And youthful graces have engaged so far,
The beauteous Margaret, that she is your own.

Vin. O but the eye of watchful jealousy
Robs my desires of meanest enjoy her favor.

Stro. Despair not: there are means enough for you,
Suborne some servant of some good respect,
That's near your choice, who though she needs no wooing,
May yet imagine you are to begin,
Your strange young love suit, and so speak for you,
Bear your kind letters, and get safe access.
All which when he shall do; you need not fear
His trusty secrecy, because he dares not
Reveal escapes, where of himself is Author,
Whom you may best attempt, she must reveal;
For if she loves you, she already knows,
And in an instant can resolve you that.

Vin. And so she will, I doubt not: would to heaven
I had fit time, even now to know her mind:
This counsel feeds my heart with much sweet hope.

Stro. Pursue it then; it will not be hard to effect:
The Duke haz none for him, but Medice
That fustian Lord, who in his buckram face,
Bewraies, in my conceit, a map of baseness.

Vin. I, there is a parcel of vnconstrued stuff,
That unknown Minion raisde to honors height,
Without the help of Virtue, or of Art,
Or (to say true) nay of honest part:
O how she shames my father! he goes like
A Princes foote-man, in old fashioned silks,
And most times, in his hose and dublet only,
So miserable, that his own few men
Do beg by virtue of his liuerie;
For he gives none for any service done him,
Or any honor, any least reward.

Stro. It Is pity such should live about a Prince:
I would have such a noble counterset, nailde
Upon the Pillory, and after, whipped
For his adultery with nobility,

Vin. Faith I would feign disgrace him by all means,
As enemy to his base-bred ignorance,
That being a great Lord, cannot write nor read.

Stro. For that, weelle follow the blind side of him,
And make it sometimes subject of our mirth.
Enter Pogioposte.
Vin. See, what news with your Nephew Pogio?


Stro. None good I warrant you.


Pog. Where should I find my Lord Uncle?


Stro. What Is the huge haste with you?


Pog. O ho, you will hunt to day.


Stro. I hope I will.


Pog. But you may hap to hop without your hope: for the truth is, Kilbucke is
run mad.


Stro. What Is this?


Pog. Nay, it is true sir: and Ki^bucke being run mad, bit Ringwood so by the
left buttocke, you might have turned your nose in it.


Vin. Out Ass.


Pog. By heaven you might my Lord: do you think I he?


Vin. Zwoundes, might I? lets blanket him my Lord: a blanket here.


Pog. Nay, good my Lord Vincentio, by this rush I te^l you for good will: and
Venus your brache there, runs so proud, that your Hunts man cannot take her
down for his life.


Stro. Take her up fool, thou would say.


Pog. Why sir, he would soon take her down and he could take her up I warrant
her.


Uin. Well said, ham mer, hammer.


Po. Nay, good now lets alone, and there is your horse, Gray Strozza too haz the
staggers, and haz struck bay. Bettrice, your Barbary mare so, that she goes
halting a this fashion, most filthily.


Stro. What poison blisters thy unhappy tongue
Evermore braying forth unhappy news,
Our hunting sport is at the best my Lord:
How shall I satisfy the Duke your father,
Defrauding him of his expected sport?
See, see, he comes.
Enter Alphonso, Medice, Sarpego, with attendants.
Alph. Is this the copy of the speech you wrote, Signieur Sarpego?


Sar. It is a blaze of wit pocticall,
Read it, brave Duke, with eyes pathetical.

Alp. We will peruse it strait: well met Vine^tio,
And good Lord Strozza, we commend you both
For your attendance: but you must conceive,
It Is no true hunting we intend to day,
But an inducement to a certain show,
Wherewith we will present our beateous love,
And therein we bespeake your company.

Vin. We both are ready to attend your Highness.


Alp. See then, here is a Poem that requires
Your worthy censures; offered if it like
To furnish our intended amorous show:
Read it Uincentio.

Vin. Pardon me my Lord, Lord Medices reading, will express it better*


Med. My patience can digest your scoffs my Lord.
I care not to proclaim it to the world:
I can nor write, nor read; and what of that?
I can both see and hear, as well as you.

Alp. Still are your wits at war: here, read this poem.


Vin. The red faced Sun has firkt the flundering shades,
And cast bright ammell on A^raes brow.

Alp. High words and strange:
Read on Vincentio.

Vin. The busky groves that gag-tooth'd boares do shroud With cringle crangle
horns do ring alowd.


Pog. My Lord, my Lord, I have a speech here worth ten of this, and yet I Will
mend it too.


Alp. How likes Vincentio?


Vin. It is strangely good,
No inkehorne ever did bring forth the lik^,
Could these brave prancing words with Actions spur,
Be ridden thoroughly, and managed right,
It Would fright the audience, and perhaps delight.

Sarp. Doubt you of action sir?


Vin. I, for such stuff.


Sarp. Then know my Lord, I can both act and teach
To any words; when I in Padua schoolde it,
I played in one of Plautus Comedies,
Namely, Curc^o, where his part I acted,
Proiecting from the poor sum of four lines,
Forty fair actions.

Alp. Lets see that I pray.


Sarp. Your Highness shall command,
But pardon me, if in my actions heat
Entering in post post haste I chance to take up
Some of your honored heels;

Po. Y'ad best leave out that action for a thing that I know sir.


Sarp. Then shall you see what I can do without ^t.


Alp. See see, he has his furniture and all.


Sarp. You must imagine, Lords, I bring good news,
Whereof being princely proud I scowre the street
And ouer-tumble every man I meet.
Exit Sarp.
Pog. Beshrew my heart if he take up my heels.

Enter ^arp
Sarp. Date viam mihi Noti, atque Ignoti.
Dum ego, hic, officium meum facio.
Fugite omnes atque abite, and de via secedite, ne quem
in cursu; aut capite, aut cubito, aut pectore offendam, a^t genu.

Alp. Thanks good Seigneur Sarpego.
How like you Lords, this stirring action?

Stro. In a cold morning it were good my Lord.
But something harshe upon repletion.

Sarp. Sir I have ventred, being enioynde to eat
Three scholars commons, and yet drew it neat.

Pogio. Come sir, you meddle in too many matters; let us ^ pray tend on our
own show at my lord Lassos.


Sarp. Doing obeisance then to every lord
I now consorte you sir even tot^ cord.
Exit. Sarp. and Po^
Med. My lord, away with these scholastique wits,
Lay the invention of your speech on me,
And the performance too; i will play my part,
that you shall say, Nature yields more then Art.

Alp. Be It so resolved; vnartificiall truth
An vnfaind passion can descipher best.

Vin. But t'wil be hard my lord, for one vnlearnd.


Med. Vnlearnd? I cry you mercy sir; vnlearnd?


Vin. I mean, untaught my lord, to make a speech,
As a pretended Actor, without close,
More gracious then your doublet and your hose.

Alph. What, think you son we mean to express a speech
Of special weight without a like attire?

Vin. Excuse me then my lord; so stands it well.


Stro. Haz brought them rarely in, to pageant him.


Med. What; think you lord; we think not of attire?
Can we not make us ready at this age?

Stro. Alas my lord, your wit must pardon his.


Vin. I hope it will, his wit is pittyfull.


Stro. I pray stand by my Lord; you are troublesome.


Vin. To none but you; am I to you my Lord?


Med. Not unto me.


Vin. Why then you wrong me Strozza.


Med. Nay, fall not out my Lords.


Stro. May I not know
What your speech is my Liege?

Alp. None but my self, and the Lord (...).


Med. No, pray my Lord
Let none partake with us.

Alp. No be assured,
But for another cause; a word Lord Strozza,
I tell you true, I fear Lord Medice
Will scarce discharge the speech effectually:
As we go therefore, i will explain to you
My whole intent; that you may second him
If need and his debilitie require.

Stro. ^hanks for this grace my Liege.

Vincentio ouerheares.
Med. My Lord; your son.


Alp. Why how now son? forbear; yet it is no matter
We talk of other busi^esse Medice
And come, we will prepare us to our show.
Exeunt.
Stro. Vin. Which as we can, we will cast to overthrow.

Enter Lasso, Corteza, Margaret, Bassiolo, Sarpego, two Pages, Bassiolo bare
before.
Bas. Stand by there, make place.


Lass. Say now Bass^; you on whom relies
The general disposition of my house,
In this our preparation, for the Duke
Are all our officers at large instructed,
For fit discharge of their peculiar places?

Bass. At large my lord instructed.


Lass. Are all our chambers hung? Think you our house amply capacious to
lodge all the train?


Bass. Amply capacious: I am passing glad.
And now then to our mirth and musical show,
Which after supper we intend t'indure,
Welcomes chief dainties: for choice cates at home,
Ever attend on Princes; mirth abroad,
Are all parts perfect.

Sarp. One I know there is.


Lass. And that is yours.


Sarp. Well guest in earnest Lord,
I need not er ubescere, ^o take
So much upon me: That my back will bear.

Bass. Nay, he will be perfection it self,
For wording well, and dexterous action too.

Lass. And will these waggish pages, hit their songs?


2 Page Remi fa solla?


Lass. O they are practicing; good boys, well done;
But where is Pogio? there you are ouershot.
To lay a capital part upon his brain,
Whose absence tells me plainly he will neglect him.

Bass. O no my Lord, he dreams of nothing else,
And gives it out in wagers, he will excel;
And see, (I told your Lo:) he is come.
Enter Pogio.
Pog. How now my Lord, have you borrowed a Snite for me: Seigneur Bassiolo, can
all say, are all things ready? the Duke is hard by, and little thinks that I Will
be an Actor in faith, I keep all close my Lord.


Lass. O, it is well done, call all the Ladies in,
Sister and daughter, come, for Gods sake come,
Prepare your courtliest carriage for the Duke.
Enter C^rte, Margarite, and maid^. Corte And Niece, in any case remember this,
Praise the old man, and when you see him first,
Look me on none but him, smiling and lovingly:
And then, when he comes near, make beisance low,
With both your hands thus moving, which not only
Is as it were courtly, and most comely too,
But speaks (as who should say) come hither Duke;
And yet says nothing, but you may deny.

Lass. Well taught sister.


Mar. I, and to much end:
I am exceeding fond to humor him.

Lass. Hark, does he come with music? what, and bound?

An amorous device: daughter, observe.

Enter Enchanter, with spirits singing; after them; Medice, like S^anus, next
the Duke bound, Vincentio, Strozza, with other.
Vin. Now let^ gull Medi^, I do not doubt,
But this a^ire put on, will put him out.

Stro. We Will do our best to that end, therefore mark.


Ench. Lady, or Princess, both your choice commands.
These spirits and I, all servants of your beauty,
Present this royal captive to your mercy.

Mar. Captive to me a subject.


Vin. I, fair Nymph;
And how the worthy mystery befell
(...) here, this wooden god can tell.

Alp. Now my Lord.


Vin. No^ the time man, speak.


Med. Peace.


Alp. Pea (...) Vincentio.


Vin. Swonds my Lord,
Shall I stand by and suffer him to shame you?
My Lord Medice?

Stro. Will you not speak my Lord?


Med. How can I?


Vin. But you must speak in earnest:
Would not your Highness h^ him speak my Lord?

Med. Yes, and I will speak, and perhaps speak so,
As you shall never mend: I can I know.

Vin. Do then my good Lord.


Alp. Medice, forth.


Med. Goddess, fair godde^, for no less, no less.


Alp. No. less, no less* no more, no more: speak you.


Med. Swounds they have put me out.


Vin. Laugh your fair goddess,
This nobleman disdaines to be your fool.

Alp. V^entio, peace.


Vin. Swounds my Lord, i^ is as good a show:
Pray speak Lord Strozza.

Stroz. Honorable dame.


Vin. Take heed you be not out I pray my Lord.


Stro. I pray forbear my Lord Vincentio:
How this destressed Prince came thus inthralde,
I must relate with words of height and wonder:
His Grace this morning visiting the woods,
And straying far, to find game for the Chase,
At last, out of a myrtle grove he rowsde
A vast and dreadful Boar, so stern and fier^*
As if the Feend fell Cruelty her self
Had come to fright the woods in that strange shape.

Alp. Excellent good.


Vin. Too good a plague on him.


Stro. The princely Savage being thus on foot,
Tearing the earth up with his thundering hoof,
And with the'nragde Aetna of his breath.
Firing the air, and scorching all the woods,
Horror held all us Huntsmen from pursuit,
Only the Duke incenst with our cold fear,
Incouragde like a second Hercules.

Vin. Zwounds, too good man.


Stro. Pray thee let me alone:
And like the English sign of great Saint Georg^.

Vin. Plague of that Simile.


Stro. Gave valorous ex^mple, and like fire,
Hunted the monster close, and chargde so fierce,
That he enforced him (as our sense conc^'d)
To leap for soil into a cristall spring,
Where on the sudden strangely vanishing,
Nimph-like for him, out of the waves arose
Your sacred figure like Diana armde,
And (as in purpose of the beasts revenge)
Dischargde an arrow through his Highness breast*
Whence yet no wound or any blood appearde*
With which, the angry shadow left the light:
And this Enchanter with his power of spirits,
Brake from a cave, scattering enchanted sounds,
That struck us senseless, while in these strange bands,
These cruel spirits thus inchainde his arms,
And led him captive to your heavenly eyes*
The Intent whereof on their report relies.

En. Bright Nymph, that Boar figured your ^ueltie,
Chared by love, defended by your beauty.
This amorous Huntsman here, we thus inthral'd,
As the attendants on your Graces charms,
And brought him hither by your bo^ous hands.
To be releast, or live in endless bands.

Lass. Daughter, release the Duke: alas my Liege.
that meant your Highness to endure this wrong?

Co. Enlarge him Niece, come dame, it must be so*


Mar. What Madam, shall I arrogate so much?


Lass. His Highness pleasure is to grace you so.


Alp. Perform it then sweet love, it is a deed
Worthy the office of your honored hand.

Mar. Too wor^hie I confess my Lord for me,
If it were serious: but it is in sport,
And women are fit Actors for such pageants.

Alp. Thanks gracious love; why made you strange of this?
I rest no less your captive then before,
For me untying, you have tied me more.
Thanks Strozza for your speech, no thanks to you.

Med. No, thank your ^onne my Lord.


Lass. It Was very well,
Exceeding well performed on every part,
How say you Bass^alo?

Bass. Rare I protest my Lord.


Cor. O, my Lord Medice became it rarely,
Me thought I likde his manly being out;
It becomes Noblemen to do^ nothing well.

Lass. Now then will it please your Grace to grace our house,
And still vouchsafe our service further honor.

Al. Lead us my Lord, we will your daughter lead.

Exit.
Vin. You do not lead, but drag her leaden steps.


Stro. How did you like my speech?


Vin. O fie upon it, your Rhe^oricke was too fine.


Stro. Nothing at all:
I hope saint Georges sign was gross enough:
But (to be serious) as these warnings pass,
Watch you your father, I Will watch (...),
That in your loue-suit, we may shun suspect:
To which end, with your next occasion, urge
Your love to name the person she will choose,
By whose means you may safely write or meet.

Vin. That's our chief business: and see, here she comes.

Enter Margaret in haste.
Mar. My Lord, I only come to say, you are welcome*
And so must say, farewell.

Uin. One word I pray.


Mar. What Is that?


Vin. You needs must presently devise,
What person trusted chiefly with your guard,
You think is aptest for me to corrupt,
In making him a mean for our safe meeting?

Mar. My fathers Usher, none so fit,
If you can work him well: and so farewell,
With thanks my good Lord Strozza for your speech.
Exit.
Stro. I thank you for your patience, mocking Lady.


Vin. O what a fellow haz she picked us out?
One that I would have choosde past all the rest,
For his close stockings only.

Stro. And why not?
For the most constant fashion of his hat?

Vin. Nay then, if nothing must be left vnspoke,
For his strict form, thus still to wear his cloak.

Stro. W^ll sir, he is your own, I make no doubt:
For to these outward figures of his mind,
He has two inward swallowing properties
Ofany gudgeons; servile Avarice,
And ouerweening thought of his own worth,
Ready to snatch at every shade of glory:
And therefore, till you can directly board him,
Waft him aloof with hats, and other favors,
Still as you meet him.

Vin. Well, let me alone,
He that is one man's slave, is free from no^.
Ex^.
Fini^ Actus Primi.
ACTVS SECVNDVS
SCAENA PRIMA.
Enter Medice, Corteza a Page with a cup of S^cke, Strozza following close.
Med: Come Lady, sit you here: Page, fill some Sack,
I am to work upon this aged Dame,
To gleane from her, if there be any cause
(In loving others) of her Neeces coins
To the most gracious love suite of the Duke:
Here noble Lady, this is healthful drink
After our supper.

Corteza O, it is that my Lord,
That of all drinks keeps life and soul in me.

Med. Here, fill it Page, for this my worthy love*
O how I could embrace this good old widow.

Cort. Now lord, when you do thus, you make me think
Of my sweet husband; for he was as like you;
Eene the same words, and fashion: the same eyes,
Manly, and cholerike, eene as you are just,
And eene as kind as you for all the world.

Med. O my sweet widow, thou do make me proud.


Cort: Na^, I am too old for you.


Med: Too old, that's nothing,
Come pledge me wench, for I am dry again,
And strait will charge your widdowhood fresh in faith:
Why that's well done.

Cort: Now fie on it, heeres a draught.


Med: O, it will warm your blood: if you should sip,
T would make you heart burnd.

Cort: Faith and so they say:
Yet I must tell you, since I plide this geere,
I have been hanted with a horson pain here,
And every moon almost with a shrewd fever,
And yet I cannot leave it: for thank God,
I never was more sound of wind and limb.
Enter Strozza. A great bumbasted leg. Look you, I warrant you I have a leg,
Holds out as hansomly.

Med. Beshrew my life,
But it is a leg indeed, a goodly limb.

Stro. This is most excellent.


Med. O that your Niece
Were of as mild a spirit as your self.

Cort. Alas Lord Medice, would you have a girl.
As well seen in behavior as I?
Ah she is a fond young thing, and grown so proud*
The wind must blow at west still, or she will be angry.

Med. Mass so me think; how coy she is to the duke?
I lay my life she haz some younger love.

Cort. Faith like enough.


Med. Gods me, who should it be?


Cort. If it be any; Page, a little Sack.
If it be any: hark now; if it be,
I know not, by this Sack, but if it be,
Mark what I say, my Lord; I drink tee first.

Med. Well said good widow, much good do thy heart*
So; now what if it be?

Cort. Well, if it be;
To come to that I said, for so I said,
If it be any, It Is the Shrewde young Prince,
For eyes can speak, and eyes can understand*
And I have marked her eyes; yet by this cup,
Which I will only kiss.

Stro. O noble Crone,
Now such a huddle and kettle never was.

Cort. I never yet have seen; not yet I say,
But I will mark her after for your sake.

Med. And do I pray; for it is passing like;
And there is Strozza, a sly Counsailor
To the young boy: O I would give a limb,
To have their knauerie limm'd and painted out.
They stand upon their wits and paper learning:
Give me a fellow with a natural wit,
That can make wit of no wit; and wade through
Great things with nothing, when their wits stick fast,
O they be scuruie Lords.

Cort. Faith so they be,
Your Lordship still is of my mind in all,
And ^ene so was my husband.

Mid. Gods my life,
Strozza* has Euesdropt here, and ouer-heard us.

Stro. They have descried me; what Lord Medice
Courting the lusty widow?

Med. I, and why not?
Perhaps one does as much for you at home.

Stro. What, choleric man? and toward wedlock too?


Cort. And if he be my Lord; he may do worse.


Stro. If he be not; madame he may do better.

Enter Bassiolo with servants with Rushes, and a Carpet.
Bass. My Lords, and Madame, the Dukes grace intreates you
To Attend his new-made Duchess for this night,
Into his presence.

Stro. We are ready sir.

Exeunt.
Bass. Come strew this room afresh; spread here this carpet,
Nay quickly man, I pray thee; this way fool,
Lay me it smoothe, and Even; look if he will;
This way a little more: a little there.
Have thou no forecast? blood me thinks a man
Should not of mere necessity be an Ass.
Look how he strowes here too: Come sir Giles Goosecap,
I must do all my self, lay me vm thus:
In fine smoothe threaues, look you sir, thus in threaues.
Perhaps some tender Lady will squat here,
And if some standing Rush should chance to prick her,
She Would squeak and spoil the songs that must be sung.

Stro. See where he is; now to him, and prepare
Your familia^itie.
Enter Vin. and Stroz.
Vin. Save you master Bassiolo,
I pray a word sir; but I fear I let you.

Bass. No my good Lord, no let.


Vin. I thank you sir.
Nay pray be couerd; O I cry you mercy,
You must be bare.

Bass. Ever to you my Lord,


Vin. Nay, not to me sir,
But to the fair right of your worshipful place.

Stro. A shame of both your worships.


Bass. What means your Lordship?


Vin. Only to do you right sir, and my self ease.
And what sir, will there be some show to night?

Bass. A slender presentation of some music
And some thing else my Lord.

Vin. It Is passing good sir,
I Will not be over bold t'aske the particulars.

Bass. Yes, if your Lordship please.


Vin. O no good sir,
But I did wonder much; for as me thought
I saw your hands at work.

Bass. Or else my Lord
Our business would be but badly done.

Vin. How virtuous is a worthy man's example?
Who is this throne for pray?

Bass. For my Lords daughter,
Whom the duke makes to represent his duchess.

Vin. It Will be exceeding fit; and all this room
Is passing well preparde; a man would swear,
That all presentiments in it would be rare.

Bass. Nay, see if thou can lay vm thus in threaues.


Vin. In threaues dee call it?


Bass. I my Lord in threaues.


Vin A pretty term:
Well sir I thank you highly for this kindness,
And pray you always make as bold with me
For kindness more then this, if more may be.

Bass. O my Lord this is nothing.


Vin. Sir, it is much.
And now i will leave you sir; I know you are busy.

Bass. Faith sir alittle.


Vin. I commend me ^ee Sir.

Exit Vin.
Bass. A courteous prince believe it; I am sorry
I was no bolder with him; what a phrase
He used at parting* I commend me tee*
Be h^ate in faith;
Enter Sarpego half dressed?
Sar^. Good master Usher, will you dictate to me,
Which is the part precedent of this nightcap,
And which posterior? I do ignorare
How I should wear it.

Bass. Why sir; this I take it
Is the precedent part; I, so it is.

Sarp. And is all well sir think you?


Bass. Passing well.

Enter Pogio, and Fungus.
Pog. Why sir come on; the Usher shall be judge:
See master Usher: this same Fungus here,
Your Lords retainer, whom I hope you rule,
Would wear this better Ierkin for the Rush-man,
When I do play the Broome-man; and speak first.

Fun. Why sir, I borrowed it, and I will wear it.


Pog. What sir, in spite of your Lords gentleman, Vs^r:


Fun. No spite ^ir, but you have changde twice already,
And now would have it again.

Pog. Why that's all one sir,
Gentillitie must be fa^asticall.

Bass. I pray thee Fungus let master Pogio wear it.


Fun. And what shall I wear then?


Pog. Why here is one, that was a Rush-mans Ierkin, and I pray, were not
absurd then; a Broome-man should wear it?


Fun. Foe, there is a reason, I will keep it ^ir.


Pog. Will sir; then do your office master Usher,
M^ke him put off his Ierkin; you may pluck
His coat over his cares, much more his Ierkin.

Bass. Fungus y'ad best be ruled.


Fun. Best ^ir! I care not.


Pog. No sir? I hope you are my Lords re^ainer.
I need not care a pudding for your Lord:
But spare not, keep it, for perhaps I Will play
My part as well in this, as you in that,

Bass. Well said, master Pogio; my Lord shall know it.

Enter Corteza, with the Broom-wench, and Rush-wench in their petticotes,
clokes over them, with hats (...) their head-tyres.
Cort. Look master Usher, are these wags well dressed?
I have been so in labor with-vm truly.

Bass. You Have had a very good deliueran^e, Lady:
How I did take her at her labor there,
I use to gird these Ladies so sometimes.
Enter Lasso, with Syl^ and a Nymph, a man Bugge, and a woman. 1 I pray my
Lord, must not I wear this hair?


Lass. I pray thee ask my Usher; Come, dispatch,
The duke is ready: are you ready there?
2 See master Usher; must he wear this hair?

1. Bug. Pray master Usher, where must I come in?
2 Am not I well for a Bug, master Usher?

Bass. What stir is with these boys here, God forgive me,
If it were not for the credit on it, I Would see
Your apish trash a^re, ere I Would endure this.
1 But pray good master Usher.

Bass. Hence ye Brats,
You stand upon your tire; but for your action
Which you must use in singing of your songs,
Exceeding dexterously and full of life,
I hope you will then stand like a sort of blocks,
Without due motion of your hands, and heads,
And wresting your whole bodies to your words,
Look to it, you are best; and in; Go; All go in:

Pog. Come in my masters; lets be out anon.

(...).
Lass. What, are all furnish^ well?


Bass. All well my Lord.


Lass. More lights then here, and let loud music sound.


Bass. Sound Music.

Exeunt. Enter Vincentio, Stro^bare, Margaret, Corteza, and Cynanche bearing
her train. After her the duke whispering with Medice, Lasso with (...), etc.
Alp. Advance your self, fair Duchess to this Throne*
As we have long since raisde you to our heart,
Better decorum never was beheld,
Then twixt this state and you: And as all eyes
Now fixed on your bright Graces think it fit,
So frame your favor to continue it.

Mar. My Lord; but to obey your earnest will,
And not make serious scruple of a ^oy,
I scarce durst have pres^de this minut^ height.

Lass. Usher, cause other m^sicke; begin your show.


Bass. Sound Consort; warn the Pedant to be ready.


Cor. Madam, I think you will see a pretty show.


Cyn. I can expect no less in such a presence.


Alp. Lo what attention and state beauty breeds,
Whose moning silence no shrill herald needs.
Enter Sarpego.
Sar. Lords of high degree,
And Ladies of low courtesy,
I the Pedant here,
Whom some call schoolmaistere,
Because I can speak best,
Approc^ before the rest.

Vi^. A very good reason.


Sar. But there are others coming,
Without mask or mumming:
For they are not ashamed,
If need be, to be named,
Nor will they hide their faces,
In any place or places;
For though they seem to come,
Loded with Rush, and Broom:
The Broomeman you must know,
Is seigneur Pogio,
Nephew, as shall appear,
To my Lord Strozza here.

Stro. O Lord, I thank you sir, you grace me much.
And to this noble dame,
Whom I with finger name.

Vin. A plague of that fools finger.


Sar. And women will ensue,
Which I must tell you true,
No women are indeed,
But Pages made for need,
To fill up women's places.
By virtue of their faces,
And other hidden graces.
A hall, a hall; whist, still, be mum,
For now with silver song they come.
Enter Pogio, Fungus, with the song Broome-maid, and Rush-maid. After which,
Pogio.
Pog. Heroes, and Heroines, of gallant strain,
Let not these Broomes, motes in your eyes remain,
For in the Moon, there is one bears withered bushes:
But we (dear wights) do bear green broomes, green rushes,
Where of these verdant herbals cleeped Broom,
Do pierce and enter every Ladies room,
And to prove them high borne, and no base trash,
Water with which your phisnomies you wash,
Is but a Broom. And more truth to deliver,
Grim Hercules swept a stable with a river,
The wind that sweepes foul clouds out of the air,
And for you Ladies makes the Welken fair,
Is but a Broom: and O Dan Titan bright,
Most clearkly called the Scauenger of night,
What art thou, but a very broom of gold?
For all this world not to be cride nor sold;
Philosophy, that passion sweepes from thought,
Is the souls Broom, and by all brave wits sought,
Now if Philosophers but Broomemen are,
Each Broomeman then is a Philosopher.
And so we come (gracing your gracious Graces)
To sweep Cares cobwebs from your cleanly faces.

Alp. Thanks good master Broomeman,


Fun. For me Rushman then,
To make Rush ruffle in a v^pse of ten,
A Rush which now your heels do lie on ^ere.

Vin. Cry mercy ^ir.


Fun. Was whilome used for a pungent spear,
In that odd battle, never fought but twice
(As Homer ^ings) betwixt the frogs and mice,
Rushes make True-loue kno^; Rushes (...),
Your Rush maugre the beard of (...) (...):
And when with gentle, amorous, ^ay (...) (...),
Each Lord with his fair Lady sw^tly swims
On these cool Rushes; they may with these bables,
Cradles for children make; children for cradles,
And lest some Momus here might now ^rie push,
Saying our pageant is not worth a Rush,
Bundles of Rushes, lo, we bring along,
To pick his teeth that bi^es them with his tongue.

Stro. See, see, that's Lord M^dice.


Vin. Gods me, my Lord,
Haz he picked you out, pi^ing of your t^h?

Med. What pick you ou^ of that?


Stro. Not such sta^e stu^
As you pick from your teeth.

Alp. Leave this war with Rushes,

Good master pedant; pray forth with your show.


Sar. Lo thus far th^n (brave duke) you see
Mere entertainment; Now our gl^
Shall march forth in (...):
And this q^eint Duchess here shall see
The fault of virgin Nicetie,
First wooed with Rural courtes^e,
Disb^rthen them; praunce on this ground,
And make your ^xit with your Round.
Ex^unt Well have they de^nc'd as it is meet,
Both with their ^imble heads and ^eet.
Now, as our cou^ry girls held off,
And rudely did their lovers scoff;
Our Nymph (...) shall only glaunce
By your fair eyes, and look (...) (...)
Upon her female friend that wo^es her.
Who is in plain (...) (...) to loose her.
And after them, to conclude all,
The p^rlue of our Pa^orall.
A female bug, and eke her friend,
Shall only come and sing, and end
(...) (...). This Lady and Duchess we conclude,
Fair Virgins must not be too rude:
For though the rural wild and ^ntike,
Abusde their loves as they were franuke;
Ye^ take you in your Iuory clutches,
This noble Duke, and be his D^tches.
Thus thanking all for their tacete,
I vo^ the room, and cry valete.
Exit.
Alp. Generally well, and pleasingly performed.


Mar. Now I resign this borrowed majesty,
Which ^ate unseemly on my worthless head,
With humble service to your Highness hands.

Alp. Well you became it Lady, and I know
All here could wish it might be ever so.

Stro. Heeres one says (...) to that.


Vin. Plague on you, peace.


Lass. Now let it please your Highness to accept
A homely banquet, to close these rude sports.

Alp. I thank your Lordship much.


Bass. Bring lights, make place.

Enter Pogi^ in his cloak and broome-mans attire.
Pog. How dee my Lord?


A^p. O master broomeman, you did passing well.


Vin. A you mad sl^ue you! you are a tickling Actor.


Pog. I was not out like my Lord Medice.
How did you like me Aunt?

Cyn. O rarely, rarely.


Stro. O thou have d^ne a work of memory,
And raisde our house up higher by a story.

Vin. Friend, how conceit you my young mother here?


Cyn. Fitter for you my Lord, than for your (...).


Vin. No more of that swee^e friend, those are bugs words.

Exeunt.
Finis Actus secundi.
ACTVS TERTII
SCAENA PRIMA.
Medice after the song, whispers alon^ with hi^ ^eruant. Med. Thou art my
trusty s^ruant and thou k^owst,
I have been ever bountiful Lord to thee,
As still I will be: be thou thankful then,
And do me now a service of import.

Ser. Any my Lord in compass of my life.


Med. To morrow then the Duke intends to hunt,
Where Strozza my despightfull enemy,
Will give attendance busy in the chase,
Wherein (as if by chance, when others shoot
At the wild Boar) do thou discharge at him,
And with an arrow, cleave his canckerd heart.

Ser. I will not fail my Lord.


Med. Be secret then.
And thou to me shall be the dear'st of men.
Exeunt. Enter Vincentio, and Bassiolo.
Vin. Now Vanity and Policy enrich me
With some rid^culous fortune on this Usher.
Where Is Master Usher?

Bass. Now I come my Lord.


Vin. Besides, good sir, your show did show so well,


Bass. Did it in deed my Lord?


Vin. O sir, believe it;
It Was the best fashiond and well orderd thing
That ever eye beheld: and there withal,
The fit attendance by the servants used,
The gentle guise in serving eu^ry guest,
In other entertainements; every thing
About your house so sortfully disposde,
That even as in a turne-spit called a Jack,
One vice assists another; the great wheels
Turning but softly, make the less to whirre
About their business; every different part
Concurring to one commendable end:
So, and in such conformance, with rare grace,
Were all things orderd in your good lords house.

Bass. The most fit simile that ever was.


Vin. But shall I tell you plainly my conceit,
Touching the man that I think causde this order?

Bass. I good my Lord.


Vin. You note my simile.


Bass. Drawn from the turne-spit.


Uin. I see you have me,
Even as in that queint engine you have seen,
A little man in shreds stand at the winder,
And seems to put all things in act about him,
Lifting and pulling with a mighty stir,
Yet adds no force to it, nor nothing does:
So, (though your Lord be a brave Gentleman)
And seems to do this business,
He does nothing;
Some man about him was the festival robe,
That made him show so glori^us and divine.

Bass. I cannot tell my Lord, yet I should know if any such there were.


Vin. Should know quoth you;
I warrant you know: well, some there be
Shall have the fortune to have such rare men,
(Like brave beasts to their Arms) support their state,
When others of as high a worth and breed,
Are made the wastefull food of them they feed:
What state has your Lord made you for your service?

Bass. He haz been my good Lord, for I canspend
Some fifteen hundred crowns in lands a year,
Which I have gotten since I served him first.

Vin. No more then fifteen hundred crowns a year?


Bass. It is so much as makes me li^e my Lord,
Like a poor Gentleman.

Vin. Nay, it is pretty well:
But certainly my nature does esteem
Nothing enough for virtue; and had I
The Duke my fathers means, all should be spent,
To keep brave men about me: but good sir,
Accept this simple jewel at my hands,
Till I can work persuasion of my friendship,
With worthier arguments.

Bass. No good my Lord,
I can by no means ^erite the free bounties
You have bestowed besides.

Vin. Nay, be not strange,
But do your self right, and be all one man
In all your actions, do not think^ but some
Have extraordinary spirits like your self,
And will not stand in their society,
On birth and riches: but on worth and virtue,
With whom there is no niceness, nor respect
Of others comm^n friendship; be he poor
Or baselv borne, so he be rich in soul,
And noble in degrees of qualities,
He shall be my f^iend sooner then a King.

Bass. T^ a most kingly i^dgement in your lordship,


Vin. Faith sir I know not, but it is my va^ne humor.


Bass. O, ti^ an honor in a Nobleman.


Vin. You Have some lords now so politic and proud,
They skorne to give good looks to worthy men.

Bass. O fie upon vm; by that light my lord,
I am but servant to a Nobl^man,
But if I would not sko^ne such puppet lords,
Would I wear breathless.

Vin. You sir? so you may,
For they will cogge so when they wish to use men,
With, pray be couerd sir, I beseech you sit,
Whoe's there? wait of Master Usher to the door.
O, these be godly gudgeons: where is the deeds?
The perfect Nobleman?

Bass. O good my Lord.


Vin. Away, away, ere I would flatter so,
I wo^ld eat rushes like lord Medici.

Bass. Well, well my Lord, would there were more such P^inces.


Vin. Alas, twere pity sir, they would be gulld
O^t of their very skins.

Bass. Why how are you my lord?


Uin. Who I, I care not:
If I be guild wh^re I profess plain love,
It Will be their faults you know.

Bass. O it were their shames.


Vin. Well, take my jewel, you shall not be strange,
I love not man^e words.

Bass. My lord, I thank you, I am offew words too.


Vin. Ti^ ^riendlie said,
You prove your self a friend, and I would have you
Advance your thoughts, and lay about for state,
Worthy your virtues: be the Mineon
Of some great King or Duke: there is Medici,
The Minion of my Father: O the Father!
What difference is there? but I cannot flatter
A word to wise men.

Bass. I perceive your Lordship.


Vin. Your Lordship? talk you now like a friend?
Is this plain kindness?

Bass. Is it not my Lord?


Vin. A palpable flattring figure for men common:
A my word I should think, if twere another,
He meant to gull me.

Bass. Why it is but your due.


Vin. It Is but my due: if you will be still a stranger:
But as I wish to choose you for my friend,
As I intend when God shall call my father,
To do I can tell what: but let that pass,
Thus it is not fit; let my friend be familiar,
V^e not me Lordship, nor yet call me Lord,
Nor my whole name Vincentio; but vince,
As they call Jack or Will, it is now in use,
Twixt men of no equallity or kindness.

Bass. I shall be quickly bold enough my Lord.


Vin. Nay, see how still you use that co^ term, Lord
What argues this, but that you shun my friendship?

Bass. Nay* pray say not so.


Vin. Who should not say so?
Will you ^fford me now no name at all?

Bass. What should I call you?


Vin. Nay, then it is no matter.
But I told you Vince.

Bass. Why then my sweet Vince.


Vin. Wh^e so then; and yet ^ull there is a fault,
In using these kind words, without kind deeds:
Pray ^ee imbra^e me too.

Bass. Why then sweet Vince.


Vin. Why now I thank you, sblood shall friends be strange?
Where there is plamenesse, there is ever truth:
An^ I will still be plame since I am true:
Come let us lie a little, I am weary.

Bass. And so am I, I swear since yesterday.


Vin. You may sir by my faith; and sir, hark thee,
What lordship would thou wish to haueifaith,
When my old father dies?

Bass. Who I? alas.


Vin. O not you, well sir, you shall have none,
You are as coy a piece as your Lords daughter.

Bass. Who, my mistress?


Vin. Indeed, is she ^our Mistress?


Bass. I faith sweet Vince, since she was three year old.


Vin. And are not we too friends?


Bass. Who doubts of that?


Vin. And are not two friends one?


Basis. Even man and wife.


Vin. Then what to you she is, to me she should be.


Bass. Why Vince, thou would not have her?


Vin. O not I: I do not fancy any thing like you*


Bass. Nay but I pray thee tell me.


Vi. You do not mean to marry her your self?


Bass. Not I by heaven.


Vin. Take heed now, do not gull me.


Bass. No by that candle.


Vin. Then will I be plain.
Think you she dotes not too much on my father?

Bass. O yes, no doubt on it.


Van. Nay, I pray you speak.


Bass. You seely man you, she cannot abide him.


Vin. Why sweet friend pardon me, alas I knew not.


Bass. But I do note you are in some things simple,
And wrong your self too much.

Vin. Thank you good friend,
For your plain dealing, I do me^ne so well.

Bass. But who saw ever summer mixed with winter?
There must be equal years where firm love is.
Could we two love so well so soddainely
Were we not some thing equaller in years.
Than he and she are?

Vi. I cry ye mercy sir, I know we could not, but yet be not ^oo bitter,
Considering love is fearful. And sweet friend,
I have a letter t'intreate her kindness.
Which if you would convey.

Bass. I, if I would sir?


Vin. Why faith, dear friend, I would not die requitelesse.


Bass. Would you not so sir?
By heaven a little thing would make me box you,
Which if you would convaie? why not I pray?
Which (friend) thou shall conuaie.

Vin. Which friend, you shall then.


Bass. Well friend, and I will then.


Vin. And use some kind perswasiue words for me?


Bass. The best I swear that my poor tongue can forge.


Vin. I, well said, poor tongue: O it is rich in meekenesle;
You are not known to speak well? You have won
Direction of the Earl and all his house,
The favor of his daughter, and all Dames
That ever I saw, come within your sight,
With a poor tongue? A plague a your sweet lips.

Bass. Well, we will do our best: And faith my Uince,
She shall have an unwieldy and dull soul,
If she be nothing moved with my poor tongue,
Call it no better; Be it what it will.

Vin. Well said in faith; Now if I do not think
It Is possible, besides her bare receipt
Of that my Letter, with thy friendly tongue.
To get an answer of it, never trust me.

Bass. An answer man? God's Blood make no doubt of that.


Vin. By heaven I think so; now a plague of Nature,
That she gives all to some, and none to others.

Bass. How I endeare him to me! Come Vince, rise,
Next time I see her, I will give her this:
Which when she sees, she will think it wondrous strange
Love should go by descent, and make the son
Follow the father in his amorous steps.

Vin. She needs must think it strange, that never yet saw
I durst speak to her, or had s^arce her sight.

Bass. Well Vince, I swear thou shall both see and kiss her.


Uin. Swears my dear friend? by what?


Bass. Even by our friendship.


Vin. O sacred oath! which, how long will you keep?


Bass. While the^e be bees in Hybla, or white swannes
In bright Meander; while the banks of Po
Shall bear brave lillies; or Italian dames
Be called the Bone robes of the world.

Vin. It Is elegantly said: and when I fail,
Ler there be found in Hybla hiues no bees;
Let no swannes swim in bright Meander stream*
Nor lillies spring upon the ban^s of Po,
Nor let one fat Italian dame be found,
But lean and brawn-falne; I, and scarsly so^nd.

Bass. It is enough, but lets embrace with all.

Exit.
Vin. With all my heart.


Bass. So, now farewell swe^t Vince.


Vin. Farewell my wo^thie friend, I think I have him.

Enter Bassiolo.
Bass. I had forgot the parting phrase he taught me, I commend me to you sir.

Exit instant.
Vin. At your wish^ ruice sir:
O fine friend, he had forgot the phrase:
How serious apish souls are in vain form:
Well, he is mine, and he being trusted most
With my dear jove, may often work our meeting,
And being thus ingagde, dare not re^eale.
Enter P^gio in haste, Strozza following.
Po. Horse, horse, horse, my lord, horse, your father is going a hunting.


Vit. My Lord horse? you ass (...) d'e^ call my Lord horse?


Stro. Nay, he speaks huddles still, lets sl^ h^ tongue.


Po. Nay good uncle now, god's blood, what cap^, merchants you be; so the Duke took
me up even now: my lord uncle here, and my old lord Lasso, by heaven you are
(...) too witty for me, I am the veriest fool on you all, ^e be sworn.


Vin. Therein thou art worth us all, for thou know thy self.


Str. But your w^edom was in a pretty t^g l^st night; was it not I pray?


Pog. O, for taking my drink a little? faith my Lord, for that you shall have
the best sport p^ntly with Mad^ Cor^, that ever was; I have made her so drunk,
that she does nothing b^ kiss my Lord Medice.

See she comes riding the Duke, she is passing well mounted* believe it.

Enter Alphonso, Corteza, Cynanche Bassiolo first, two women attendant^, and
hunts-men, Lasso.
Alp. Good wench forbear.


Cort. My Lord, you must put forth your self among Ladies, I warrant you have
much in you, if you would show it; see, a cheek a twenty; the body of a
George, a good leg still; still a good calfe* and not slabby, nor hanging I
warr^nt you; a braw^e of a thumb here, and it were a p^d p^; Niece Meg ^ou shall
have the sweetest bedfellow on him, that ever called Lady husband; try him
you shamefaced babble you, (...) him.


Mar. Good Madame be ruled.


Cort. What a nice thing it is, my Lord, you must set forth this g^re* and k^e
her; in faith you must; get you tog^her and be naugh^ awhile, get you together.


Alp. Now what a merry harmless dame it is!


Cort. My Lord Medice, you are a right noble man, and will do a woman right in a
wrong matter and need be; prav do you give the duke ensample upon me; you come
a wooing to me now; I accept it.


Lass. What ^ane you sister?


Cort. Pray my Lo^d away; consider me as I am, a woman.


Pog. Lord, how I have wh^d her?


Cort. You come a woo^ng to me now; ^ay ^ee Duke mark my Lord Medi^; and do
you mar^e me (...); Stand you aside, m^ Lord* (...), and you; g^ pl^; now ^y L^
^edice, ^ut case I b^ st^ge a (...) yet y^ lik^ (...) (...) to it. Come ^e me
my L^d, be not (...).


Med. Not I Mad^, (...) come no^ (...) ^ng (...) ^ou.


Cort. ^ ^.


Lass. (...) fister, v'(...) too (...); (...) will you goet (...) (...) (...)


C^t. ^.


Lass. What Is the matter?


Cort. Dee think I am drun^e?


Lass. I think so truly.


Cort. But are you sure I am drunk?


Lass. Else I would not think so.


Cort. But, I would be glad to be sure on it.


Lass. I assure you then.


Cort. Why then say nothing; and I Will begone God bwy lord, duke

I Will come again anon.

Exit.
Lass. I hope your Grace will pardon her my liege,
For it is most strange; she is as discreet a dame
As any in these countries, and as sober,
But for this only humor of the cup

Alp. It Is good my Lord sometimes:
Come, to our hunting; now it is time I think.

O^n The very best time of the day, my Lord.

Alp. Then my Lord, I will take my leave till night,
Reserving thanks for all my entertainment,
Till I return; in mean time, lovely dame,
Remember the high state you last presented, Vin. and St. have all this while
talked together a pretty way.
And think it was not a mere festival show,
But an essential type of that you are
In full consent of all my faculties
And hark you good my Lord.

Vin. See now, they whisper
Some private order, (I dare lay my life)
For a forced marriage t'wixt my love and father*
I therefore must make sure: and noble friends,
I Will leave you all, when I have brought you forth,
And seen you in the chase; meane-while observe
In all the time this solemn hunting lasts,
My father and his minion Medice,
And note, if you can gather any sign,
That they have mist me, and suspect my being,
If which fall out, send home my Page before.

Stro. I will not fail my Lord.

Medice whispers with I* Huntsman all this while.
Med. Now take thy time.


Hunt. I warrant you my Lord, he shall not escape me.


Alp. Now my dear Mistress, till our sports intended end with my absence, I
will take my leave.


Lass. B^lo, attend you on my daughter.

Exeunt
Bass. I will my Lord.


Vin. Now will the sport begin; I think my love Will handle him, as well as I
have done.

Exit.
Cyn. Madam, I take my leave, and humbly thank you.


Mar. Welcome good madam; mayds wait on my Lady.

Exit
Bass. So mistress, this is fit.


Mar. Fit sir, why so?


Bass. Why so? I have most fortunate news for you.


Mar. For me sir? I beseech you what are they?


Bass. Merit and Fortune, for you both agree;
Merit what you have, and have what you merit.

Mar. Lord with what Rhetorike you prepare your news*


Bass. I need not; for the plain contents they bear
Vttred in any words, deserve their welcome,
And yet I hope the words will serve the turn.

Man. What, in a letter?


Bass. Why not?


Mar. Whence is it?


Bass. From one that will not shame it with his name* And that is Lord
Vincentio.


Mar. King of heaven!
Is the man mad?

Bass. Mad Madam, why?


Mar. O heaven, I muse a man of your importance,
Will offer to bring me a letter thus?

Bass. Why, why good Mistress, are you hurt in that?
Your answer may be what you will your self.

Mar. I, but you should not do it: Gods my life,
You shall answer it.

Bass. Nay, you must answer it.


Mar. I answer it! are you the man I trusted?
And will betray me to a stranger thus?

Bass. That's nothing, dame, all friends were strange^s first.


Mar. Now was there ever woman ouerseene so,
In a wise man's discretion?

Bass. Your brain is shallow, come, receive this letter*


Mar. How dare you say so? when you know so well
How much I am engaged to the duke?

Bass. The duke? a proper match: a grave old gentman:
Haz be^rd at will; and would, in my conceyt,
M^ke a most ex^ellent pattern, for a potter
To have his pictu^e stamped on a Judge.
To keep ale-^nights in memory of sobriety.
Here gentl^ m^dam, take it.

Mar. Take it si^?
A^ I common taker of love letters?

Bass. Common? why when received you one before?


Mar. ^ome, it is no matter; I had thought your care
Of my bestowing, would not tempt me thus
To one I know not; but it is because
You know I dote so much on your direction.

Bass. On my direction?


Mar. No sir, Not on yours.


Bass. Well mistress, if you will take my advice
At a^y time, then take this letter now.

Mar. It Is strange, I wonder the coy gentleman,
That seeing me so often, would never speak,
Is on the (...) so far wrapped to write.

Bass. It showed his judgment, that he would not speak
Knowing with what a strict and jealous eye
He should be noted; hold, if you love yourselfe;
Now will you take this letter? pray be ruled.

Mar. Come, you have such another plaguie tongue,
And yet yfayth I will not.

Bass. Lo^d of heaven,
What, did it bu^ne your hands? hold, hold, I pray,
And let the words within it fire your heart.

Mar. I wonder how the devil, he found you ou^
To be his spokesman, -- O the duke would thank you,
If he knew how you vrgde me for his son.

Bass. The duke? I have fretted her,
Fuen to the liver, and had much ado
To ^ake her take it, but I knew it was sure;
For he that cannot turn and w^nde a woman
Like silk about his finger, is no man,
I Will make her answer't too.

Mar. O here is good stuff.
Hold, pray take it for your pains to bring it.

Bass. Lady you err in my reward a little,
Which must be a kind answer to this letter.

Mar. Nay then in faith, it were best you brought a Priest;
And then your client; and then keep the door.
God me I never knew so rude a man.

Bass. Well, you shall answer; I Will fetch pen and paper.

Exit
Mar. Poor Usher, how were thou wrought to this brake?
Men work on one another for we women,
Nay each man on himself; and all in one
Say; No man is content that lies alone.
Here comes our gulled Squire.

Bass. Here Mistress, write.


Mar. What should I write?


Bass. An answer to this letter.


Mar. Why sir, I see no cause of answer in it,
But if you needs will show how much you rule me,
Sit down; and answer it, as you please your self,
Here is your paper, lay it fair before you.

Bass. Lady, content, I Will be your Secretorie.


Mar. I fit him in this task; he thiukes his pen
The Shaft of Cupid, in an amorous letter.

Bass. Is here no great worth of your answer say you?
Believe it, it is exceedingly well writ.

Mar. So much the more unfit for me to answer,
And therefore let your Style and it contend.

Bassi. Well, you shall see I will not be far short,
Although (indeed) I cannot write so well
When one is by, as when I am alone.

Mar. O, a good Scribe must write, though twenty talk, and he talk to them
too.


B^ss. Well, you shall see.


Mar. A proper piece of Scribeship there is no doub^;
Some words, pic^t out of Procl^mations,
Or great men's Speeches; or well s^lling Pamphlets:
See how he rubbes his ^emples (...) (...)
His Muse lies in the back-(...) (...) (...),
Which thick and gross, is hard to be brought forward,
What? is it loath to come?

Bass. No, not a whi^:
Pray hold your peace a little.

Mar. He sweates, with bringing on his heavy style,
I Will plie him still, till he sweat all his wit out,
What man, not yet?

Bass. Swoons, yowle not extort it from a man,
How do you like the word Endeare?

Mar. O fie upon it.


Bass. Nay, then I see your judgment: what say you to condole?


Mar. Worse and worse.


Bass. O braue^ I should make a sweet answer, if I should use no words but of
your admittance.


Mar. Well sir, write what you please.


Bass. Is model a good word with you?


Mar. Put them together I pray.


Bass. So I will I warrant you.


Mar. See, see, see, now it comes pouring down.


Bass. I hope you will take no exceptions to believe it.


Mar. Out upon it, that phrase is so run out of breath in trifles, that we
shall have no belief at all in earnest shortly. Believe it it is a pretty
feather; believe it a dainty Rush; believe it an excellent Cocks-combe.


Bass. So, so, so, your exceptions sort very collaterally.


M^r. Collaterally? there is a fine word now; wrest in that if you can by any
means.


Bass. I thought she would like the very worst of them all, how think you? do
not I write, and hear, and talk too now?


Mar. By my soul, if you can tell what you write now, you write very readily.


Bass. That you shall see straight.


Mar. But do you not write that you speak now?


Bass. O yes, do you not see how I write it? I can not write when any body is
by me, I.


Mar. Gods my life, stay man; you will make it too long.


Bass. Nay, if I can not tell what belongs to the length of a Ladies device
in faith.


Mar. But I will not have it so long.


Bass. If I cannot fit you?


Mar. O me; how it comes upon him? pre thee be short.


Bass. Well, now I have done, and now I will read i^; your Lordships motive
acco^modating my thoughts, with the very model of my hearts mature
consideration: it shall not be out of my Element to negotiate with you in this
amorous duello; wherein I will condole with you, that our project cannot be fo
collaterally made, as our endeared hearts may very well seem to insinuate.


Mar. No more: no more; fie upon this.


Bass. Fie upon this? he is accursed that haz to do with these unsound women, of
judgment: if this be not good in faith.


Mar. But it is so good, it will not be thought to come from a woman's brain.


Bass. That's another matter


Mar. Come, I will write my self.


Bass. A Gods name Lady: and yet I will not loose this I warrant you; I know
for what Lady this will serve as fit; now we shall have a sweet piece of
indictment.


Mar. How spell you foolish?


Bass. F, oo, l, i. sh* she will presume t'endite that cannotspel:


Mar. How spell you Usher?


Bas. Sblood, you put not in those words together, do you?


Mar. No, not together.


Bas. What is betwixt I pray?


Mar. Ass the.


Bas. Ass the? betwixt foolish, and Usher,
Gods my life, ^oolish Ass the Usher?

Mar. Nay then you are so jealous of your wit: now read all I have written I
pray.


Bas. I am not so foolish as the Usher would make me: O so foolish as the Usher
would make me? Wherein would I make you foolish?


Mar. Why sir, in willing me to believe he loved me so well, being so mere a
stranger.


Bass. O, is it so? you may say so indeed.


Mar. Cry mercy sir, and I will write so too, and yet my hand is so vile, Pray
thee sit thee down and write as I bid thee.


Bass. With all my heart ^ady, what shall I write now?


Mar. You shall wri^e this sir, I am not so foolish to think you love me,
being so mere a stranger.


Bass. So mere a stranger!


Mar. And yet I know, love works strangely.


Bass. Love works strangely.


Mar. And therefore take heed, by whom you speak for love.


Bass. Speak for love.


Mar. For he may speak for himself.


Bass. May speak for himself.


Mar. Not that I desire it,


B^ss Desire it.


Mar. But if he do* you may speed, I confess.


Basse. Speed I conf^sse.


Mar. But let that p^sse, I do not love to discourage any body.


Bass. Discourage ^y body.


Mar. Do you or he ^icke out what you can; and so farewell.


Bass. And so fare well. Is this all?


Mar. I, and he may thank your Sirens tongue that it is so much.


Bass. A proper Letter if you mark it.


Mar. Well sir, though it be not so proper as the writer; yet it is as proper as
the ^diter; Every wo^an cannot be a g^ntleman Usher; they that cannot go
before, must come behind.


Bass. Well Lady, this I will carry instantly, I commend me tee Lady.

Exit.
Mar. Pitiful Usher, what a pretty sle^ght,
Goes to the work^ng up of every thing?
What swe^t variety se^ues a woman's wit?
W^ make men fue to us for that we wi^h.
Poor men; hold o^t a while; and do not sue,
And spite of Custom we will s^e t^ ^ou.
Exit.
Finis Actus ter^.
ACTVS QVARTI,
SCAENA PRIMA.
Enter Pogi^ runnin^ in and knocki^ at (...) (...). Pog. O Go^, how weary I
am? Aunt, M^dam. Cynanche, Aunt?


Cyn. How now?


Pog. O God, Aunt: O God Aunt: O God.


Cyn. What bad news brings this man? where is my Lord?


Pog. O Aunt, my Uncle, he is shot.


Cyn. Shot, ay me!
How is he shot?

Pog. Why with a forked shaft
As he was hunting, full in his left side.

Cyn. O me accursed, where is he? bring me, where?


Pog. Coming with Doctor Beniuemus,
I Will leave you, and go tell my Lord Vincentio.
Exit. Enter Beniuemus with others, bringing in Strozza with an arrow in his
side.
Cyn. See the sad sight, I dare not yield to grief,
But force faind patience to recomfort him:
My Lord, what chance is this? how fares your lordship?

Stro. Wounded, and faint with anguish, let me rest.


Ben. A chair.


Cyn. O Doctor, is it a deadly hurt?


Ben. I hope not Madam, though not free from danger*


Cyn. Why pluck you not the arrow from his side?


Ben. We cannot Lady, the forckt head so fast
Sticks in the bottom of his sollide ribbe.

Stro. No mean then Doctor rests there to educe it?


Ben. This only, my good Lord, to give your wound
A greater orifice, and in sunder break
The pierced ribbe; which being so near the mid^iffe,
And opening to the region of the heart,
Will be exceeding dangerous to your life.

Stro. I will not see my bosom mangled so,
Nor sternely be anatomizde alive,
I Will rather perish with it sticking still.

Cyn. O no; sweet doctor think upon some help.


Ben. I told you all that can be thought in Art,
Which since your Lordship will not yield to use,
Our last hope rests in Natures secret aid,
Whose power at length may happily expel it.

Stro. Must we attend at deaths abhorred door,
The torturing delays of slavish Nature?
My life is in mine own powers to dissolve:
And why not then the pains that plague my life?
Rise furies, and this fury of my bane,
(...) and conquer; what men madness call
(That has no eye to sense, but frees the foul,
Exempt of hope, and fear with instant fate)
Is m^nliest reason; manliest reason then,
Resolve and rid me of this brutish life,
Hast^n the cowardly protracted cure
Of all diseases: King of Physicians, death,
I Will dig thee from this Mine of mise^ie.

Cyn. O hold my Lord, this is no christian part,
Nor yet skarce manly, when your mankind foe,
Imperious death shall make your groans his trumpets
To summon resignation of life's Fort,
To fly without resistance; you must force
A countermine of Fortitude, more deep
Than this poor Mine of pains, to blow him up,
And spite of him live victor, though subdued:
Pat^ence in torment, is a valor more
Than ever crowned T^' Alcmenean Conqueror.

^ro. Rage is the vent of torment, let me rise.


Cyn. Men do but cry, that rage in miseries,
And scarcely beaten children, become cries:
Pains are like women's clamors, which the less
They find men's patience stirred, the more they cease.
Of this it is said, afflictions bring to God,
Because they make us like him, drinking up
Joys that deforme us with the lusts of sense,
And turn our general being into soul,
Whose actions simply formed and applied,
Draw all our bodies frailties from respect.

Stro. Away with this vnmedcinable balm
Of worded breath; for bear friends, let me rest,
I swear I will be bands unto my self.

Ben. That will become your lordship best indeed.


Stro. I Will break away, and leap into the Sea.
Or from some Turret cast me hedlong down,
To shiuer this frail carcass into dust.

Cyn. O my dear Lord, what unlike words are these*
To the late fruits of your religious Noblesse?

Stro. Leave me fond woman.


Cyn. I Will be hewne from hence
Before I leave you; help me gentle Doctor*

Ben. Have patience good my Lord.


Stro. Then lead me in,
Cut off the timber of this cursed Shaft,
And let the fork'd pile canker to my heart.

Cyn. Dear Lord, resolve on humble sufferance.


Str. I will not hear thee, woman, be content.


Cyn. O never shall my counsels cease to knock
At thy impatient ears, till they fl^e in
And salve with Christian patience, Pagan sin.
Exeunt. Enter Vincentio with a letter in his hand, Bassiolo.
Bass. This is her letter sir, you now shall see
How seely a thing it is in respect of mine,
And what a simple woman she haz proved,
To refuse mine for hers; I pray look here.

Vin. Soft sir, I know not, I being her sworn servant,
If I may put up these disgraceful words,
Given of my Mist^is, without touch of honor.

Bas. Disgraceful words; I protest I speak not
To disgrace her, but to grace my self.

Vin. Nay then sir, if it be to grace your self,
I am content; but otherwise you know,
I was to take exceptions to a King.

Bas. Nay, you are ith right for that; but read I pray* if there be not more
choice words in that letter, than in any thr^e of G^euaras golden epistles, I
am a very ass. How think you (...)?


Vin. By heaven no less sir, it is the best thing;

he rends it, Gods what a beast am I.


Bas. Is is no matter,
I can set it together again.

Vin. Pardon me sir, I protest I was ravished: but was it possible she should
prefer hers before this?


Bass. O sir, she cride fie upon (...).


(...). Well, I must say nothing, love is blind you know, and can find no
fault in his beloved.


Bass. Nay, that's most certain.


(...). (...) me: I Will have this letter.


Bass. No good Vince, it is not worth it.


Vin. I Will have it (...), heeres enough in it (...) (...) for my letters as long as
I live; I Will (...) it to breed on as twere:

But I much wonder you could make her write.


Bass. Indeed there were some words belongd to that.


Vin. How strong an influence works in (...) placed words,
And yet there must be a prepared love,
To give those words so mighty a command,
Or twere impossible they should move so much:
And will you tell me true?

Bass. In any thing.


Vin. Does not this Lady love you?


Bass. Love me? why yes; I think (...) does not hate me.


Vin. Nay but in faith, does she not love you dearly?


Bass. No I protest.


(...). Nor have you never (...) her?


Bass. (...) her, that's nothing.


(...). But you know my meaning:
Have you not been, as one would say, before me?

Bass. Not I, I swear.


Vin. O, you are too true to tell.


Bass. Nay be my troth, she haz, I must confess,
Used me with good respect, and nobly still,
But for such matters.

Vin. Very little more,
Would make him take her maidenhead upon him:
Well friend, I rest yet in a little doubt,
This was not hers.

Bass. It Was by that light that shines,
And I Will go fetch her to you to confirm it.

Vin. O passing friend.


Bass. But when she comes, in any case be bold,
And come upon her with some pleasing thing,
To show you are pleased: how ever she behaues (...),
As for example; if she turn her back,
Use you that action you would do before,
And court her thus; Lady, your back part is as fair to me, as is your fore
part.

Vin. It Will be most pleasing.


Bass. I, for if you love
One part above another, it is a sign
You like not all alike, and the worst part
About your Mistress, you must think as fair,
As sweet, and dainty, as the very best,
So much, for so much, and considering too,
Each several limb and member in his kind.

Vin. As a man should.


Bass. True, will you think of this?


Uin. I hope I shall.


Bass. But if she chance to laugh,
You must not lose your countenance, but devise
Some speech to show you pleased, even being laughed at.

Vin. I, but what speech?


Bass. Gods precious man! do something of your self?
But I Will devise a speech.
he studies.
Vin. Inspire him folly.


Bass. Or (...) no matter, be but bold enough,
And laugh when she laughs, and it is enough:
I Will fetch her to you.
Exit.
Vin. Now was there ever such a demilance,
To bear a man so clear through thick and thin?
Enter (...).
Bass. Or hark you sir, if she should steal a laughter
Under her fan, thus you may say, sweet Lady,
If you will laugh and lie down, I am pleased.

Vin. And so I were by heaven; how know you that?


Bass. Slid man* I Will hit your very thoughts in these things.


Vin. Fetch her sweet friend, I Will hit your words I warrant,


Bass. Be bold then Vince, and press her to it hard,
A shamefaced man, is of all women barred.
Exit.
Vin. How easly worthless men take worth upon them,
And being over credulous of their own worths,
Do vnderprize as much the worth of others.
The fool is rich, and absurd riches thinks
All merit is rung out, where his purse chinks.
Enter Bassiolo and Margaret.
Bas. My Lord, with much entreaty heeres my Lady.
Nay Maddam, look not back: why Vince I say?

Mar. Vince? O monstrous jest!


Bas. To her for shame.


Vin. Lady, your back part is as sweet to me
As all your forc part.

Bas. He missed alittle: he said her back part was sweet, when
He should have said fair; but see, she laughs most fitly,
To bring in the the other: Vince, to her again, she laughs.

Vin. Laugh you fair Dame?
If you will laugh and lie down, I am pleased.

Mar. What villainous stuff is here?


Bas. Sweet Mistress, of mere grace imbolden now
The kind young Prince here, it is only love
Upon my protestation, that thus daunts
His most Heroicke spirit: so a while
I Will leave you close together; Vince, I say --
Exit.
Mar. O horrible hearing, does he call you (...)?


Vin. O I, what else? and I made him embrace me,
(...) a most familiar league of friendship.

Mar. But wherefore did you court me so absurdly?


Vin. Gods me, he taught me, I spoke out of him.


Mar. O fie upon it, could you for pity make him
Such a poor creature? (...) abuse enough
To make him take on him such saucy friendship;
And yet his place is great; for he is not only
My fathers Usher, but the worlds beside,
Because he goes before it all in folly.

Vin. Well, in these homely wiles, must our loves mask,
Since power denies him his (...) right,

Mar. But is there no mean to dissolve that power,
And to prevent all further wrong to us,
Which it may work, by forcing Marriage rites,
Betwixt me and the Duke?

Vin. No mean but one,
And that is closely to be married first,
Which I perceive not how we can perform:
For at my fathers coming back from hunting,
I fear your father and himself resolve,
To bar my interest with his present nuptials.

Mar. That shall they never do; may not we now
Our contract make, and marie before heaven?
Are not the laws of God and Nature, more
Than formal laws of men? are outward rites,
More virtuous then the very substance is
Of holy nuptials solemnizde within?
Or shall laws made to curb the common world,
That would not be contained in form without them,
Hurt them that area law unto themselves?
My princely love, it is not a Priest shall let us:
(...) since the eternal acts of our pure souls,
Knit us with God, the soul of all the world,
He shall be Priest to us; and with such rites
As we can here devise, we will express,
And strongely ratify (...) hearts true vows,
Which no external violence shall dissolve.

Vin. This is our only mean t'enioy each other:
And, my dear life, I will devise a form
To execute the substance of our minds,
In honored (...). First then hide your face
With this your spotless white and virgin veil:
Now this my skarfe I Will knit about your arm,
As you shall knit this other end on mine,
And as I knit it, here I vow by Heaven,
By the most sweet imaginary joys,
Of untried nuptials; by loves vshering fire,
Fore-melting beauty, and loves flame it self.
As this is soft and pliant to your arm
In a circumferent flexure, so will I
Be tender of your welfare and your will,
As of mine own, as of my life and soul,
In all things, and for ever; only you
Shall have this care in fullness, only you
Of all dames shall be mine, and only you
I Will court, co^end and joy in, till I die.

Mar. With like conceit only our arm this I tie,
And here in sight of heaven, by it I swear,
By my love to you, which commands my life,
By the dear price of such a constant husband,
As you have vowed to be: and by the joy
I shall embrace by all means to requite you:
^e be as apt to govern as this silk,
As private as my face is to this veil,
And as far from offense, as this from blackness.
I will be courted of no man but you,
In, and for you shall be my joys and woes:
If you be sick, I will be sick, though well:
If you be well, I will be well, though sick:
Your self alone my complete world shall be,
^en from this hour, to all eternity.

Vin. It is enough, and binds as much as marriage.

Enter Bassiolo.
Bass. I Will see in what plight my poor lover stands,
Gods me^a beckons me to have me gone,
It seems he is entered into some good vain:
I Will hence, love cures when he vents his pain.
Exit.
Vin. Now my sweet life, we both remember well
What we have vowed shall all be kept entire
Maugre our fathers wraths, danger and death:
And to confirm this, shall we spend our breath?
Be well aduisde, for yet your choice shall be
In all things as before, as large and free.

Mar. What I have vowed* (...) keep ^uen past my death.


Vin. And I: and now in token I dissolve
Your virgin state, I take this snowie veil,
From your much fairer face, and claim the dues
Of sacred nuptials: and now fairest heaven,
As thou art infinitely raisde from earth,
Diffrent and opposite, so bless this match,
As far removed from Customs popular sects,
And as unstained with her abho^'d respects.
Enter Bassiolo.
Bass. Mistress, away, Pogio runs up and down,
Calling for Lord Vin^; come away,
For hitherward he bends his clamorous haste.

Mar. Remember love.

Exit Mar. and Bassiolo.
Vin. Or else forget me heaven.
Why am I sought for by this Pogio?
The Ass is great with child of some ill news,
His mouth is never filled with other sound.
Enter Pogio.
Pog. Where is my Lord Vincentio, where is my Lord?


Vin. Here he is Ass, what an exclaiming keep'st thou?


Pog. Slood, my Lord, I have followed you up and down like a Tantalus pig,
till I have worn out my hose here abouts* I Will be sworn, and yet you call me
Ass still; But I can tell you passing ill news my Lord.


Uin. I know that well sir, thou never bringst other; what is your news now, I
pra^*


Pog. O Lord, my Lord uncle is shot in the side with an arrow.


Vin. Pl^gues take thy tongue, is he in any danger?


Pog. O danger; I, he haz lien speechless this two hours,
And talks so idly.

Vin. Accursed news, where is he, bring me to him*


Pog. Yes, do you lead, and I Will guide you to him.

Exeunt. Enter Strozz^; brought in a Chair, Cynanche, Benenemus, with others.
Cyn. How fares it now with my dear Lord and husband?


Stro. Come near me wife, I fare the better far
For the sweet food of thy divine advice,
Let no man value at a little price.
A virtuous woman's counsel, her winged spirit,
Is fe^ herd oftentimes with heavenly words;
And (like her beauti^) rauishing, and p^re.
The weaker body, still the stronger soul,
When good endeavors do her powers apply,
Her love draws nearest man's felicity,
O what a treasure is a virtuous wife,
Discreet and loving, Not one gift on earth,
Makes a man's life so highly bound to heau^*
She gives him do^ble forces, to endure
And to enjoy; by being one with him,
Feeling his Ioies and Griefs with equal senc^;
And like the twins Hyp^ates reports:
If he fetch sighs, she draws her breath as short:
If he lament, she melts her self in tears:
If he be glad, she triumphs; if he st^e,
She moou's his way; in all things his sweet Ap^:
And is in alteratious passing strange.
Himself d^ely varied without change:
Gold is right precious; but his price infects
With pride and avarice; Aucthority l^
Hats from men's heads; and bows the strongest knees*
Yet cannot bend in rule the weakest hea^ts;
Music delights but one sense; No^ choice meats
One quickly fades, the other stir to sin*
B^t a true wife, both sense and soul delights,
And mixeth not her good with any ill;
Her virtues (ruling hearts) all powers command;
All Store without her, leaves a man b^ poor;
And with her, Poverty is exceeding Store;
No time is tedious with her, her true worth
Makes a true husband think, his arms enfold;
(With her alone) a complete world of gold.

Cyn. I wish (dear love) I could deserve as much*
As your most kind conceit has well expressed:
But when my best is done, I see you wounded;
And neither can recure nor ease your pains.

Stro. Cynanche, thy advise has made me well;
My free submission to the hand of heaven
Makes it redeem me from the rage of pain*
For though I know the malice of my wound
Shootes still the same distemper through my vain^,
Yet the Judicial patience I embrace,
(In which my mind spreads her impassiue powers
Through all my suffering parts;) expels their frail^;
And rendering up their whole life to my soul,
Leaves me naught else but soul; and so like her,
Free from the passions of my ^ing blood.

Cyn. Would God you were so; and that too much pain.
Were not the reason, you felt sense of none.

Stro. Think thou me mad Cynanche? for mad men,
By pains vngouernd, have no sense of pain.
But I, I tell you am quite contrary,
Easde with well governing my submitted pain*
Be cheerd then wife; and look not for, in me,
The manners of a common wounded man.
Humility has raisde me to the stars;
In which (as in a sort of Cristall Globes)
I sit and see things hid from humane sight.
I, even the very accidents to come
Are present with my knowledge; the seventh day
The arrow head will fall out of my side.
The seventh day wife, the forked head will out.

Cyn. Would God it would my Lord, and leave you we^


Stro. Yes, the seventh day, I am assurd it will:
And I shall live, I know it; I thank heaven,
I know it well; and i will teach my physician,
To build his cares hereafter upon heaven
More then on earthly medcines; for I know
Many things shown me from the opened skies,
That pass all arts. Now my physician
Is coming to me, he makes friendly haste;
And I will well requite his care of me.

Cyn. How know you he is coming?


Stro. Passing well; and that my dear friend lord Vincentio Will presently
come see me too; i will stay (My good physician) till my true friend come.


Cyn. Ay me, his talk is idle; and I fear,
Foretells his reasonable Soul now leaves him.

Stro. Bring my Physician in, he is at the door.


Cyn. Alas, there is no Physician.


Stro. But I know it;
See, he is come.
Enter Benouemius.
Ben. How fares my worthy Lord?


Stro. Good Doctor, I endure no pain at all,
And the seventh day, the arrows head will out.

Ben. Why should it fall out the seventh day my Lord?


Stro. I know it; the seventh day it will not fail.


Ben. I wish it may, my Lord.


S^ro. Yes, it will be ^o,
You come with purpose to take present leave,
But you shall stay a while; my Lord Vincen^o
Would see you feign and now is coming hither:

Ben. How knows your Lordship? have you sent for him?


Stro. No but it is very true; he is now hard by,
And will not hinder your affairs a whit.

Ben. How want of rest distempers his light brain?
Brings my Lord any train?

Stro. None but himself.
My nephew Pogio now has left his Grace.
Good Doctor go, and bring him by his hand,
(Which he will give you) to my longing eyes,

Ben. It Is strange, if this be true.

Exit.
Cyn. The Prince I think,
Yet knows not of your hurt.
Enter Vincentio holding the Doctors hand.
Stro. Yes wife, too well,
See he is come; welcome my princely friend:
I have been shot my Lord; but the ^euenth day
The arrows head will fall out of my side,
And I shall hue.

Vin. I do not fear your life,
But, Doctor, is it your opinion,
That the seventh day the arrow head will out?

Stro. No, it is not his opinion, it is my knowledge:
For I do know it well; and I do wish
Even for your only sake, my noble Lord,
This were the seventh day; and I now were well,
That I might be some strength to your ^ard state,
For you have many perils to endure:
Great is your danger; great; vour vniustill
Is passing foul and mortal; would to God
My wound were something we^l, I might be with you,
Nay do not whisper, I know what I say,
Too well for you, my Lord* I wonder heaven
Will let such violence threat an innocent life.

Vin. What ere it be, dear friend, so you be well,
I will endure it all; your wounded state
Is all the danger I fear toward me.

Stro. Nay, mine is nothing; For the seventh day
This a^row head will out, and I shall live,
And so shall you, I think; but very hardly.
It will be hardly, you will escape indeed.

Vin. Be as will be; pray heaven your prophecy
Be happily accomplished in your self,
And nothing then can come amiss to me.

Stro. What says my Doctor? thinks he I say true?


Ben. If your good Lordship could but rest a while,
I would hope well.

Stro. Yes, I shall rest I know,
If that will help your indgement.

Ben. Yes, it will,
And good my Lord, lets help you in to try.

Stro. You p^ease me much, I shall sleep instantly.

Exeun^, Enter Alphonso, and Medice.
Alp. Why should the humorous boy forsake the chase?
As if he took advantage of my absence,
To some act that my pre^ence would offend.

Med. I warrant you my Lord, it is to that end:
And I believe he wrongs you in your love.
Children presuming on their parents kindness,
Care not what unkind actions they commit
Against their quiet: And were I as you,
I would affright my son from these bold parts,
And father him as I found his deserts.

Alp. I swear I will: and can I prove he aims
At any interruption in my love,
I Will (...) his life.

Med. We soon shall see,
For I have made Madam Corteza search
With pick-locks, all the Ladies Cabynets
About Earl Lassos house; and ^f ^here be
Traffic of love, twixt any one of them,
And you^r suspected son; it will soon appear,
In some sign of their amorous merchandise;
See where she comes, loded with (...) and paper^.
Enter. Cort.
Cor. See here, my Lord, I have robbed all their Caskets,
Know you this Ring? this Carquanet? this Chain?
Will any of these letters serve your turn?

Alp. I know not these things; but come: let me read some of these letters.
Madam, in this deed
You deserve highly of my Lord the Duke.

^or. Nay my Lord Medice, I think I told you
I could do pretty well in these affairs:
O these young Girls engrosse up all the love
From us, (poor Beldams;) but I hold my hand,
I Will ferret all the Cunni-holes of their kindness
Ere I have done with them.

Alp. Passion of death!
See, see, Lord Medice, my traitorous son,
Has long ioyde in the favors of my love:
Woe to the womb that bore him: and my care
To bring him up to this accursed hour,
In which all cares possess my wretched life.

Med. What father, would believe he had a son
So full of treachery to his innocent state?
And yet my Lord, this letter ^hewes no meeting,
But a desire to meet.

Cort. Yes, yes, my Lord,
I do suspect they meet; and I believe
I know well where too; I believe I do;
And therefore tell me; does no creature know,
That you have left the chase thus suddenly?
And a^ come hither? have you not been seen
By any of these Lovers?

Alp. Not by any.


Cor. Come then, come follow me; I am persuaded
I shall go near to show you their kind hands.
Their confidence, that you are still a hunting,
Will make your amorous son that stole from thence,
Bold in his loue-sports; Come, come, a fresh chase,
I hold this pickelocke, you shall hunt at view.
What, do they think to seape? An old wives eye
Is a blew Cristall full of sorcerie.

Alp. If this be true, the traitrous boy shall die.

Exeunt. Enter Lasso, Margaret, Bassiolo going before.
Lass. Tell me I pray you, what strange hopes they are
That feed your coy conceits against the Duke,
And are preferred before th'aslured greatness
His highness^ graciously would make your for^nes?

Mar. I have small hopes, my Lord; but a desire
To make my nuptial choice of one I love,
And as I would be loath t'impaire my state;
So I, affect not honors that exceed it.

Lass. O you are very temperate in your choice,
Pleading a judgment past your sex, and years.
But I believe some fancie' will be found,
The forge of these gay Gloses: if it be,
I shall descipher what close traitor it is
That is your Agent in your secret plots.

Bass. Swoones.


Lass. And him for whom you plot; and on you all
I will revenge thy disobedieuce,
With such severe correction, as shall fright
All such deluders from the like attempts:
But chiefly he shall smart that is your factor*

Bass. O me, accursed!


Lass. Mean time I Will cut
Your poor craft short in faith.

Mar. Poor craft indeed,
That I, or any others use, form.

Lass. Well Dame, if it be nothing but the jar
Of your vnfiued fancy; that procures
Your wilful coyness to my Lord the Duke,
No doubt but Time, and Iudge^nt will conform it
To such obedience, as so great desert
Proposde to your acceptance does require.
To which end do you co^saile her Bassio l^.
And let me see Maid against the Duks return,
Another tincture set upon your looks
Then here^ofore; For be assured at last
Thou shall con^nt, or else incur my curse:
Advise her, you Bassiolo.
Exit.
Bass. I, my good Lord;
Gods pity, what an errant Ass was I,
To entertain the Princes crafty friendship?
Slood, I half suspect, the villain guld me;

Mar. Our Squire I think is star^'d.


Bass. Nay Lady it is true,
And you must frame your ^ancie to the Duke,
For I protest I will not be corrupted,
For all the friends and fortunes in the world,
To gull my Lord that trusts me.

Mar. O sir, now,
You Are true too late.

Bass. No Lady, not a whit,
Slood, and you think to make an Ass of me,
May chance to rise betimes; I know it, I know.

Mar. Out servile coward, shall a light suspect,
That has no slendrest proof of what we do,
Infringe the weigh^e faith that thou have sworn,
To thy dear friend the Prince that dotes on thee;
And will in pieces cut thee for thy falsehood;

Bass. I care not; I Will not hazard my estate,
For any Prince on earth: and I Will disclose
The complot to your father, if you yield not
To his obedience.

Mar. Do if thou dare,
Even for thy scrapt up living, and thy life,
I Will tell my father then, how thou did woo (...)
To love the young Prince; and did force me too,
To take his Letter^; I was well inclined,
I will be sworn. before, to love the Duke,
But thy vile railing at him, made me hate him.

Bass. I rail at him?


Mar. I marie did you sir,
And said he was a pattern for a Potter,
Fit to have his picture stamped on a stone Judge,
To keep Ale-knights in memory of Sobriety.

Bass. She Has a plaguie memory.


Mar. I could have loved him else; nay, I did love him,
Though I dissembled it, to bring him on,
And I by this time might have been a Duchess:
And now I think on it better: for revenge,
I Will have the Duke, and he shall have thy head,
For thy false wit within it, to his love.
Now go and tell my Father, pray be gone.

Bass. Why and I will go.


Mar. Go, for Gods sake go, are you here yet?


Bass. W^ll, now I am resolved.


Ma. It Is bravely done, farewell: but do you hear sir?
Ta^e this with you besides; the young Prince keeps
A certain letter you had writ for me,
(Endearing, and Condoling, and Mature)
And if you should deny things, that I hope
Will stop your i^pudent mouth: but go your ways,
If you can answer all this, why it is well.

Bass. Well Lady, if you will assure me he^re,
You will refrain to meet with the young Prince,
I will say nothing.

Mar. Good sir, say your worst,
For I will meet him, and that presently.

Bass. Then be content I pray, and leave me out,
And meet hereafter as you can your selves.

Mar. No, no sir, no, it is you must fetch him to me,
And you shall fetch him, or I Will do your arrand.

Bas. Swounds what a spite is this, I will resolve
To Endure the worst; it is but my foolish fear,
The plot will be discouerd: O the gods!
It Is the best sport to play with these young dames;
I have dissembled, Mistress, all this while
Have I not made you in a pretty taking?

Mar. O it is most good; thus you may play on me;
You cannot be content to make me love
A man I hated till you spoke for him,
(...) such ^nchanting speeches, as no friend
Could possi^ly resist: but you must use
Your villainous wit, to drive me from my wits:
A plague of that bewitching tongue of yours;
Would I had never heard your scuruie words.

Ba. Pardon dear Dame, I Will make amends in faith,
Think you that I Will play false with my dear Vince^
I swore (...) sooner Hybla should want bees,
And Italy bon^ robes, then I; faith
And so they shall.
Come, you shall meet, and double meet, in spite
O^ all your foes, and D^kes that dare maintain them,
A plague of a^l old doters, I disd aine them:
Exeunt.
Mar. S^d like a friend; O let me comb the cokscombe.


Fiuis Actus Quarti.
ACTVS QVINTI
SCAENA PRIMA.
Enter Alphon^o, Medice, Lasso, Cortezza above. Cor. Here is the place will
do the deed in faith;
This Duke will show thee how youth puts down age,
I and perhaps how youth does put down youth.

Alp. If I shall see my love in any sort
Prevented, or abusde, th'abuser dies.

Lass. I hope there is no such intent my Liege,
For sad as death should I be to behold it.

Med. You must not be too confident my Lord,
Or in your daughter or in them that guard her.
The Prince is pol^ike, and enuies his Father:
And though ^t for himself, nor any good
Intended to your daughter, yet because
He knows it would kill his father, he would seek her.

Cor. Whist* wh^st, they come.

Enter Bassiolo, Vincentio, and Margaret.
Bass. Come, meet me boldly, come,
And let them come from hunting when they dare.

Vin. Haz the best spirit.


Bass. Spirit? what a plague,
Shall a man fear Capriches? you forsooth
Must have your love come to you, and when he comes,
Then you grow shamefaced, and he must not touch you:
But fie, my Father comes, and foe, my Aunt,
O (...) a (...) hearing, is it not think you?

Vin. Nay, pray thee do not mock her gentle friend.


Bass. Nay, you are even as wise a wooer too,
If she turn from you you even let her turn,
And say; you do not love to force a Lady.
It Is too much rudeness; gosh hat, what is a Lady?
Must she not be touched? what. is she copper think you?
And will not bide the touch stone? kiss her Vince,
And thou do love me, kiss her.

Vin. Lady, now
I were too simple if I should not offer.

M^r. O God sir, pray away, this man talks idly.


Bass. How shay by that; now by that candle there,
Were I as Vince is, I would handle you
In ruftie tuftie wise, in your right kind.

Mar. O, you have made him a sweet beagle, ha'y not?


Vin. It Is the most true believer in himself:
Of all that sect of folly faith's his fault.

Bass. So to her Vince, I give thee leave my lad,
Sweet were the words my mistress spoke, when tears fell from He lies down her
eyes. by them.
Thus, as the Lion lies before his den,
Guarding his whelps, and streakes his careless limbs,
And when the Panther, Fox, or Wolf comes near
He never daines to rise, to fright them h^nce,
But only puts forth one of his stern paws,
And (...) his dear wh^lps safe, as in a hutch,
So I pr^sent his person, and keep mine.
Fox ^s, go by I put my terror forth, Cant,
Let all the world (...) what they can,
Her bargain best she makes,
That has the wit to choose a man,
To pay for that he takes. Belle Piu. etc. iterum cant.
Dispatch sweet whelps the bug, the Duke comes strait:
O it is a gra^e old lo^er that same Duke,
And chooses Minions rarely, if you mark him.
The noble Medice, that man, that Bobbadilla*
That foolish kn^ue, that hose and d^blet ^inckard.

Med. Swounds my Lord, rise, lets endure no more.


Alp. A little, pr^y my Lord, for I b^leeue
We shall discover very notable knaue^y.

L^ss. Al^s how I am gre^'d and shamed in this.


Cor. Never care you Lord brother, there is no harm done.


Bass. But that sweet Creature* my good Lords sister,
Madam Cortezza, she, the noblest Dame
That ever any vein of honor bled;
There were a wise now, for my Lord the Du^e
Had he the grace to choose her, but in ^eede,
To spe^ke her tru^ prais^, I must use some s^udy.

Cor. Now truly brother, I did ever think
This man the honestest man that ere you k^pt.

Lass. So siste^, so, because he praises you.


Cor. Nay sit, but you shall he^re him further yet.


Bass. Were not her head sometimes a little light,
And so unapt for mat^er of much weight,
She were the fittest, and the wort^est Dame
To leap a window, and to break her neck,
That ever was.

Cor. Gods pity, ar^ant kna^e,
I ever thought him a dissembling varlot.

Bass. Well, now my hearts be wary, for by this,
I fear the Duke is coming; I Will go watch,
And give you warning: I commend me ^ee.
Exit.
Vin. O fine phrase,


Mar. And very timely used.


Vin. What now sweet life, shall we resolve upon?
We never shall enjoy each other here.

Mar. Direct you then my Lord, what we shall do,
For I am at your will, and will endure
With you, the cruellst absence, from the state
We both were borne too, that can be supposde.

Vin. That would extremely grieve me, could my self
Only endure the ill, our hardest fates,
May lay on both of us; I would not care,
But to behold thy sufferance, I should die.

Mar. How can your Lordship wrong my love so much,
To think the more woe I sustain for yo^,
Breeds not the more my comfort? I alas
Have no mean else, to make my merit even
In any measure, with your eniment worth.
Enter ^assiolo.
Bas. Now ^st I exercise my timorous lovers,
Like fresh armed soldiers, with some false alarms,
To ma^e them yare and wary of their foe
The boistrous bearded Duke: I Will rush upon them
With a most hideous cry, the Duke, the Duke, the Duke.
Ha, ha, ha, woe ho, come again I say,
The Duke's not come in faith.

Vin. Gods precious man,
What did you mean to put us in this fear?

Bass O sir, to make you look about the more;
Nay, we must teach you more of this I tell yo^:
What, can you be too safe sir? what I say,
Must you be pamperd in your vanities?
Ah, I do domineere and rule the roast.
Exit.
Mar. Was ever such an Ingle? would to God,
(If twere not for our selves) my father saw him.

Las. Minion, you have your prayer, and my curse,
For your good Huswiferie.

Med. What says your Highness?
Can you endure these injuries any more?

Alp. No more, no more, advise me what is best,
To be the penance of my graceless son?

Med. My Lord, no mean but death or banishment,
Can be fit penance for him: if you mean
T'inioy the pleasure of your love your self.

Cor. Give him plain death my Lord, and then you are sure


Alp. Death or his banishment, he shall endure,
For wreake of that joys exile I sustain.
Come, call our Guard, and apprehend him strait.
Exeunt.
Vin. I have some Jewels then my dearest life,
Which with what ever we can get beside,
Shall be our means, and we will make escape.
Enter Bassio^o running.
Bas. Sblood, the Duke and all come now in earnest;
The Duke, by heaven, the Duke.

Vin. Nay, then in faith
Your jest is too too stale.

Bass. Gods p^etious,
By these ten bones, and by this hat and heart,
The Duke and all comes, see, we are cast away.
Exeunt. Enter A^phonso, Medice, Lasso, Cortezza, and Iu^io.
Alp. Lay hands upon them all, pursue, pursue.


Lass. Stay thou ungracious girl.


Alp. Lord Medice,
Lead you our Guard, and see you app^ehend
The treacherous boy* nor let him escape with life,
Unless he ye^lde to his external exile.

Med. It Is princely said my Lord --

Exit.
Lass. And take my Usher.


Mar. Let me go into exile with my Lord,
I will not live, if I be left behind.

Lass. Impudent Damzell, would thou follow him?


Mar. He is my husband, whom ^lse should I follow?


Lass. Wretch, thou speak treason to my Lord the Duke.


Alp. Yet love me Lady, and I p^rdon all.


Mar. I have a husband, and must love none else.


Alp. Dis^ightfull Dame, I Will dis inherit him,
And thy good Father here shall cast off thee,
And both shall feed on air, or staru^, and die.

Mar. If this be justice, let it be our doomes:
If free and spotless love in equal years,
With honors vnimpaired deserve such ends,
Let us approve what justice is in friends.

Lass. You shall I swear: sister, take you her close
Into your chamber, lock her fast alone,
And let her stir nor speak with any one.

Cor. She shall not brother: come Necce, come with me.


Mar. Heaven save my love, and I will suffer gladly.

Exeunt Cor. Mar.
Alp. Haste Iulio, follow thou my sons pursuit,
And will Lord Medice not to hurt nor touch him,
But either banish him, or bring him back:
Charge him to use no violence to his life.

Iulio I will my Lord.

Exit Iulio.
Alp. O Nature! how alas
Art thou and Reason thy true guide opposde?
More bane thou take, to guide Sense, led amiss,
Then being guided, Reason gives thee bliss.
Exeunt. Enter Cynanche, Beneuenius, Anci^a, Strozza having the Arrow head.
Stro. Now see good Doctor, it was no frantike fancy,
That made my tongue presage this head should fall
Out of my wounded side the seventh day;
But an inspired rapture of my mind,
Submitted and conioynde in patience,
To my Creator, in whom I foresaw
(Like to an Angel) this divine event.

Ben. So is it plain, and happily approved,
In a right christian president, confirming
What a most sacred medcine Patience is,
That with the high thirst of our souls, clear fire
Exhausts corpore (...) humor; and all pain,
Casting our flesh off, while we it retain.

Cy. Make some religious vow then my dear Lord,
And keep it in the proper memory,
Of so Celestial and free a grace.

Stt. Sweet wife, thou restest my good Angel still,
Suggesting by all means, these ghostly counsels.
Thou weariest not thy husbands patient ears,
With motions for new fashions in attire,
For change of Jewels, pastimes, and nice cates,
Nor studiest eminence, and the higher place
Amongst thy consorts, like all other Dames:
But knowing more worthy objects appertain
To every woman that desires t'inioy
A blessed life in marriage: thou contemn'st
Those common pleasures, and pursu'st the rare,
Using thy husband in those virtuous gifts:
For which, thou first did choose him, and thereby
Cloy'st not with him, but love him endlesly.
In reuerenc^ of thy motion then, and zeal^
To that most sovereign power, that was my cure.
I make a vow to go on soote to Rome,
And offer humbly in S. Peter's Temple,
This fatal Arrow head: which work, let none judge
A snperstitious Rite, but a right use,
Proper to this peculiar instrument,
Which visiblie resignde to memory,
Through every eye that sees, will stir the soul
To Gratitude and Progress, in the use
Of my tried patience which in my powers ending,
Would shut the example out of future lives.
No act is superstitious, that applies
All power to God, deuoting hearts, through eyes.

Ben. Spoke with the true tongue of a Nobleman:
But noware all these excitations toys,
And Hono^ fa^s his brain with other joys.
I know your true f^iend, Prince Vincentio
Will triumph in this excellent effect
Of your late (...).

Stro. O, my dear fr^ds name
Presents my thoughts, with a most mortal danger,
To his right inno^nt life: a monst^s fact
Is now effected on him.

Cyn. Where? or how?


Stro. I do not well those circumstances know,
But am assured, the substance is too the.
Come reverend Doctor, let us harken out
Where the young Prince remains, and bear with you
Medcines t'allay (...) danger: if by wounds,
Bear precious Balsome, or s^e s^gne juice;
If by fell poison, some choice A^te,
If by black witch^, our good s^ts and prayers
Shall exorcise the devilish wrath of hell,
Out of his princely bosom.
Enter Pogio running.
Pog. Where? where? where? where is my Lord vnche, my Lord my uncle?


Stro. Here Is the ill tydings-bringer; what news now, with thy unhappy
present?


Po. O my Lord my Lord Vincentio, is almost killed by my Lord Med^.


Stro. See Doctor, see, if my pr^ge be true.
And well I know if he have hurt the Prince,
It Is trecherously done, or with much help.

Pog. Nay sure he had no help, but all the Dukes Guard; and they set upon him
ind^d; and after he had defended himself, dee see? he drew* and having as good
as wounded the Lord Medice almost, he struck a^ him, and ^d h^, dee mark?


Stro. What tale is here? where is this mischief done?


Pog. At Monks well, my Lord, I Will g^de you to him presen^y


Str. I doubt it no^; fools are best g^des to ill,
And mischiefs ready way l^s open still.
Lead sir I pray.
Exeunt. Enter Cortez^, and M^rgaret ab^e.
Cort. Quie^ your self, Nece; though your love be slain,
You have another that is worth two of him.

Mar. It is not possible; it cannot be
That heaven should suffer such impi tie.

Cort. T is true, I swear niece.


Ma. O most unjust truth*
I Will cast my self down headlong from this Tower,
And force an inst^ pass^ge for my soul,
To seek the wandering spirit of my Lord.

Cort. Will you do so Niece? That I hope you will not,
And yet there was a Maid in Saint Marks street,
For such a matter did so; and her clo^hes
Flew up about her so as she had no harm:
And grace of God your clothes may ^e up too,
And save you harmless; for your cause and hers
Are ene as like as can be.

Mar. I would not s^ape;
And certainly I think the death is easy.

Cort. Ot'is the eafiest death that ever was,
Look N^e, it is so far hence to the ground.
You should be quite dead, long before you felt it.
Yet do not leap N^e.

Mar. I will kill my self
With running on some sword; or drink strong poison;
Which d^h is e^est I would feign endure.

Cor. Sure Cleopatra was of the same ^de,
And did so; she was honored ever since,
Yet do not you so Niece.

Mar. Wretch that I am; my heart is soft and faint;
And trembles at the veri^ ^hought of death,
Though thoughts ten-folde more gre^uous do torment it;
I Will f^le death by degrees; and first deforme
This my accursed face with ugly wounds,
That was the first cause of my dear loves death.

Cor. That were a cruel deed; yet Adelasia;
In Pettis Palace of Petit p^asure,
For all the world, with such a knife as this
Cut off her cheeks, and nose, and was commended
More then all Dames that kept their faces whole;
O do not cut it.

Mar. Fie on my faint hear^,
It will not give my hand the wished strength;
Behold the just plague of a sensual life,
That to preserve it self in Reasons spite,
And shun deaths horror, feels it ten times more.
Unworthy women, why do men adore
Our fading Beauties, when their worthiest lives,
Being lost for us, we dare not die for them?
Hence hapless Ornaments that adorned this head:
Disorder ever these entering carles
And leave my beauty like a wilderness,
That never man's (...) mo^e may dare t'inuade.

Cor. I Will tell you N^ce; and yet I will not tell you,
A thing that I desire to have you do.
But I will tell you only what you might do,
Cause I would pleasure you in all I cud.
I have an Ointment h^re, which we Dames use,
To take off hair^ ^hen it does grow too low*
Upon our foreheads, and that for a need,
If you should rub it hard upon your face,
Would blister it, and make it look most vildely.

Mar. O G^e me that Aunt.


Cor. Give it you virg^? that were well indeed:
Shall I be thought to tempt you to such matters?

Mar. None (of my faith) shall know it: gentle Aunt,
Bestow it on me, and I Will ever love you.

Cor. Gods pity, but you shall not spoil your face.


Mar. I will not then indeed.


Cor. Why then Niece take it:
But you shall swear you will not.

Mar. No, I swe^re.


Cor. What, do you force it from me? Gods my dear,
Will you mis-vse y ur face so? what, all over?
Nay, if you be so desperate, I Will be gone --
Exit.
Mar. (...)* please b^autie, turn the vgliest face
The ever Aethiop, or affrightfull fiend
Showed in th'amaz'd eye of profaned light:
See precious Love, if thou be it in air,
And can break darkness, and the strongest Towers,
With thy dissolved intellectual powers,
See a wo^e tormen^ s^ffered for thy death,
Then ifit had extended his black force,
In seuen-fold horror to my hated life.
Smart precious ointment. smart. and to my brain
Sweat thy enu^nom'd fury, make my eyes
Burn with thy sulphre* like the lakes of hell,
That fear of me may sh^er him to dust,
That eat his own child with the jaws of lust --
Ex^. Enter Alphonso, Lasso, and others.
Alp. I wonder how far they pursued my Son^,
That no return of him or them appears,
I fear some hapless accident is chanced,
That makes the news so loath to pierce mine ears.

Lass. High heaven vouchsafe no such effect succeed
Those wretched ca^es that from my house flow,
But that in h^elesse love all acts may end.
Enter Cort^.
Cort. What shall I do? Ala^ I cannot rule
My desp^rate Niece, all her sweet face is spoylde,
And I dare keep her prisoner no more:
See, see, she comes frantike and all undressed.
Enter Marg.
Mar. Tyrant! beho^d how thou have used thy love,
See, thief to N^ure, thou have killed and robbed,
Killed what my self killed, robbed what makes thee poor*
Beauty (a Lovers treasure) thou have lost*
Where none can find it; all a poor Maids dow^
Thou have forced from me: all my joy and hope.
No man will love me more; all Dames excel me,
This ougly thing is now no more a face,
Nor any vile form in all Earth resembled,
But thy foul tyranny; for which all the pains
Two faithful Lovers feel, that thus are parted,
All joys they might have felt, turn all to pains;
All a young virgin thinks she does endure,
To loose her love and beauty; on thy heart
Be heapt and pressed down till thy soul depart.
Ent^r Iulio.
Iul. Haste Liege, your son is daungerously hurt.
Lord (...) contemning your command,
By me delivered, as your Highness willed,
Set on him with your Guard; who ^rooke him down;
And th^n the coward Lord, with mortal wounds,
And (...) insolency, plowed up his soft breast;
Which barbarous f^ct in part is laid on you,
For first enioyning it, and ^owle exclai^mes
In pity of your son, your subjects breathe
Against your unnatural fury; amongst whom
The good Lord Strozza desp'rately raues,
And vengeance for his friends injustice craves.
See where he comes burning in zeal of friendship.
Enter Srozza, Vincentio, brought in a chair, Benevenius, Pogio, Cynanch with
a guard, Suozza before and Med^^c.
Stro. Where is the tyrant? let me stri^e his eyes
Into his brain, with horror of an object.
See Pagan Nero; see how thou have ri^
Thy (...) bosom; rooted up that flower,
From whence thy now spent life should spring anew,
And in him killed (that would have bred thee fresh)
Thy mother and thy father.

Vin. Good friend cease.


Stro. What hag with child of Monster, would have nursed
Such a prodigous longing? But a father
Would rather eat the brawne out of his arms
Then glut the mad worm of his wild desires
With his dear issues entrails.

Vin. Honored friend;
He is my father, and he is my Prince,
In both whose rights he man command my life.

Stro. What is a father? ^urne his entrails gulfs
To swallow children, when they have begot them?
And what is a Prince? Had all been virtuous men,
There never had been Prince upon the earth,
And so no subject; all men had been Princes:
A virtuous ^an is subject to ^o Prince,
But to his soul and honor; which are laws,
That carry Fire and Sword within themselves
Never corrupted never out of rule;
What is there in a Prince? That his least lu^te
Are valued at the lives of other men,
When common faults in him should prodigies be,
And his gross dotage r^ther (...) then soothed.

A^p. How thick and (...) my plagues descend*
Not giving m^ mazde powers a time to speak:
Pour mo^e rebuke upon me worthy Lord,
For I have guilt and patience for them all:
Yet know, dear son, I did forbid thy harm:
This Gentleman can witness, whom I sent
With all comm^nd of haste to ^terdict
This forward man in mischief; not to touch thee:
Did I not Iu^io? utter naught but truth.

Iul. All your guard heard, my Lord, I gave your charge,
With loud and violent ^erations.
After all which, Lord Medice cowardly hurt him.
The Guara. He did my Princely Lord.

Alp. Believe then son,
And know me pierst as deeply with thy wounds:
And pardon virtuous Lady that have lost
The dearest treasure proper to your sex.
Ay me, it seems by my unhappy means!
O would to God, I could with present cure
Of these unnatural wounds; and moning right
Of this abused beauty, join you both,
(As last I left you) in eternal nupt^als.

Vin. My Lord, I know the malice of this man,
Not your unkind consent has used us thus.
And since I make no doubt I shall survive
These fatal dangers; and your grace is pleased,
To give free course to my unwounded love;
It Is not this outward beauties ruthful loss,
Can any thought discourage my desires:
And therefore, dear life, do not wrong me so,
To think my love the shadow of your beauty,
I woo your virtues, which as I am sure
No accident can alter or empaire;
So, be you certain naught can change my love.

Mar. I know your honorable mind my Lord,
And will not do it that unworthy wrong,
To let it spend her forces in contending
(Spite of your sense) to love me thus deformed:
Love must have outward objects to delight him,
Else his content will be too grave and sour.
It is enough for me my Lord, you love,
And that my beauties sacrifice redeemde
My sad fear of your slaughter. You first loved me
Closely for beauty; which being withered thus,
Your love must fade; when the most needful rights
Of Fate, and Nature, have dissolved your life,
And that your love must needs be all in soul,
Then will we meet again: and then (dear Love)
Love me again; for then will beauty be
Of no respect with loves eternity.

Vin. Nor is it now; I wooed your beauty first
But as a lover: now as a dear husband,
That title and your virtues bind me ever.

Mar. Al^s, that title is of little force
To stir up men's affectious: when wives want
Outward excitements, husbands loves grow skant.

Ben. Assist me Heaven, and Art, give me your Mask,
Open thou little storehouse of great Nature,
Use an Elixar drawn through seven years fire,
That like Medeas Cauldron, can repair
The vgliest loss of living temp'rature:
And for this princely pair of virtuous Turtles,
Be lavish of thy precious influence
Lady, t'attone your honorable strife,
And take all let from your loves tender eyes*
Let me for ever hide this stain of Beauty,
With this recureful Mask; here be it fixed
With painelesse operation; of it self,
(Your beauty having brook'd three days eclips)
Like a dissolved clowd it shall fall off,
And your fair looks regaine their freshest rays:
So shall your Princely friend, (if heaven consent)
In twice your sufferd date renew recure,
Let me then have the honor to conioyne
Your hands, conformed to your constant hearts.

Alp. Grave Be^uenius, honorable Doctor,
On whose most sovereign Aesculapian hand,
Fame with her richest miracles attends,
Be fortunate, as ever heretofore,
That we may q^ite thee both with gold and honor,
And by thy happy means, have power to make
My Son, and his much injured love amends,
Whose well proportioned choice we now applaud,
And bless all those that ever furthered it.
Where is your discreet Usher my good Lord,
The special furtherer of this eq^all match?

Iu^io Brought after by a couple of your Guard.


Al^. Let him be fetched, that we may do him grace.


Po. I Will fetch him my Lord: away, you must not go: O here

He comes; O master Usher, I am ^orie for you, you must presently be chopped in
pieces.


Bass. Woe to that wicked Prince that ere I saw him.


Pog. Come, come, I gull you master Usher, you are like to be the Dukes Minion
man; dee think I would have been seen in your company, and you had b^ene
out of favor? Here Is my friend master Usher, my Lord.


Alp. Give me your hand friend, pardon us I pray,
We much have wronged your worth, as one that knew the fitness of this match
above our selves.

Bass. Sir, I did all thing for the best, I swear,
And you must think I would not have been gul'd,
I know what is fit sir; as I hope you know now:
Sweet Vince, how fa^'st thou, be of honored cheer.

Lass. Vince does he call him? O Fool, do thou call
The Prince Vince, like his equal?

Bass. O my Lo^d, Ahlas
You know not what haz past twixt us two;
Here in thy bosom I will ^e sweet Vince,
And die if thou die, I protest by heaven.

Lass. I know not what this means.


Alp. Nor I my Lord:
But sure he saw the fitnes of the match,
With freer and more noble cies then we.

Pog. Why I s^w that as well as he my Lord; I knew it was a foolish match
betwixt you two; did no^ you think so my Lord Vincentio? Lord uncle, did not I
say at first of the Duke* will his Antiquity never leave his Imqu^tie?


Stro. Go to, too much of this; but ask this Lord,
If he did like it.

Pog. Who, my Lord Medice?


Stro. Lord Stinkard Man, his name is* (...) him Lord Stinkard* did you like
the match? say.


Pog. My Lord Stinkar^, did you like the match betwixt the Duke, and my Lady
Margaret?


Med. (...) Sicophant, I will have thy l^fe.


Alp. Unworthy Lo^d, put up: ^hirst'st ^ou more blood?
T^y life is ^tt'st to be called in question,
For thy most murthrous cowardice on my son*
Thy forwardness to every cruelty
Calls thy pretended Noblesse in suspect.

Stro. Noblesse my Lord? set by your princely favor,
That gave the luster to his painted state,
Who ever viewed him but with deep contempt,
As reading vileness in his very looks?
And if he prove not son of some base drudge,
Trimmed up by Fortune, being disposed to jest
And dally with your state, then that good Angel,
That by divine relation spoke in me,
Foretelling these foul dangers to your son*
And without notice brought this reverend man
To rescue him from death: now fails my tongue,
And I Will confess, I do him open wrong.

Med. And so thou do; and I return all note
Of infamy or baseness on thy throat:
Damn me my Lord, if I be not a Lord.

Stro. My Liege, with all desert, even now you said
His life was duly forfet, for the death
Which in these b^rbarous wounds he sought your son;
Vouchsafe me then his life, in my friends right,
For many ways I know he merits death;
Which, (if you grant) will instantly appear,
And that I feel with some rare miracle.

Alp. His life is thine Lord Strozza, Give him death.


Med. What my Lord,
Will your grace cast away an innocent life?

Stro. Villain thou lie, thou guilty art of death
A hundred ways, which now I Will execute.

Med. Recall your word my Lord.


Alp. Not for the world.


Stro. O my dear Liege, but that my spirit prophetike
Has inward feeling of such sins in hi^,
As ask the forfait of his life and soul,
I would, before I took his life, give leave
To his confession, and his penitence:
O, he would tell you most notorious wonder^,
Of his most impious state; but life and soul
Must suffer for it in him, and my hand
Forbidden is from heaven to let him live,
Till by confession he may have forg uenesse.
Die therefore monster.

Vin. O be not so uncharitable sweet friend,
Let him confess his sins, and ask heaven pardon.

Stro. He must not Princely friend, it is heavens justice
To plague his life and soul, and here is heavens justice.

Me. O save my life my Lord.


L^s. Hold good Lord Strozza,
Let him confess the sins that heaven has told you,
And ask forgiveness.

Med. Let me good my Lord,
And I Will confess what you accuse me of;
Wonders indeed, and full of damned deserts.

Stro. I know it, and I must not let thee live
To ask forgiveness.

Alp. But you shall my Lord,
Or I will take his life out of your hand.

Stro. A little then I am content my Liege:
Is thy name Medice?

Med. No my Noble Lord,
My true name is Mendice.

Stro. Mendice? see,
At first a Mighty scandal done to Honor.
Of what country art thou?

Med. Of no Country, I,
But borne upon the Se^s, my mother passing
Twixt Za^t and Uenice.

Stro. Where were thou christened?


Med. I was never christened,
But being brought up with beggars* called Mendice.

Alp. Strange, and unspeakable.


Stro. How came thou then
To bear that port thou did, entering this Court?

Med. My lord when I was young, being able limbed,
A Captain of the Gypsies entertained me,
And many years I lived a loose life with them:
At last I was so fauor'd, that they made me
The King of Gypsies; and being told my fortune
By an old Sorceresse, that I should be great
In some great Princes love, I took the treasure
Which all our company of Gypsies had
In many years, by several stealths collected,
And lea^ing them in wars, I lived abroad,
With no less show then now: and my last wrong
I did to Noblesse, was in this high Court.

Alp. Never was heard so strange a counterfeit.


Stro. Did thou not cause me to be shot in hunting?


Med. I did my Lord, for which, for heavens love pardon.


Stro. Now let him live my Lord, his bloods least drop
Would stain your Court, more then the Sea could cleanse:
His soul's too foul to expiate with death.

Alp. Hence then, be ever banished from my rule*
And live a monster, loathed of all the world.

Pog. I Will get boys and bait him out a'th Court my Lord.


Alp. Do so I pray thee, rid me of his sight.


Pog. Come on my Lord Stinckerd, I Will play Fox, Fox, come out of thy hole with
you in faith.


Med. I Will run and hide me from the sight of heaven.


Pog. Fox, Fox, go out of thy hole; a two legged Fox,
A two legged Fox.
Exit with Pages beating Medice*
Beue. Never was such an accident disclosde.


Alp. Let us forget it honorable friends,
And satisfy all wrongs with my sons right,
In solemn marriage of his love and him.

Vin. I humbly thank your Highness honored Doctor*
The Balsome you infusde into my wounds,
Has easde me much, and given me sudden strength
Enough t'assure all danger is exempt,
That any way may let the general joy,
My Princely Father speaks of in our nuptials.

Alp. Which my dear Son shall with thy full re^re
Be celebrate in greater Majesty,
Than ever graced our greatest Ancestrie.
Then take thy love, which heaven with all joys ble^e,
And make ye both mirrors of happiness.

FINIS.

