PRO VERE, AVTVMNI LACHRYMAE. INSCRIBED TO THE IMMORTAL Memory of the most
Pious and Incomparable Soldier, Sir HORATIO VERE, Knight: Besieged, and
distressed in MAINHEM. Pers: Sat: IV. -- da verba and decipe neruos
By GEO: CHAPMAN.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop for Th. Walkley, and are to be sold at his shop at
the Sign of the Eagle and Child in Britains Burse. 1622.

TO THE MOST WORTHILY HONORED and Iudicially-Noble Lover and Fautor of all
Goodness and Virtue, ROBERT, Earl of SOMERSET, etc.
ALL lest Good; That but only aims at Great,
I know (best Earl) may boldly make retreat
To your Retreat, from this Worlds open Ill.
Of Goodness therefore, The Prime part (the Will)
Enflamed my Powers, to celebrate as far
As their force reached, This Thunderbolt of War.
His wished Good, and the true Note of his Worth,
(Yet never, to his full Desert, set forth)
Being Root, and Top, to this his Plant of Fame.
Which cannot furnish with an Anagram
Of just Offense, any Desire to wrest
All the free Letters here; by such a Test
To any Blame: for equal Heaven auert,
It should return Reproach, to praise Desert;
How hapless, and perverse, soever be
The Enuies, and Infortunes following Me:
Whose true, and simple-onely-ayme at Merit,
Makes your acceptiue, and still-bettering Spirit
My Wane view, as at Full still; and sustain
A Life, that other subtler Lords disdain:
Being Suttlers more, to Braggart-written Men,
(Though still deceived) then any truest Pen.
Yet He Is as wise, that to Impostors gives,
As Children, that hang Counters on their sleeves:
Or (to pare all his Wisdom to the Quick)
That, for the Elixar, hugges the Dust of Brick.
Go then your own Way still; and God with you
Will go, till his state all your steps auow.
The World still in such impious Error strayes,
That all ways fearful are, but Pious ways.
Your best Lordships ever most worthily bounden, GEO: CHAPMAN.

PRO VERE, AVTVMNI LACHRYMAE.
ALL my years comforts, fall in Showers of Tears,
That this full Spring of Man, This VERE of VERES,
Famine should bar my Fruits, whose Bounty breeds them,
The faithless World love to devour who feeds them.
Now can th'Exempt I Will from the World, no more
(With all her armed Fires) such a Spring restore.
The dull Earth thinks not This; Though should I sum
The Master-Martiall Spirits of Christendom,
In his few Nerves; My Sum (t'a thought) were true.
But who lives now, that gives true Worth his due?
It Is so divine a Spark, and loves to live
So close in Men; that hardly it will give
The Owner notice of his Power or Being.
Naught glories to be seen, that is worth the seeing.
God, and all good Spirits, shun all Earthy sight,
And all true Worth, abhorres the guilty Light,
Infus'de to few, to make it choice and dear,
And yet how cheap the Chief of all is VERE?
As if his want, we could with Ease supply.
When should from Heaven fall His Illustrious Eye,
We might a Bon-Fire think would fill his Sphere,
As well as any other, make up VERE.
Too much this: why? All know, that some one Hour
Has sent a Soul down, with richer Dowre.
Then many Ages after, had the Graces,
To Equal in the Reach of all their Races.
As when the Sun in his Equator shines,
Creating Gold, and precious Mineral Mines
In some one Soil of Earth, and chosen Vein;
When, not 'twixt Gades and Ganges* He again
Will daine to enrich so, any other Mould.
Nor did great Heavens free Finger, (That extold
The Race of bright ELIZA'S blessed Reign,
Past all fore-Races, for all sorts of Men,
Scholars, and Soldiers, Courtiers, Counselors)
Of all Those, choose but Three (as Successors)
Either to other, in the Rule of War;
Whose Each, was All, his three-Forckt-Fire and Star:
Their last, This VERE; being no less Circular
In guard of our engaged I Will (were he here)
Then Neptunes Marble Rampire: But (being There
Circled with Danger (Danger to us All;
As Round, as Wrackfull, and Reciprocal.
Must all our Hopes in War then* Safeties All;
In Thee (O VERE) confound their Spring and Fall?
And thy Spirit (Fetched off, Not to be confinde
In less Bounds, then the broad wings of the Wind)
In a Dutch Cytadell, dye pinned, and pin'de?
O England, Let not thy old constant Tie
To Virtue, and thy English Valor lie
Ballanc't (like Fortunes faithless Leuitie)
Twixt two light wings: Nor leave Eternal VERE
In this undue plight. But much rather bear
Arms in his Rescue, And resemble her,
Whom long time thou have served (The PAPHIAN Queen)
When (all ashamed of her still-giglet Spleen)
She cast away her Glasses, and her Fannes,
And Habites of th'Effeminate Persians,
Her Ceston, and her paintings* and in grace
Of great LYCVRGVS, took to her Embrace,
Cask, Lance, and Shield, and swum the Spartan Flood
(EVROTAS) to his aid, to save the blood
Of so much Justice, as in him had fear
To wrack his Kingdom. Be (I say) like her,
In what is chaste, and virtuous, as well
As what is loose, and wanton; and repel
This Plague of Famine, from thy fullest Man:
For, to thy Fame, 'twill be a blasting Ban,
To let him perish. Battles have been laid
In Balance often, with Kingdoms; and he weighed,
With Victory, in Battles. Muster then
(Only for him up) all thy Armed Men,
And in thy well-rigg'd Nymphs Maritimall,
Ship them, and plough up all the Seas of Gall,
Of all thy Enemies, in their Armed Prease;
And (past Remission) fly to his Release.
It Is done, as sure as counsail'd: For who can
Resist God, in the Right of such a Man?
And, with such Men, to be his Instruments,
As he has made to live in Forts and Tents,
And not in soft SARDANAPALIAN Sties
Of Swinish Ease, and Goatish Veneries.
And know (Great Queen of Isles) That Men that are
In Heavens Endowments, so Divinely rare,
No Earthy Power should too securely dare
To hazard with Neglect, since as much it is,
As if the Worlds begetting Faculties
Should suffer ruin; with whose loss would lie
The World it self, and all Posterity.
For worthy men the breeders are of Worth,
And Heavens brood in them (cast as Offall forth)
Will quite discourage Heaven to yield us more:
Worths only want, makes all Earths plenty, poor.
But thou have now a kind and Pious King,
That will not suffer his immortal Spring
To die untimely; if in him it lie,
To lend him Rescue: Nor will therefore I
Let one Tear fall more from my Muses Eye,
That else has vowed to pine with him, and dye.
But never was (in best Times most Abuses)
A Peace so wretched, as to sterue the Muses.
FINIS.

