FVLFORDO ET FVLFORDAE.

A SERMON Preached at Exeter, in the Cathedral Church, the sixth day of August
commonly called Jesus day 1594. in memorial of the Cities deliverance in the
days of King EDWARD the sixth.

Wherein is entreated of the goodness of God toward Man, and of the ingratitude
of Man toward GOD.

By JOHN CHARLDON, Doctor of Divinity.

In which also some few things are added, then omitted through want of time.

Psalm. 127.1. Except the Lord keep the City, the keeper watches in vain.
LONDON, Printed by John Danter: and are to be sold by William Barley, at his
shop in Gracious street. 1595.

To the worshipful Master Thomas Fulford Esquire, loved in the truth, of all
that have known the truth, for the truths sake: Mercy, peace, and love be
multiplied in Jesus Christ.
YOU had from me (which you desired) the Sermon preached at Exeter in
commemoration of the Cities deliverance, or at the least you received the very
sum and substance thereof, which I supposed might have contented you, and the
zealous Gentlewoman your wife, without further adoo: but finding you and her
greatly inclined to vulgar profit, and to make common unto many which was then
vttred unto few, that so the benefit of it might redound also unto many: and
knowing you both to be such as truly, and sincerely love and favor the holy
Gospel of Jesus Christ and the Ministers thereof, and seeing your request to
stand with so good reason and Godly purpose, and that my Office and function
binds me to do all the good I can to the Church of God, ^. Pe. 5, 2
and that willingly and of a ready mind (to satisfy your honest desire and
charitable meaning) have suffered that poor Exercise to be published which I
do present unto you as a simple New-yeares-gift. Of which if any take
benefit, let them first praise God, and next thank you, that (according to the
rule of Christ) will have the meanest talents and graces of God, be they five,
Mat. 25 15.
or two, or one; many or few, more or les, delivered his servants for the work
of his service, to be well and profitably employed and occupied, that gain
and increase may come thereby, Luke 19.10.
and not to be laid up in a napkin, or hid in the earth to the good of none.
And so beseeching the Lord to kindle daily more and more in you and in your
good wife many such holy motions of his blessed spirit, and to establish you in
every word and good work, I will commend you unto him and to his might, who is
able both to fulfill whatsoever wa^teth in you through his riches with glory in
Jesus Christ, and also of power to keep you that you fall not, to the very day
that you shall be presented faultles and without blame before the presence of
his Majesty with joy.

In the mean while, quench not the Spirit, grieve not that holy of God by
whom you are sealed to the day of redemption. I will pray always for you that
GOD may settle and confirm you, and make you worthy of his calling, that the
name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him. Pray you also
for me: for I trust that through your prayers I shall the sooner be given unto
you again. The Lord be with you, London the first of January: 1594.

Yours in Christ, John Charldon.

AD D. THOMAM FVLFORDVM, (...).
Non mea sunt quae nune mitto tibi, sed tua: quare,
Ne tua detineam, quae tua mitto tibi.
Quae mea si dicas; tua tanta modestia fulget,
Vt, cum parua feram, magna dedisse putes.
AD EVNDEM TOTIVS CONCIONIS (...).
Die mihi; corda virum quae sic dementat Erinnys,
Vt. spernant magni iusta colenda Dei?
Si poteris, narra; quali furor incitet oestro
Pectora, quae perhibent nos ratione regi?
Bos possessorem nouit, cognouit asellus
Praesepe et Domini (bestia tarda) sui.
Fuste nimis rigido quanuis pulcetur asellus,
Bosque sub immenso pondere pressa cadat,
Terga grauata tamen praebent fericuda: magistri
Vtraque seruitium bellua victa subit.
Ast genus electum Christi, diuina propago,
Dura negat tenero colla premenda iugo.
Aspectant coeli fastum tellusque fatiscens,
Quae nostrae testes proditionis erunt.
Aethereae volucres, ^eluti Grus, Turtur, Hirundo,
Brumales norunt annumerare dies.
At nos quos docuit patris Sapientia summi,
Quos nutrit, pascit, sustinet, ornat, amat.
Quos and ab immani Jethalis fauce Leonis
Seruat, and hostiles dat superare manus:
Nos (inquam) Domini praesagia non meditamut,
Temnimus (ah) potius tradita scita Dei.
Obtusasaures praecludimus Aspidis instar,
Ne feriant sophiae ferrea corda soni.
Vastorum solito bellamus more Gigantum,
Deque sua volumus pellere sede Iouem.
Nunc vbi turgescit nimia pinguedine corpus,
Obruit and nostrum nulla procella caput,
Bella damus superis: ventosus pectora fastus
(Obliti veteris conditionis) agi^.
Tu tamen (alme parens) hominum qui fecta gubernas,
Suscipe quas moesto fundimus ore preces.
Tu gemitus nostros, nostri suspiria cordis
Exaudi solita pro bonitate, Deus.
Pristina (chare pater) nobis peccata remitte,
Postmodo daque tuis carnea corda, pater.
Nou caperis fuso vitulorum sanguine centum,
Nec caperis longo thuris honor, pater.
Te placare solet quoniam compunctio cordis,
En: compuncta damus corda, benign pater.
Ne nos abijceas igitur quos dextra creauit,
Sit nobis charitum candida iuncta cohors.
Conseruet ma nos miseratio magna misellos:
Inde tibi nomen mite parentis erit.
AD EVNDEM.
Discito (Fulford) Sit tibi Christus. Iussa Iehouae; Men's tua gestit^ Front
Serena, Scire laboras? Pectore puro Quomodo possis Discito Christum. Viuere
sancte, Anchora vitae, Sanctaque tandem Prora salutis, Tecta Superni Fons
bonitatis, Cernere coeli? Vita perennis Voluito libri Dogmata sacri: Itur ad
arces. Consule Christi (^andide ^homa) Dicta magistri: Temnito mundum, Consule
Christum, Dilige Christum, Is tibi pandet Dilige Christos: Voce paterna,
Praemia Christi Qua ratione Sunt diuturna, Cuncta gubernes: Praemia mundi Ille
docebit Sunt peritura: Te pederecto Nunc tibi multa, Claudere cursum: Nunc tibi
paucae Alta Sionis Singula nostra, Moenia saluo Singula nulla: Scandere gressu:
Mors truculenta, Claustra ^onantis, Mors fu^ibunda Sydera laeto Auferet vno
Visere vultu. Tempore, duro Est via Christus Parta labor. Vera salutis, Omne
caducum. Est via salua, Quicquid habetur, Tuta, quieta: Concidit omne: Hac
licet ire, Floris Imago. Hac penetrare Sole micante, Coelica magni Fulua
recedit. Castra parentis. Vt fugit vmbre, Haec via munda, Lubrica transit Haec
via sana, Gloria secli. Haec via certa, Vna manebit Haec via pastus Arx
paradisi: Diriget omnes, Caetera fumus. Hacque beatas

AD VRSVLAM THOMAE Fulfordiconiugem Orthodoxam.
Vrsula, funesto flerem tua carmina fata,
Biblia si scirem te coluis^e parum.
Ast munit contra falsi praeludia mundi,
Messiae pectus pagina sancta tuum.
AD EANDEM.
Lesbia cantabat lasciua poemata Sappho,
Vrsula coelestis clara tropha Dei.
Lesbis amica chelyn Phoebo dedit: Vrsula Phoebo,
Vota feret fido pectore clausa suo.
Vrsula, Sola Deo tua sit seruire voluptas,
Gaudia vera putes: gloria sinis erit.
AD EANDEM.
Vrsula, collectos cernis flaccescere flores,
Et verno nit^das deperi^sse rosas?
Anglorum spectas marcescere lilia peste,
Quae fuerant oculis lilia digna tuis?
Hinc subolere potes quaenam sit gloria mundi,
Quae tacit tenues soluitur in cineres.
IT IS WRITTEN IN the first Chapter of the Prophet Esaie. 2. and 3. Hear, O
heavens, and hearken, O earth, for the Lord has said, I have nourished and
brought up children, but they have rebelled against me.

The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel has not
known: my people has not understand.


OF these you expect the interpretation and meaning: but first let us pray
together that God, of whom is every good giving, and every perfect gift, may
give unto you, ears to hear his word with frut, and may open unto me the
door of utterance, Coll. 4.3. to speak the mystery of Christ: that I may
utter it, as it becomes me; to his glory, to your comfort, and to the
increase of his church.

O Eternal GOD and merciful father, we thy poor servant present our
selves before the throne of thy Divine Majesty, entirely desiring thy fatherly
goodness to grant that thy word may take such deep root in our hearts, that
it may fructify and bring forth an hundredth, sixty, or thirty fold, so much
as shall seem best to thy heavenly wisdom. And next unto this, we pray thee
(O Father) to be gracious and merciful to thy whole militant Church,
dispersed far and wide upon the face of this earth; especially to the two
principal members of the same, 1. Tim. 2. 1.2.
England and Ireland. And whereas by thy holy Apostle Paul, we are willed to
make prayers and supplications for all men, for Kings and Princes, and for all
that are in authority, we humbly and heartily pray and beseech thee to bless
and preserve thy chosen servant our dread Sovereign Elizabeth, by thy grace,
of England, France and Ireland Queen, defendresse of the true, ancient and
Apostolic faith; and in all causes, and over all persons within these her
Majesty's Dominions, next and immediately on earth, under thee, supreme
Gouernesse. Bless (O Lord) we beseech thee, both her and all her most
Honorable Counselors against all domestical and foreign foes, that thy Church
so prosperously begun, may be builded and fully finished according to the
platform of thy most sacred and holy word. And to this end we pray thee also
(O Lord) to visit, comfort and cherrish with the spirit of thy grace, the
Archbishops, Bishops, and all other inferior Ministers to whom thou have
assigned the preaching of thy Law, and the charge of thy chosen, that they may
be found good Stewards o^ thy will, and true disposers of thy secrets; and
that by their labors sanctified of thee, thy poor sheep which wander and go
astray in the vale of darkness and shadow of death, may be brought home to thy
sheep sold under one shepherd, thy son Christ, the great shepherd of the
sheep, and Bishop of our souls.

We recommende likewise to thy favor and goodness (O Lord) all the Rulers and
Commons of this Realm; that the Rulers with courage and in a reverent fear of
thee (according to the trust committed unto them) may carefully and truly
judge thy people at all seasons; and that the Commons in their several degrees
may live and abide in Christian duty and obedience toward their superiors, and
in Godly love and charity one toward another.

We beseech thee (O Lord) that (in like measure of thy grace) thou will
vouchsafe to water with the dew of thy blessing the two notable Universities
of this Land, Oxford and Cambridge; that from age to age they may send forth
Bezaleels and Aholiabs filled with the spirit of wisdom, understanding, and
knowledge to work together, with all the wise hearted, all manner workmanship
for the service of the Sanctuary, for the uniting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body.

And here (O Lord) for as much as we are all thy children, and sheep of thy
pasture, we call upon thee for all our poor and afflicted brethren, which by
any means, any where, do groan under the Cross for the testimony of thy
eternal truth, that according to thy promise it would please thee to give
them the fulness of consolation, patience and constancy, that they may
cheerfully abide whatsoever fiery trial it shall please thy heavenly wisdom
to put them unto; that both by their life and by their death, thy truth may be
sealed, Antichrist that man of sin ashamed, and the Kingdom enlarged of thy
dear son Jesus Christ. For these and all other thy graces what so ever,
which thou know to be needful and necessary for us and thy whole Church, we
make our humble and hearty prayer unto thee our God and father, which art the
father of mercies and the God of all comfort, according to that manner and form
which Christ thy son our Master in his Gospel has taught us. Our Father,
etc.

A SERMON PREACHED AT EXETER.
Esaie, 1. verse, 2. and 3. Hear, O heavens, and hearken, O earth, for the
Lord has said, I have nourished and brought up children, but they have
rebelled against me.

The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel has not
known: my people has not understand.


THese words which I have read unto you (Men, Fathers, and Brethren, beloved in
the Lord) divide themselves into two parts: an exclamation, and a complaint.
The exclamation is contained in the first part of this second verse, and is
made not unto men, but unto the heavens above, and unto the earth beneath.
Hear O heavens, (says the Prophet) and hearken O earth. For because the
Jews refused to tread the paths of the Lord, and to walk in his ways:
because they were like unto the serpent, the deaf Adder, that stops his
ear at the voice of the charm, rcharme he never so wisely, Psalm. 58.4.5.
Therefore now (by the Lords appointment) he speaks unto deaf and dumb
creatures, and says, Hear O heavens, and hearken O earth. As if he should
have said, because the ingratitude and impiety of men is such, that they will
not hear, nor hearken unto the voice of the Lord, I will speak unto the
heavens and earth, and the heavens (though they be far off) shall hear, and
the earth (though it be stony) shall hearken: for the ears of men that should
hear and hearken indeed are out of course.

The Prophet does not this, as though the heavens and earth did understand:
but to signify and express the abominable wickedness and impiety of the
Jews, he speaks unto these insensible creatures, which did more obey the
will of their Creator, than did they whom he had blessed with reason and
understanding.

Wherein the Prophet (as in this place) so in many other follows the example
of the true and trustlie servant of God Moses: who in the 4. of Deutronomie,
against the Israelites, calls heaven and earth to witness in these words: I
call heaven and earth to record against you this day. Meaning, that if they
would defile themselves with strange Gods, that then (if men would not condemn
them) the very insensible creatures of God would bear testimony against them
and their idolatry. So in the 32. of the same book, he makes them witnesses
against them of their ingratitude, and says: Hearken (ye heavens) and I will
speak, and let the earth hear the words of my mouth. In like manner, the man
of God in the first of Kings and 13 when he saw King Jeroboam to stand by the
Altar in Bethel to offer incense, cried out by the commandment of the Lord,
not against the Prince, or people, but against the Altar, and said, O Altar,
Altar, thus says the Lord: 1. Kings, 13.2.5. and immediately the Altar claue
asunder, and the ashes fell out from the Altar, according to the sign which
the man of God had given by the mouth of the Lord. So that our Prophet Esaie in
this place intends no new thing, for he takes Moses and others for example,
who were wont to do the like: A kind of speech then most usual, when as
iniquity has gotten the upper hand, when it is grown to that fulness of
measure, that it astonieth not only creatures sensible, but also insensible,
and when the hearts of the ungodly are so hardened, that they cannot be softened,
be the admonition never so gentle, or the correction never so fearful.

But what does the Prophet require of the heavens and earth? verily to hear
and to hearken. Hear (says he) O heavens, and hearken O earth. The Prophet
requires not a slack or a negligent hearing, but a diligent and careful
hearing, fit and convenient for so great a cause.

But wherefore would the Lord have the Prophet thus to exclaim and cry out to
the heavens and earth? Doubtless for two special causes. The one was, that the
heavens and earth might be astonished at the ingratitude and rebellion of his
people. So in the second of Jeremiah: because they were unthankful, because
they made the Lords heritage an abomination, because the Priests taught not
the people to seek the Lord, because the Prophets prophesied in Baal, and
went after things that did not profit, because they had changed their glory,
even their God which was their glory, and who had made them glorious above all
other people, and to be short, because all estates were corrupt and out of
course, the Prophet infers hereupon, O ye heavens, be astonished at this: he
afraid and utterly confounded, says the Lord, Iere. 2.12. Hereby declaring,
that the very insensible creatures of God did detest and abhor the sin of
ingratitude and unkindness, and as it were did tremble at Gods most severe and
bitter judgments against the same. The other was, that the heavens and earth
(hearing the complaints of the Lord against his people) might judge and
determine between him and them. So in the Prophet Micah, 6.2. the high hills
and mountains, the hard rocks, and mighty foundations of the earth are taken
to witness, and to decide betwixt him and his in this sort. Hear ye (O
mountains) the Lords quarrel, and ye mighty foundations of the earth, for the
Lord has a quarrel against his people, and he will plead with Israel. The
sum whereof is this: that of the one part, the wickedness of the people was
such and so notorious, and of the other, the cause and quarrel of the Lord so
just, that if the case were to be decided of the heavens and earth, of the
hills and mountains, of the rocks and mighty foundations of the earth, they
would stand all together on the Lords part against his people, they would give
sentence with him against them, and (not without astoniednes) would judge and
condemn them of extremest madness and impiety.

But alas, that the heavens and earth, that the hills and mountains, that the
rocks and mighty foundations of the earth, that such senseles creatures should
condemn mankind of ingratitude and unkindness? That they should condemn Man,
the most excelent creature of God, endued with reason and understanding? That
the heavens should be summoned to testify against him, which are the Lords
seat, and the earth to witness against him, which is his footestoole. That dull
and dumme creatures should be more prompt and ready to follow and obey the
Lords will, than they his people, unto who^ he had given eyes to see, ears to
hear, and an heart to perceive. But so it is; they that should have lived best
in order, are found to live most out of course. For if the world be considered
together with the parts and portions thereof in order and as they lie, we by
searching shall see, and by seeing shall confess every member thereof Man only
excepted) diligently and truly to do his duty. (Says David). The heavens
declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows the works of his hands.
Psa. 19.1. The Sun, Moon and Stars do keep their courses, the earth
brings forth fruit, the Sea passes not his appointed bounds, and in all
other things a singular duty and obedience toward their creator, and yet they
all without understanding: But Man for whose sake all things were created, and
whom God has enriched with singular gifts, far beyond any other of his
creatures, and unto whom he has given the use of his word, a lantern unto his
feet, and a light unto his paths; Psa. 119.105. this Man will not be
reclaimed; but walks on still in the stifnes and stoutnes of heart; that now
the prophet is forced to appeal unto deaf and dumme creatures, and says;
Hear, O Heavens, and harken, O earth.

But what? Does the prophet make this exclamation and outcrie to the heavens
and earth of his own mind? Not so; for he says, Quoniam Dominus locutus est,
for the Lord has said. As who should say; I speak not this of mine own
mind, I do not this of mine own authority, I came not before I was sent, I
utter nothing of my self, but what the Lord did first reveal unto me, and
which ye are bound to hear and hearken, believe, and obey; And therefore,
Hear, O heavens, and hearken O earth.

It might have seemed more methodically done, and fitter for manner and order
of teaching, if the prophet straight way upon this his vehement exclamation and
outcrie unto the heavens and earth, had showed the^ first, what they should
hear, than whom they should hear. But it was more forcible and pearcing, yea
and more requisite too, that the prophet should first show them whom they
should hear, than what they should hear. When Man does speak, the word is
not so well accepted and received as when the Lord does speak. The message
that is done from a Prince is more highly esteemed, than that which comes from
a Subject. When the Prince speaks, let the Subject hold his peace; but when
the Lord speaks, let all flesh give ear. The Lion has roared (says Amos)
who will not be a fraide? the Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy?
Amos. 3.8. worthy is his Majesty to be reverenced and obeyed of all his
creatures which are in earth, whose voice nothing, whether above or beneath,
whether in heaven or in earth, sensible or insensible ought to disobey. Hear
then, O heavens, and hearken, O earth: for the Lord has said.

In which latter words, for the Lord has said) the Prophet commends unto us
three special points.

1 First the excellency and worthiness of the word of God, which David
prefers before gold, before much fine gold; which he counts sweeter than
honey and the honey comb, Psalm. 19.10. For it is that honye, whose sweetness does
both delight the soul, and also temper the troubles of this life, that they
become tolerable and easy. It is that fire which burns up and consumes the
fig leaves of vanity, and wickedness of man's heart whatsoever. It is that
which dropeth as the rain, which stilleth as the dew, as the shower upon the
herbs, and as the great rain upon the grass. Deuteronomy. 2.2. It is the sword of
the spirit, Ephesians. 6.17. Sharper than any two edged sword, entering through, even
to the dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit, and of the joints, and
marowe. Heb. 4.12. It is that grain of mustard seed Math. 13.31. which at the
first is very small, but taking root and increasing in the children of God,
grows to such an height, that it reaches the very heart and mind of man. It
is that seed, whose roots take such deep hold, and are so firmly fastened,
that it never cease from growing, till it bring the whole man into the quiet
possession of the kingdom of God. It is the forcible seed of regeneration, by
which (through the working of the spirit of God) all must be regenerate and
borne a new, as many as desire to be made partakers of the eternal
inheritance. It is that word of truth, by which God the father, the fountain
and welspring of all goodness, according to his free mercy, even of his own
will begat us, that we should be as the first fruits of his creatures. Ia.
1.18. So writes Saint Peter in his 1. Epistle 1. Chapter and verse 23. Borne a
new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God, who lives for
ever. If I might stand upon this point, I could bring many most excellent
places of Scripture for the worthiness hereof, and for the great benefits which
Solomon describes, and which David confesses to have received by the same, as
namely, that he had perished in the multitude of his sorrows, if the comforts
thereof had not refreshed his soul. Pro. 4. Psa. 94.19.

Secondarilie, the prophet in these words (For the Lord has said) declares
in what estimation and reverence his word is to be had, and the ministers
thereof: that his word is to be received, not as the word of men, but as it is
indeed the word of God, which also works in them that believe; 1. These.
2.13. and that the Ministers thereof are to be esteemed, as the Ministers of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God: 1. Cor. 4.1. whom he that
contemns, contemns God himself. For as Moses said unto the Isralites; The
Lord has heard your murmurings which ye murmur against him: for what are we?
Your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord. Ex. 16.8. Again
(concerning them) the Lord from his own mouth says unto Samuel: they have
not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should not reign
over them. 1. Sa. 8.7. Our Savior to the Disciples; he that hears you
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. Lu. 10.16. And the Apostle unto the Thessalonians,
he that despises us, despises not man but God, who has sent his holy
spirit among us. 1. These. 4.8.

3 Thirdly, out of these words (For the Lord has said) we learn; that the
Prophets of God were wont, as often as they published any thing worthy
admiration, whether it were to set forth Gods justice, or to reco^mend his
mercy) to say; This says the Lord or the Lord has spoken it; thereby
declaring that they vttred nothing of their own mind, but that which they had
received from the mouth of the Lord. Which practice was usual not only with
the prophets, but also with Christ and his Apostles. For Christ said unto the
Jews: I do nothing of my self, but as my Father has taught me, so I speak
these things. Io. 8.28. Again, I have not spoken of my self; but the Father
which sent me, he gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should
speak. Io. 12.49. S. John his Apostle likewise: That which we have seen and
heard, declare we unto you. 1. Io. 1.3. S. Paul in like sort: That which I
delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. 1. Co. 11, 23, So in his Epistle to
the Romans (entreating of the manner and order of Justification) he puts
this queston: for what says the scripture. Romans 4.3. And in sundry other
places, when he labors to prove what he had said, he cites the
Scriptures; given by inspiration of God, and therefore profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God, may
be perfect and prepared unto every good work. 2. Tim. 3.16.

Which divine and heavenly practice of the Prophets, of Christ and his
Apostles, would God the Papists of our days: would once endeavor to imitate
and follow. But they (still like unto their forefathers) plunged with them in
the bottomless pit of ignorance, or rather given in the haughtines and malice
of heart to deceive, prefer the Popes holiness before the Scriptures: and the
Scriptures which our Savior Christ used and confirmed with so many miracles,
and at last sealed up with the effusion of his precious blood; which came by
inspiration of God; 2. Tim. 3.19. which the Prophets, Apostles, and Fathers (as
often as was needful) alleged for testimony and proof these men have used,
and yet use to call a bare, dumme, unprofitable, and dead Letter, They tell us
not what the Lord has said, but what men have said, as Pardoners, Priests,
Friars, and Popes them selves; as Alexander, Gregory, John, Clement, and
others like.

They note unto us what Counsels have decreed, what custom has confirmed,
and what the Pope his unlawful soueraignetie has established; which seems
to us all one, as if he had said, The Scriptures are to no purpose; or as good
as nothing. Of which opinion was Cardinal Hosius: who in his book. De
expresso Verbo Dei, Fol. 242. in lit. F. writes thus: Vanus est labor qui
scripturis impenditur. It is but lost labor that is spent in the scriptures.
Nos Dei de caelo sententiam potius expectabimus: We will rather expect Gods
pleasure from heaven. Scriptura enim creatura est, and egenum quoddam
elementum. For the Scripture is a creature, and a certain needy element. And
in conclusion he pronounces Sentence definitive in this wise: in Epilogo ad
Sigismundum regem Poloniae. Quod Ecclesia docet, expressum Dei verbum est: quod
contra sensum, et consensum Ecclesiae docetur, expressum Diaboli verbum est.
That which the Church teaches (by the Church I trow, meaning the Pope and his
Cardinals) is the express word of God: what is taught against the meaning
and consent of the Church, is the express word of the Devil. And long before
him Guido (editus, An. 1495.) he which compiled that sottish book, Manipulus
curatorum, (to justify the whole matter and stuff of Confirmation) puts
this down for a Maxim and infallable truth: In Tract. 3.1. Par. 2. de mat.
confir. Licet non inueniatur in canonicis epistolis Diui Petri, tamen Dominus
Papa habet in decretis Romanae ecclesiae etc. That though it be not found in
the canonical Epistles of S. Peter; yet our Lord the Pope has it in the
decrees of the Church of Rome; and this mounteth far above and beyond all
other authority whatsoever. Thus Christ must Surrender to Beliall; the Spouse
must give place to Babylon: Truth to falsehood, and the written word to
unwritten verities: humane traditions must be hot and lively letters, and the
scriptures, cold and dead Elements; if we hunger, our meat must be chafe in
steed of wheat; and if we call for drink, it must come from their broken and
puddlepits, full of mire and filth, Ier. 2.13. which neither have nor are able
to hold the water of power to refreshe the withered soul of man: for the
veins of the fresh and clear springing waters they have stopped up: that by
this drift, the sayings both of Jeremy and Esaie, verified in the Jews, as
well pore as rich, have been brought on us. The Elders of the Jews (says
Jeremy) sent their little ones to the wells, and they finding no water, with
shame and confusion returned with their vessels empty. The poor and the
needye (says Esaie. 41.17.) sought water, but no where found they any: their
tongue was even withered with thirst. Even so these men, by breaking in pieces
the pipes and conduits, and by damming and choking the fountains of living
waters with dirte and mire, have brought the people of God into a pitiful
thirst, and this was a misery and a rufull state: we have felt it, let us
beware. We are counseled, if we will follow counsel, and we are warned, if we
will take warning, to beware of such deceivers, least otherwise it come to
pass, that as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so our minds
should be corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2. Cor. 11.3. If they
bring with them Esaies commission and cry as he does: Hear and hearken, for
the Lord has said: Let us receive them as ambassadors sent us from God, and
let us believe them. Otherwise, if they breed suspicion, let us make proof, as
did those noble men of Beroea, noble not so much for birth, as for courage in
embracing the word of God with all readiness, and as they did, Act. 17.11. let
us search thr scriptures daily and diligently, whether the things which
they teach be so or not. And then if (upon due trial and proof) we find that
they bring us counterfeit coin, that they come with the Revelations of men
which flow not from the mouth of the Lord, what countenance soever they carry
(where they Angels from heaven, that did us the message) by the commandment
of Saint Paul to the Galathians, 1.8. let us hold them accursed.

And yet there are that say, and will say; The Lord has said it, when the Lord
never spoke the word. Such are the Prophets of Antichrist, not unlike unto
those of Israel, which Prophesied after their own fantasy, and said; the Lord
says it, albeit the Lord had not spoken. Eze. 13.7. But behold, what the
word of the Lord is against such Prophets, which follow their own spirit,
and teach the people the counsels of their own hearts. I am against them,
mine hand shall be upon the Prophets that see vanity, and divine lies: they
shall not be in the assembly of my people, neither shall they be written in
the writing of Israel, (Verse. 8.9.) to wit, in the book of life in which the
true Israelites are written; neither shall they enter into the land of Israel:
and that because they have deceived my people saying peace; which Jeremy 6,
14. calls a sweet word, but it was not so, for there was no peace: and one
built up a wall and others daubed it with untempered mortar. Eze. 13.10. But
says the Lord, Ver. 13.14. I will destroy the wall which they have daubed with
untempered mortar, and bring it down to the ground, by a stormy wind which
shall break forth in my wrath, and by a great shower in mine anger, and
hailestones in mine indignation, so that the foundation thereof shall be
discovered, and it shall fall and they shall be consumed in the midst thereof,
and shall know that I am the Lord. Thus will the Lord accomplish his wrath
upon the wall and upon them that daubed it with untempered mortar, even with
their own devises, under the authority of Gods word. If then the Lord will
thus deal with the wall, and with the daubers that daubed it with untempered
mortar, let the builders take heed how they build the wall, and the daubers
how they daube it, least the Lord pull down both wall and mortar; Ver 15.
and they say, the wall is no more, neither the daubers thereof. And this much
of the first part; namely, how Esaie (by way of exclamation) has enjoined (by
the commandment of God) the heavens to hear, and the earth to hearken, unto
the message which he is willed to do unto them from the mouth of the Lord.

Now the Prophet goes onward with the Lords most lamentable complaint
concerning the ingratitude of his people, for whom he had done many and great
good turns. The complaint is this: I have nourished and brought up children,
but they have rebelled against me. A most grievous complaint, which consists
of two parts. In the first, he expresses his benefits bestowed upon them. In
the second, he declares their ingratitude and rebellion against him. He
expresses his benefits toward them in these words; I have nourished and
brought up children. He declares their ingratitude and rebellion against him
in these; but they have rebelled against me. This their ingratitude and
rebellion he amplifieth in the verse following by way of comparison, or
example of brute and dull beasts. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his
Masters Cribbe, but Israel has not known: my people has not understand.

Thus you have the sum of the complaint; by which almighty God, as a most
unhappy father, with lamentable voice does deplore and bewail the unkindness
of his people, and withal does recite what and how great benifits he had
bestowed upon them, but to no purpose. The complaint is very short if we mark
the words, but very heinous and weighty if we diligently weygh and examine
the thing it self. For the Lord seems thus to say; Oh what an unhappy father
am I to have such unthankful children, whom I neither could, nor ought more
to have loved, than if they had come forth of mine own loins. For behold; he
brought them out of the iron furnace of Egypt, Deu. 4.20, where their lives
were bitter unto them by sore labor in clay and brick. Ex. 1.14. He went
before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the way; and by night
in a pillar of fire to give them light, that they might go both by day and by
night. Exodus 13.21. He divided the red sea in two parts, and made Israel to
pass through the midst of it, which when the Egyptians attempted to do, they
were drowned, Exodus 14.21. Psa. 136.13. At their desire he brought Quails, and
filled them with the bread of heaven; Ps. 105.40. in so much that (as David
says.) Man did eat the bread of Angels. Psalm. 78.25. When they were thirsty
and had no water to drink, Psalm. 105.41. he opened the rock, and the waters
flowed out, and ran in the dry places like a river. For their sakes he smote
diverse nations, Psalm. 135.10. and slew mighty kings, Psalm. 136.19. as Sihon
king of the Amorites, and Og king of Basan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan,
Number. 21.33. and gave their land to be an heritage, even an heritage unto Israel
his people. He made them a mighty nation, a fearful, and a terrible to all
the princes and potentates of the earth, Deuteronomy. 32.10. He found them in the land
of the wilderness, in a waste, and roaring wilderness: he led them about, he
taught them, and kept them as the apple of his eye. As an Eagle stirs up her
nest, fluttereth over her birds, stretches out her wings, takes them, and
bears them on her wings; So the Lord alone led them, and carried them up to
the high places of the earth, that they might eat the fruits of the fields,
and suck honey out of the stone, and oil out of the hard rock; Butter of
kine, and milk of sheep, with fat of the Lambs, and Rams fed in Bashan, and
goats, with the fat of the grains of wheat, and drink the licour of the red
grape. So in the second of Jeremy, the Lord ringeth in the ears of Jerusalem
the sum of his benefits in this sort; Iere. 2.2. I remember thee, with the
kindness of thy youth; and the Jove of thy marriage, when thou wentest after
me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown. Israel was a thing hallowed
unto the Lord, and his first fruits, chosen above all other to serve the Lord
only, and the first offered to the Lord of all other nations. And by Ezekiel
(amongst other his benefits toward Jerusalem) thus says the Lord: Ezech.
16.6. When thou wast polluted in thy own blood: to wit, when thou wast in thy
filthiness and forsaken of all men, I took thee and gave thee life, for I
said unto thee, thou shall live. I caused thee to multiply as the budde of
the field, and thou have increased and waxen great, and thou have gotten
excellent ornaments: thy breasts are fashioned, thine hair is grown. verse.
11. I decked thee with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thine hands, and
a chain on thy neck. I put a frontlet upon thy face, and earings in thine
ears, and a beautiful crown upon thine head. Thus wast thou decked with
gold and silver, and thy raym^nt was of fine linen, and silk, and broidered
work: thou did eat fine flower, and Honey: and Oil, and thou vvast very
beautiful and thou did grow up into a kingdom. And to be short; what
benefit was there, which the Lord bestowed not upon his people? What could
he have done more unto his Vineyarde, Esaias. 5.4. which he did not do unto
it? He planted it in a very fruitful hill, he hedged it, and gathered out the
s^ones of it; he planted it with the best plants, he built a tower in the
midst thereof, and made a wine press therein. This did the Lord for his
Vineyard.

Surely the Vineyarde of the Lord of hoasts, was the house of Israel, and
the men of Judah were his pleasant plant. verse. 4. Then the Lord looked that
his Vineyarde should bring forth sweet Gr^pes, but it brought forth wild
and sour grapes: he looked for judgment, but behold oppression, verse. 7.
for righteousness, but behold a doleful crying: for obedience, but behold a
rebellion. I have nourished and brought up chillldren (says he) but they have
rebelled against me. I have nourished and brought them up; I have done the duty
of a father, I have performed what was required of my part; I have carried them
out of all danger, I have made them the lot and portion of mine inheritance, I
have fed them with the best and cheifest things of the earth, I have bestowed
many and infinite good turns upon them (as before expressed) and yet see: this
is the recompense which they yield unto me for all that I have done; They have
rebelled against me.

But it may seem that the Lord does not justly charge his people with
ingratitude and disobedience; for they offered many sacrifices: Esa. 1.11. they
offered the burnt offerings of rams, the fat of fed beasts, the blood of
bullocks, of Lambs, and of goats; They did what the law could require. They
observed the new moons, verse. 13. Sabbaths and solemn days. They had their
assemblies, and appointed feasts: they stretched out their hands, and made many
prayers. And yet for all these (which they did, or could do) they are counted a
sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of the wicked, corrupt
children, which had forsaken the Lord, and provoked the holy one of Israel to
anger; ver. 4. and in such sort, as that he hated and abhord their feast days,
and would not smell in their solemn assemblies, Amo. 5.21. nor accept their
burnt offerings, meat offerings, nor regard the peace offerings of their fat
beasts: and all was, because they did these and such like without faith and
mercy, even in the full measure of hypocrisy and dissimulation.

King Vzziah himself, called also Azariah 2. Kin. 15.1 (in whose time this our
prophet began to prophecy) after that God had blessed him maruellously, and
had given him many notable victories, and thereby was grown to be strong,
lifted up his heart, and usurped the priests office, and went into the temple
of the Lord to burn incense upon the altar of incense, and when he was willed
to leave off, would not, but waxed wroth, as it is in the second of Chronicles
and 26. chap. v. 19. Jerusalem a faithful city, and which had promised
fidelity unto God, as a wife to her husband, is now become a common harlot,
and a filthy strumpet, Esa. 1.21. She was once full of judgment, and justice
was lodged within her breast: but now she is full of raven, cruelty and deceit.
verse. 22. Her silver is become dross, and her wine is mixed with water. The
testimonies of the Lord which sometime were pure and without dross, like unto
silver that is tried with fire, are now defiled with pharisaicall traditions
and doctrines of men. The commandments of the Lord which were like unto pure
wine rejoicing the heart, through watery dregs, have lost their strength,
color and beauty, verse. 23. The princes of the people were rebellious and
companions of thieves: they loved gifts, and followed after rewards, they
judged not the fatherless, neither did the widows cause come before them.
Ierem. 2.8. The Priests said not so much as, where is the Lord? and they that
should minister the law, knew not God. Deuteronomy. 32.15. He that should have been
upright, when he waxed fat, and gross, and was laden with fatness, spurned
with his heel, and forsook the Lord that made him, and regarded not the
strong God of his salvation. And therefore the state and condition of Judah and
Jerusalem being thus corrupt, whom neither the benefits of God could win, nor
his punishments amend, the Lord by his Prophet, does justly charge them with
ingratitude and disobedience in this sort: They have rebelled against me.

Wherein they did rightly imitate and follow their forefathers, Psalm. 78.8. a
stubborn and rebellious generation: a generation whose heart was not aright,
and whose spirit was not faithful unto God. For no sooner had God brought the^
out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, with a mighty hand and stretched out
arm, Psalm. 106.7. but they forgate his great goodness, and rebelled at the
Sea, even at the red Sea. Exo. 16.3. In the wilderness of Sin they grudged for
bread and flesh, Exodus 17.2. and in Rephidim for water. They made a calfe in
Horeb, Exodus 32.4. and worshipped the molten image. Psa. 106.19. They maliced
Moses and Aaron, the holy one of the Lord. v. 16. They would have stoned Caleb
and Joshua. Nom. 14.10. They joined themselves unto Baal peor, and did eat the
offerings of the dead Psa. 106.28. They sacrificed their sons and daughters
unto devils, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and
daughters, whom they offered unto the idols of Canaan; Deuteronomy. 32.17. gods whom
they knew not, new gods that came newly up, and forsook the Lord God of their
fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods,
as Baal and Ashtaroth, the gods of the people that were round about them, and
bowed unto them. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was hot against Israel, and
he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and sold them
into the hands of their enemies round about them. Notwithstanding, the Lord
raised up Judges, which delivered them out of the hands of their oppressors,
ve. 16. but they would not obey their Judges, for they wet a whoring after
other gods and worshipped the^: Judge. 10.6. as the gods of Aram, Zidon, and
Moab, the gods of the children of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and forsook
the Lord God, and served not him. And thus they rebelled and their posterity
to the days of John the forerunner, and of Christ and his Apostles, insomuch
that of Christ, and (before him) of John the Baptist they are called, Progenies
viperarum, the generations of vipers Mat. 3.7. And because they were the
children of them which murthred the prophets, and fulfilled the measure of
their fathers Mat. 23.31, the lord vpbraideth and casts in their teeth not
only their own, but also their fathers malice. Many a time would the Lord
have gathered them together, Matt. 23 37. as the hen does her chickens under
her wings, but they would not: And therefore did Stephan to their faces charge
them with stubbornness and rebellion, calling them Act. 7.51. stifnecked and of
uncircumcised hearts, and ears always resisting the holy Ghost, as their
fathers did. So that, though Israel and Judah, after a sort, could color their
rebellion and stiffness of heart against the Lord, and against his anointed,
with the multitude of sacrifices, Esa. 1.11. with the burnt offerings of Rams,
and fat of fed beasts, with the blood of bullockes, of Lambs, and of goats,
with the observation of new moons, Sabbaths, and solemn days: with the
stretching out of hands, and making many prayers: yet, we see what they are,
and the Lord (who alone looks into the hearts of all) by the prophet here
charge the very Rulers to be rebellious and companions of thieves: ve. 23,
yea, and the whole pack of them (for their impiety and wickedness) to be
like unto the princes of Sodoma and people of Gomorah.

The application.
And now (to apply these former points unto our selves, before we come to the
exaggeration of this peoples ingratitude and unkindness) let us take some
short view, whether our condition be the same with the condition of Israel and
Judah, or whether ours be better than theirs was.

The Lord our God (as ye all know) has nourished and brought up us his
children, in as good and ample manner as ever he did the Jews his elect and
chosen people. He has given us for our comfort, Psa. 8.7.8. the beasts of the
field, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea. He brought us out of
the iron furnace of Romish Egypt, at what time the Egyptian tyrants made us
weary of our lives, with sore labourin the clay and brick of hellish
superstition, and with all manner of bondage, which they laid upon us most
cruelly. Hitherto, the Lord has gone before us by day, in a pillar of a
cloud, and by night in a pillar of fire, to lead us the way, and to give us
light, that we might go both by day and by night, out of all danger. He has
given us Manna from heaven: not Manna, of which the Fathers did eat in the
wilderness, and are dead; but a living Manna, a Manna that gives life unto
the world; a Manna, of which he that truly eats, shall live for ever. Ioh. 6
38. The Israelites (after they had drunk of the water out of the rock)
thirsted again: but of the water, which he shall give us, if we once drink,
we shall never be more a thirst; Joh 4.14. for it is the water of life, even
the grace and love of God in his son Christ, shed abroad in our hearts, by
the holy Ghost, unto eternal life. This our God (for our peace) has smitten
of late years Sihon of Rome; and Og of Spain, who sought to make the Lords
heritage an abomination: that so (to this very day) the heritage stands as
it did, it is as it was, and in as good plight, if not better; it remains in
the hand of the right owner, and we trust that it shall still remain, even in
the hand and possession of Israel his servant; for which we do, and shall
praise his holy and blessed name for ever. This our God the lord God of hosts,
has made us a mighty nation, a fearful, and a terrible to all the Princes
and Potentates of the earth. He conducteth us, not by Joshua, but by a Jesus:
not to a terrestrial, but to a celestial Canaan, the la^d of eternal
felicity, whose brightness is God, whose light is the lamb: the lot of the
faithful, and the possession of the saved. The Lord finding us in this vale of
misery (as he found Iaacob in the land of a roaring wilderness, Deuteronomie
23.9.10.) has led us by his spirit, taught us by his word, governed us by
his grace, and kept us as the Apple of his eye. As the Eagle, he stirs up
his nest, he fluttereth over us his young ones, stretches out the wings of
his mercy, takes and bears us on the same to the best and surest places of
the earth: that so we eat the fruits of the fields, and suck honey, not from
the stone, as did the Jews, but from the Be: and oil not from the rock (as
they) but from the Olive: we eat the butter of kine, and the milk of sheep,
with the fat of Lambs and Rams; fed, not in Bashan, but in England, with the
fat of the grains of wheat, and for good and perfect digestion, we draw from
the enemy the licour of the red grape. This our good and gracious God has
caused us to multiply as the bud of the field. We are (to the knowledge of the
nations round about us) increased and waxen great: many of us have gotten many
goodly and excellent ornaments. Our breasts are fashioned, our hair is grown.
The Lord has given us rich and precious jewels: bracelets for our hands,
chains for our necks, frontlets for our faces, earings for our ears,
beautiful things for our heads; in which, would God we did not delight and
rejoice so much as we do. The Lord has decked us with gold and silver: our
raiment is of the finest linen, and silk, and broidered work: we eat fine
flower, and honey, and oil: yea, better things than ever did the Jews; and
thus we become beautiful, more than the sons and daughters of Zion; and we
are grown into a kingdom, God grant not into pride. The Jews in the first of
Haggei, verse. 8. are commanded to go up to the hill Lebanon, which was not
within the borders of Iewry, but of Zidon and Tyrus, Ezra. 3.7. and from thence
to bring home Cedarwood for the building of the Temple. Truly a figure of the
Lords abundant mercy, and most comfortable for us Gentiles; that albeit we
be not borne of Jews: yet we are trees meet to build Gods house with, and
God wills us to be brought home unto him by the preaching of his word, that
we may be plankes or boardes, bases or props, sides or posts, pillars or
beams, rafters or tenons, one thing or other of that house, wherein himself
will dwell, and he delighted with us, and among whom he will declare his
glory.

Beside all these (which has been already observed for a blessing upon
Israel and Judah) Esa. 5.1.2. the Lord has planted his vineyard in a very
frutful soil; he has given it a skillful vinitor, one endued with all gifts
and qualities necessary for regiment; even a learned, religious, gentle,
merciful, gracious and loving Prince, by name Elizabeth, the rest of God, the
seventh of God, and fulness of the oath of God: a great blessing, the Lord
continue it, and make us thankful for it.

This skillful vinitor (our gracious Sovereign) comparable for fortitude with
Joshua, for magnanimity with Gedeon, for victories with Macchabeus, for
wisdom with Solomon, for zeal with Hezekiah, for deutoion with David; has
caused the stones that pestered the vineyard to be gathered out; the briers
and thorns to be grubbed up; rubbidge and whatsoever was noisome to be
removed; 2. These. 2.3. Antichrist the man of sin with his trash and
traditions, to be exiled: that now the field is cleared, the vineyard
cleansed, the Church purged, and all this concluded and more, without any great
sedion or tumult at all. It was the Lords doing, and it is wonderful in the
eyes of as many as do truly behold it. No vineyard, no Church, no people
under the heavens more enriched with the blessings of God: so that the Lord may
justly say unto us, as he did unto his people of old, Es. 4.5. what more could
I have done unto my vineyard which I have not done unto it? The Lord have the
glory for it: and he in his mercy, preserve, keep and maintain the vinitor
our gracious queen, in health, wealth, peace and prosperity, that (to the joy
and comfort of all her loyal, hearty true and trusty subjects) she may long
continue, live and reign an old mother in Israel; and he that from the very
bottom of his heart does not so wish and pray, and say Amen, the ravens of
the valley pick out his eyes, and the young Eagles eat them up. Pro. 30.17.

This vineyard so planted in a most fruitful ground, cleansed from stone,
thorn, and brier, watered with the dew of Gods truth, cherished with his
Sacraments, pruned with the two edged sword of his most holy spirit, under
propped with the authority of zealous magistrates, fortified with good and
godly laws, to keep both root and branch in order; has brought forth
many a goodly and pleasant grape: amongst others, peace spiritual and peace
civil: peace toward God, peace amongst men, and amongst our selves; and so the
peace of conscience, which passes all wisdom and understanding: pleasant
grapes, and a rich blessing. He that has felt the evil of war, can best
speak of the good of peace. War, as a Locust, makes scarcity; but peace,
like unto the morning and evening dew, works plenty, as Eras. Apo. lib. 6.
notes; Croesus king of Lydia by this only argument preferred peace before
war; Quod pacis tempore filii sepelirent patres, in bello contra patres
sepelirent liberos; that in the time of peace, children did bury their
fathers; contrariwise in war, fathers did bury their children. So contrary
is the fruit of war to the fruit of peace; which we (through the benefit of
God under his Anointed) have enjoyed long time without any effusion of blood to
speak of, except of a sort of Archtraitors, who received but the reward they
deserved, and which I pray God all traitors with their adherents may receive
hereafter, if they practice, conspire, and rebel as they did.

This flourishing peace has made not only this City, but also the whole land
to flow, like another Canaan, with milk and honey. The God of peace has done
this for us; he be praised therefore, and prosper her majesty, by whom it is
governed and maintained.

Whereas the Nations about us struggle in the field, tumble in war, and
wallow in blood, expecting no end of their miseries, but utter ruin and
desolation; we in the mean while sit at home by our fires in our furred
gowns, corked slippers, trimmed buskins, and warm mittons. Am. 4.6. We lie
upon our costly beds, and stretch out our selves upon them; we eat the Lambs
of the flock, and the Calves out of the stall. verse. 5. We sing to the sound
of the Violl, the Harp and Pipe, and wine are in our feasts, and the wine we
drink in bowls: Esa. 5.12. Am. 6.6. In which great peace and plentifulnesse,
God make us worthily to consider the works of his hands, and to be sorry for
the affliction of Joseph and his brethren, Verse. 6. of which now many are
slain in France, Flanders, and else wheare, in defense of the Gospel,
propagation of the truth, and safety of this Land. Moreover (whereas the
nations and people about us do eat in fear, and drink in dread, and like
fearful hares do flee away at the wagging of every leaf) we sit quiet and
safe, as did Israel and Iudab, 1. King. 4.20. like unto the sand of the Sea in
number, eating, drinking and making merry; every man under his vine, and under
his Boothe, from Dan to Beer-sheba; to wit, from the one end of this land to
the other. For God has made the bars of the gates of our Jerusalem strong,
Psa. 147.5. and has blessed our children within her. He has set peace in her
borders, and satisfied her poor with the flower of wheat. His word is come
from Iaacob, and his statutes from Israel unto us; the best and greatest
blessing that may be. He has not dealt thus with every Nation, verse. 20. as
he has dealt with us, the least Nation of all: Our punishment and fall will
be the greater, if we be not thankful. It must be confessed that some
stonnes have bin raised in her Majesty's days; and before time in the days of
her dear brother King Edward the sixth, which somewhat disturbed our happy rest.
But the Prince of peace, and sovereign Lord of our tranquillity, soon ceased
the waves of the sea, stilled the fury and madness of those heathen,
miraculously prevented their wicked devises, and confounded the deuisers of
them. Thus was the Lord of Hoasts jealous for his Zion, with great iealouzie,
he was jealous for her with great wrath, Zach. 8.2. He was not unmindful of
his people, nor forgetful of his inheritance. A mother may forget her child,
and take no compassion on the son of her womb; Esaias, 49.15. such stepmothers
there are. But though such (unnaturally given) forget, yet will not the Lord
forget Zion: for he has graven her upon the palm of his hands, and her walls
are ever in his sight. Christ the shipmaster (our salvation) Matthew 8.24. slept
in the shipp on a pillow, the ship covered with waves: the Disciples, Mar.
4.38. with no little diffidence and distrust awoke him, they put him out of his
napp: A faithles and needles labor. For he that keeps Israel, shall neither
slumber nor sleep: Psalm. 121 4. we have felt the experiment. For the Lord in
our Cities distress, in the time of Commotion, (as we call it) or
insurrection, awaked as one out of sleep, and as a Giant refreshed with wine.
Psalm. 78.65. He smote his enemies and ours in the hinder parts, and put them to
a perpetual shame, verse, 66. They ran about us like Bees; but they were
extinct suddenly as a fire of thorns. Psalm. 12. Our soul escaped, even as a
bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare was broken, and we delivered,
Psalm. 124.7. The Plowers would have plowed upon our backs, and made long
furrows at their pleasure, Psalm. 129.3. But the righteous Lord took in hand
the two edged sword of his justice, and hewed the snares and cords of those
wicked in pieces: (verse. 4.5.) He in like measure reward as many as have evil
will at Sion. This was the Lords work, and it is marvelous in our eyes. Psalm.
118.23. This is the day which the Lord made. we will rejoice and be glad in
it, verse, 24. This is the day which you call Jesus day, whether because it is
so fixed in the Calender I know not; but sure I am, that it was Jesus day unto
you, a day of salvation. For if Jesus the Lord had not been on our side, Psalm.
114.1. (may not Israal, but Exeter now say) if the Lord had not bin on our
side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick (so unable
were we to resist) when their wrath was kindled against us. The waters had
drowned us, the stream and swelling waters had gone over our soul, verse, 4.
But praised be the Lord, who gave us not over for a pray unto their teeth.

And thus has our good and gracious God continued his favor toward us to this
present day, that there is no leading into captivity, nor any complaining in
our streets. Psalm. 144.14. Blessed are we that be in such a case: yea blessed
are we which have the Lord for our God. For this great calm, for this
miraculous peace, let us thank the Lord.

But what? are we thankful unto him for these and other his blessings? or
live we as children obedient to a father? If we do not, would we did; all do
not. For behold, how many of us (like unto Israel and Judah) are turned back,
and started aside like a broken bow? Psalm. 78.57. The Lord looks that we
should bring forth sweet grapes, but we bring forth sour ones. There are at
this very day in our streets, usury, deceit, cruelty, and oppression. We have
(as the Jews had) our Sabbaths and solemn days, our assemblies and appointed
feasts; we stretch out our hands and make many prayers as they did: and yet
see (as theirs were) our hearts (if not our hands) are full of blood. Esa.
1.13.15. Now that we are waxen fat and gross; now that we have what we
would have (as did Israel) we spurn with the heel, we forsake the Lord that
made us, and regard not the mighty and strong God of our salvation. Deu.
32.15. We begin to loath Manna, and to long for the flesh pots of Egypt. Number.
11.6. We profess that we know God; but our works testify, that we deny
him. Exo. 19.3. As for the word of the Lord, we count it vain: Tit. 1.19. we
can be content to say to the S^ers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy
errors. Esa. 36.10. Like unto the me^ of Anathoth we desire to be flattered
and soothed in our sins. Ier, 11.17. The Lord has set watchme^ over us that
cry take heed of the sound of the Trumpet; but we say, we will not take heed.
Ier. 6.17. He has commanded us to ask for the old way, which is the good
way; the way wherein the patriarks and prophets have walked, directed by the
word of God: ver. 16. but we say we will not walk therein; we will go rather
the broad way that leads to destruction. Mat. 7.13. we drink iniquity like
water: we have as great a desire to sin, as they that are thirsty have a
desire to drink. Job. 15.16. We draw wickedness unto us with cords, and sin
(as it were) with cart ropes; Esa. 5.18. we use all the allurements and
prouocations that canbe, to freese together the conscience in sin and impiety.
And yet we can speak of truth and of verity, of justice and mercy, of the
knowledge of God and his laws, and of sundry other high points: but when we
are brought unto the balance, we are found too light, and when we are drawn
unto the touchstone for trial, we prove dross. For what do the Suns of men
find in our shops and shop-houses, in our wares and warehouses, but fraud and
deceit, if not worse? Truly said Tertullian, Lib. de patientia, page 13. sect.
7 Lata atque diffusa est operatio mali.

The operation, or handicrafte of mischief is wide and diffused all abroad;
more now than ever it was.

John the Apostle left written many years past, that the whole world lies
in wickedness: First John, 5. Chapter and 19. verse, which if it lay buried in
wickedness then, how may we think it to lie buried in wickedness, now being
old, bowing and winding it self even for age to the pit of destruction?

Hosea must be just, and his Prophecy comes homeward to our doors, and the
Lord as then with the inhabitants in Israel, so now with us in England, has
a controversy, because in Hos. 4.1.2. there is no truth, nor mercy, nor
knowledge of God in the land; but swearing, and lying, and killing, and
stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood; mischief
upon mischief, one still falling on the neck of another; and all these with
many more committed without any dread, or fear of God at all. For so man does
not see us, we pass not; fearing more the face of man, than the wrath of God;
insemblance the very sons of Ammon, who coveting to force his sister Tamar,
2. Sam. 13. caused every man to go out from him, as ashamed to work that
villainy before men, which he feared not to commit in the sight of his God.
This Ammon (wicked Ammon) has left Ammons in great store behind him, as much
forgetful of God and his laws as ever himself was, if not more. For as he
feared, so do we the eyes of men: and thus, and thus, we think in our hearts,
Eccle. 23.18. Who sees us? we are compassed about with darkness; the walls
cover us; no body marketh us; whom need we to fear? the most High will not
remember our sins; albeit he remembers them well enough, and still looks
down upon them from his holy Mountain, and beholds them in the most
secret parts; his eyes being ten thousand times brighter than the sun
beams, beholding all the ways of men, and the ground of the deep. And
therefore such imaginations of the thoughts of men's hearts shall perish, and
they in them: such shifts and turning of devises shall be esteemed as the
Potters clay, Esaias, 29.16. For (notwithstanding all their craft) they shall be
able to escape the Lords wrath no more than the clay that is in the Potters
hand of power to deliver itself. But so long as men will dwell in this mind
and opinion that he that planted the ear does not hear, and that he that
formed the eye, does not see; what merueile is it, if they give themselves unto
wantonness, to work all uncleanness, even with greedines? Ephesians. 4.19.

But there is another sort of us, who though we perceive and will confess that
there is nothing so hid which God sees not; that he knows our down sitting
and our vprising, Psa. 159.2.3.4. that he understands all our thoughts long
before, that he is about our paths and about our beds, and spieth out all
our ways, that there is not a word in our tongues, which he knows not
altogether: yet we rest persuaded that God has feet of woll, and will punish
slowly, or never. As for the deserved tokens of his wrath, now hanging over
our heads, and ready to be powered upon us, for our manifold sins and
damnable iniquities, what of them? We count them as buggs; bugges to fray
children. The Lord our God has gone by us in a mighty strong wind: but we
say the Lord was not in the wind. After the mind came an earthquake: but we
say the Lord was not in the Earthquake. After the Earthquake came fire: but we
say, the Lord was not in the fire. After the fire came a still and soft voice:
and yet we will not obey.

If God withdraw his heavy hand for a time, to try if we will amend with a
gentle correction before he lay on us a sharper: we fall to our old fashions,
we forget God, his rod, our duty, and his reverence, attributing his plagues
to unseasonable weather, pestilent aires, or to some unhappy chance, as
though they were not sent of God to nurture us rightly in the duty and
obedience of Children to a father.

So in the days of most cruel Popery and bloody persecution, we cried; O
Lord our God, deliver up this once, and we will ever take heed hereafter how
we fall to Apostasy and offend thy divine Majesty.

But now being delivered, we are worse; more unthankful and disobedient
than ever before; which apparent wickedness, surely the righteous God in his
due time, will not suffer to escape without some manifest token of his high
indignation and most heavy displeasure.

When Prince Edward the sixth, was taken away for our unthankfulness, there
ensued Mariana tempora, Lamentable times: and then too, this was the wish of
many one, bounded with a vow: O that the Mass Book were burnt, and the
Communion book restored again. O that these mitred Bishops were sent packing,
and zealous Pastors placed in their rooms; for then (said they) We will enter
into the house of the Lord, and in his fear will we worship tovvard his
holy Temple. The Lord in his great mercy pitied their desire and heard their
moan. Queen Marie died: Our gracious Lady and Queen Elizabeth succeeded,
(whom almighty God long preserve, with all health, wealth and peace to
govern) and the book, in better sort than in former days through Gods
goodness and hit Majesty's carefulnes (was restored again. But of it now? A
book (says one) blown up (like unto a bladder) with the wind of confusion
and profanation. The orders (says another) prescribed earthly, beggarly,
dungie, drossie, lousie, Antichristian. The frequenting of the Lords house,
and worshipping in his holy temple in his fear, vowed with the lips and
promised with the mouth; what of it? Christ if he were here on earth, should
not need so much a whip to drive them out of the Church (so few come there)
as he should need a great sort of whips, and that good ones to drive them
thither. As for the Bishops which they wished to be removed; mitred ones were
thrust out of their holds sooner than they thought; and exiles and other very
zealous men placed in their steads. But what of those then, and of their
successors now? Even as of the Bishops and Elders of the Churches in saint
Paul's time: Reviled, evil spoken off; made, Os pericatharmata tou cosmon, as
the filth of the world, 1. Cor. 4.13. Panton peripsema the ofscowring of all
things; unto this time the very practice of ancient Sectaries, who by
dispraising and reuiling others, sought to purchase fame and glory to
themselves. But this is not all; for Captain Cuffe of the bouncing band of all
Surebies, the old sheep ebiter, (which pricketh at the body and spares not
the fleece) will have their Manors and lands to make his brats Gentlemen.
Their houses must go down their livings must be clipped, or clean taken away,
and they set to petrie pensions. The Captain with the help of his surebies
(like an other Xerxes) will suppe up whole countries before him, and snatch up
houses and woods dales and mountains, valleys and hills, people and all into
the budget of his wrath. Havoc must be made of the Churches inheritance,
without contradiction either of Prince or people: else the trumpet sounds a
stylo ad macheram; Tertul. de prescrip. page 110. Sect. 15. Sirs, no more words
but blows and al for Church patrimony, under the color of religion. Captain
Cuffe (belike in his Itinerario, or Calendar of miles) smelt that Abbey lands,
etc. so well pretended to be employed to the enriching of the King, maintaining
of schools, and releeuing the poor, were unto some very sweet, and the best
feather of their tail; who perhaps having spent the better part (if not the
total) upon back and belly, himself could be content to consume in like
proportion the remnants that are left.

Hear ye this (O Elders) and hearken ye all inhabitants of this City, whether
such a thing has been in your days, or yet in the dares of your fathers. The
Palmer worm has his part, and so has the Grasshopper, and canker worm; and
now residuum erucae the residue of the canker worm (...) the Caterpiller eat
if he may. Such is the thankefulnes which these and others yield both to the
Lord, and also to them, who have ministered and to this day do minister in his
sanctified labors.

It is presupposed that some Clergy men have too little, some too much, and
some nothing at all to live by; and therefore very requisite that just and
equal division were made, that all might be sufficiently provided for. A
deep charity, dipped in as deep hypocrisy. But (Sirs of the corporation of
Mal-contents) who shall make the division?

There is just cause, why we may stagger at putting the Church patrimony to
arbitrament; lest (while division be pretended) some Quintus Fabius adiudge
the better part thereof to the Senate of Rome, Cicero Offic li. 10. Et ita erit
nouissimus error peior priore; And so shall the last error be worse than the
first, Matthew Chapter 27. verse, 64.

But all this is the wicked working of Satan the moulder of mischief, whose
drift has been evermore to decay learning that there should be none learned in
the Scriptures, to commit the flocks unto, which he attempted to accomplish;
First by seducing spirits; Secondarily, by force of tyrants; and now lastly, by
impayring the livings of the Ministers of the word to the intent that they
(oppressed with poverty) should forsake the Ministry, and so the little and
miserable flock of Jesus Christ (left destitute of the food of life) should
become in time, like unto the horse and mule which have no understanding, Psalm.
32.9. In regard whereof, what good Christian is there, which may not (upon so
just occasion) justly cry out in the bitterness of his heart? O tempora! O
mores! O times! O manners! seeing the times so dangerous, and men in their
manners so monstrous, whom the Lord notwithstanding has nourished and
brought up as his children, and yet does, but they rebel. For in what one
point can they more significantly express and make known their rebellion
against the Lord, than by battering the walls, and shaking the foundations of
his Church? than by annoying his servant the Prophets, contrary to his
commandment; touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets no harm? Psalm.
105.15 than by dividing, mangling and impairing the portions of the Levites, as
in the da^^s of Nehemiah? cap. 13. verse. 10. which caused them (for that they
received not according to the Law provided in that case) to forsake the house
of God, as not able to execute the work any longer, and to flee every one away
to his own Land. This it was and will be when the Lords portion is pinched,
and the mouth of the Ox musled that treads out the corn; it must needs
breed and bring Anarchy and confusion, even the riune and utter overthrow of
all good learning and true religion. For take away once the patrimony and
maintenance of the Church (at which that Axe of theirs strikes especially, as
at a sweet and pleasant root) and entreat the Lords Ambassadors as Hanun did
David's messengers, 2. Sam. 10.4. and ye take away learning; take away learning
and ye take away teaching. David's messengers sent to comfort Hanun, must of
forc tarry at Jericho with shame enough, verse. 5. until their garments be
lengthened and their beards grown; and when will that be? when the children of
Ammon, verse. 6. band themselves, and hire other to work them (if they may)
some further despite? And so you may lightly conjecture what will become of the
Church of Christ. For, where no vision is, the people decay, Pro. twenty nine
Chap. and 18. verse. Howbeit (beloved) we hope better and trust that the Lord
of Hoasts in his accustomed mercy will continue a strength unto Israel, and a
defense for Judah, yea, we trust that Jehovah will so bless us out of Zion,
Psalm. 128.5. that we shall see our Jerusalem to flow with prosperity, peace,
plenteousnes, and true religion all the days of our life; and that the
destroyers of the vineyard Psalm. 80.13. and young Vine which the Lord has made
so mighty and strong for himself, shall perish in their appointed time, at
the rebuke of the countenance of our God,

But if so be the Lords arm be stretched out toward us, if his wrath be
kindled against us; if matters fall out in the end otherwise than well, let us
burden and blame no man but our selves; for we are a crooked and rebellious
nation, as badd as ever were the Jews, if not worse; and look what sins
reigned among them Ezec. 16.49.50. and we have exceeded them; yea, and have
justified them, as did Jerusalem her two sisters Sodom and Samaria, verse, 51.
in all the abominations which we have done.

The piety and godliness which many of us pretend, when it is at best, is but
Jewish hypocrisy, or some sudden passion of the mind, or violent motion, and
therefore endures but a while; soon hot and soon cold, as was Esaus to
Iaakob, Ge. 33.4 27.41. 32.6.36.6. Saul's to David, 1. Sam. 24.5.17.18. 1. Sam.
26.2. and the peoples to Christ, which spread their garments in the way that
he went, which cut down branches from the trees, which greeted him with
Hosanna, Mat. 21.8.9. and shortly after cried, Crucifige, crucifige eum;
Crucify him, crucify him, Luke, 23.21.

So inconstancy in brotherly love, gentleness, tender mercy, kindness, humblenes
of mind, meeknes, and other such lively fruits of faith (which S. Paul
bids us, Coll. 3.12. as the elect of God, to put on) betrayed these, and so
it betrayeth us. We (as these men and people were) like unto Clouds without
water, Jude. verse, 12. are carried about of winds, having no continuance in
that which is good. We think that we have done God good and great service,
when we have left some pretty shows of Christianity; though within a while
after, with the Dog we return to the vomit, 2. Pet. 2.22.

We deal with the Lord, as Israel did with Joshua. How was that say you?
Surely thus. We give out many fair and large promises; as that all shall be
amended which is amiss; that we will do so and so no more; that we will wax
better and better every day. God forbid (say we) that we should forsake the
Lord our God, who delivered us when we were in misery, and scattered our
enemies round about us: therefore the Lord our God will we serve, and his voice
will we obey. This was Isreal's vow and promise then, Ios. 24.16.24. and the
same is ours now; though quickly forgotten, as theirs was. For as they (not
long after that the covenant was made, and written by Joshua in the book of
the law of God, and a great stone pitched in the remembrance and testimony
thereof) provoked the Lord to anger, so do we. And as did Israel, we have said
and sworn that we will serve the Lord only, but yet mark and behold, there
are of us that serve and follow other Gods as bad in effect, as the Gods of
Aram and the Gods of Zidon, and the Gods of Moab, and the Gods of the children
of Ammon, and the Gods of the Philistines, Judge. 10.6. Wherefore, as Joshua
said unto the Israelites, so give me leave to say unto you, that say and do
such things: Ye are witnesses against your selves, Ios. 24.22. The stones of
the street, which the Pauier pitched shall testify against you; for by
trampling and treading on them with your feet, they are wakened, and have hard
the words which ye have spoken concerning the Lord.

So that rather than man's dissimulation, man's ingratitude, man's unkindness, man's
rebellion and Apostasy shall escape unpunished, the very stones of the street
(deaf and dumb creatures) shall call and cry for vengeance against it: and
who so is wise, will ponder this in his heart.

Brethren, with the Apostle I will show you this secret, of which I would not
that ye should be ignorant, least ye should be arrogant. Although it has
pleased God in his abundant mercy to make us his people, which in time past
were not a people; 1. Pet. 2.10. to graffe us, a wild olive tree, wild by
nature, contrary to nature in the right olive tree, Roman. 11.17. let not the
wild olive (though some of the branches be broken off) graft in for them, and
made partaker of the root, and fathes of the olive tree, boast it self
against the branches. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed
least he also spare not us. Wherefore, let us not be high minded, but fear:
let us behold the boundtifulnes and severity of God, and ponder well the one
and the other: toward the Jews (which have fallen) severity; but toward us,
bountifulnes, verse. 22. if we continue and abide therein. Beloved, these and
such like are written to warn us, that we should beware of the like sins,
least we feel the like plagues. Let us remember then what manner of people we
were in time past, and what we are now in Christ Jesus. Let us consider that
we have had and yet have, a God that is gracious and merciful, long suffering
and of great compassion, no otherwise affected toward us than a father toward
his own children; for he has nourished and brought us up, though we have
rebelled against him, and yet do. But if we continue and go onward, walking
in the ways of our hearts, he will call us to a sharp account, even to the
ballaunce of his judgment Eccles. 11.9. and because he will make due and just
proof of our guiltiness, he will summon the heavens and earth to witness
against us, and the brute and dumb creatures of the world to condemn us. For
so does the Lord here against his own people the Jews; calling to record
against them, first the heavens and earth; and now (to aggrauate their
ingratitude and rebellion against him, their father) the ox and the ass, in
this form and manner of speaking. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his
masters cribbe; but Israel has not known, my people has not understand. By
which kind of comparison, or example demonstratiue, the most just God (so
justly provoked) does declare, that the most brute and dull beasts did more
acknowledge their duty toward their masters (which notwithstanding pressed
them down with sore and heavy burdens) than did his people toward him, of
whom they had received benefits without comparison.

In like sort, the Lord in the eight chapter of the prophet Jeremy and the
sixth verse complains of the Jews that turned back by a perpetual rebellion,
and says.

I hearkened and heard, but none spoke aright, no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? every one turned to their race, as the
Horse rusheth into the battle.

Verse 7. Even the storke in the air knows her appointed times, and the
turtle and the crane and the swallow observe the time of their coming, but my
people knows not the judgment of the Lord.

He accuses the Jews, because they were more ignorant of the judgments of
their God, than were these birds of their appointed seasons to discern the
cold and heat. But a strange thing and a wonderful. They that should have been
like the Angels in heaven, that should have expressed, and that most lively,
the similitude and likeness of God, are not to be preferred to the brute
creatures of the earth. Israel the Lords people, Israel the Lords inheritance,
Israel the lot of his inheritance, Deu. 32.9. Israel the Lords servant, Esa.
44.21. Israel the Lords portion, Israel a thing hallowed to the lord, Ier. 2.3.
Israel the first fruits of the Lord, Israel the first offered to the Lord of
all other Nations, Israel the beloved of the Lord, Esa. 5.1. is rebellious, and
as an unruly heyfar; nay more than the storke and the turtle, than the crane
and the swallow: yea than the ox and the ass: for the one sort knows the
appointed times, and the other his owner, and his masters cribbe; but Israel
has not known, his people has not understand. The ox and ass are loved,
esteemed and praised, not as children, but as beasts: for beasts they are,
brute and dull. They are not preferred to any dignity or promotion, but laden
and pressed down with great and weighty burdens: and yet see, the ox knows
his owner, and the ass his masters cribbe; but Israel, unto whom pertained
the adoption, Romans 9.4. and the glory, and the covenants, and the giving of
the law, and the service of God, and the promises; of whom were the Fathers,
and of whom (concerning the flesh) Christ came, who is God over all, blessed
for ever: this Israel has not known, his people has not understand.

If it had been a strange people, another people, a bastard people, a people
unknown, a people none of his; it had not been so great a matter: but (says
the Lord) Populus meus, my people: a people proper and peculiar unto my self,
mine own people has not understand. Mine own people, which I have chosen of
old, precious in my sight and honorable in my eyes, Esa. 43.8. whom I have
tenderly cherished and brought up, not for their sakes but for mine holy
Names sake, Ezekiel. 36.22. whose fathers I led by the shadow of death, Ier. 2.6.
by a land that no man passed through, to a pleasant and plentiful country,
which I gave unto them and their posterity: even the glorious heritage of the
Armies of the heathen, Ier. 3.19. This my people has played this pranke; It
will not hear nor hearken, but rebel. As a woman rebelleth against her
husband, so has my people rebelled against me, Ier. 3.20. My people knows
nothing, it has not understand my righteousness, nor walked in the ways of
my commandments, nor entered into the paths of discipline, through my
righteousness. Therefore now the Lord sends Judah his chosen and Israel his
inheritance, to the brute and dull beasts of the earth, to the Ox and Ass to
learn of them knowledge, duty, gratitude, and obedience; which yet had the
law of God to teach them, but would not learn; and his Prophets to call them,
but would not come; and his watchmen to blow the trumpet in Zion, Ier. 6.17.
but they would not hear. Which unreasonable, brute and dull creatures of God,
as the Ox and Ass in this chapter of Esaias; and the Storke and the Turtle, and
the Crane, and the Swallowe in the eight of Jeremy, shall one day give
sentence not only against them, but also against us and our blindness, except
we amend; which having not the benefit of reason (but guided and governed
only by the instinct of nature) do that which we that have the law of God,
and teaching, and discipline, and understanding, and reason, and memory, to
conceive, judge and bear away, will not do.

We are therefore earnestly and heartely to pray and beseech the Lord our God
to banish far from us the sins of ingratitude and unkindness. For (beloved)
the only recompense which the Lord does require at our hands for his sundry
gifts and manifold blessings bestowed on us, is this: to be thankful unto
him for the same, to fear him, to walk in his ways, to love and to serve
him, with all the heart, and with all the soul, Deu. 10.12. This is the very
true and perfect way to make our selves thankful. This has been, is, and must
be the sacrifice of al true and perfect Christians, the sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and in all things to be thankful, and such is the will of God in
Christ Jesus toward us; which will of his we ought and are bound in all duty and
reverence to embrace and obey. For let us mortal men and worms meat, weigh
well and consider with our selves what God has done for us, as Cassiodus
notes upon the Psalms, and how great and good things he has given us for
sustentation, preservation, erudition, consolation and delight; and al these
and more than these in his free mercy without merit: and quid ni gratias
agamus? and what may we do but give him thanks? Thanksgiving is named of
Bernard (sermon 54 super cant.) Balsamum purissimum, the purest balm, and
sweetest savor in the nosthrills of our God. The Prophet Ose cap. 14. ver. 2.
calls it Vitulos labiorum nostrorum, the calves of our lips: which, by the
spirit of God Heb. 13. we are exhorted to offer always unto God; the
sacrifice of praise, the fruit the lips, which confess his name. Now then (as
Hugo exhorts) Si sentis beneficium, read debitum: si accipis benignitatem,
read charitatem. If thou feel a benefit, pay thy debt: if thou receive
liberality, deliver home charity. This we ought to do, and this we may do.
For (as S. Austine in ps. 27. says, Gratias agere Deo possumus, refer non
possumus, We can give thanks to God, but we cannot recompense him. If we
might die (says Chrysostom) a thousand deaths, and power out all the
faculties and powers of the soul, we can do nothing worthy of such and so
great benifence, favor and grace, which we have received of God; and therefore
it only remains that we be thankful. Let us not flatter our selves least we
deceive our selves: let us not (under the veyle of hypocrisy) ask with the
Jew Micah. 6.6. the manner and way to please the Lord? which was content to
offer sacrifice, but would not change the custom of his life. Let us not
contend with him, whether God will be worshipped with bare ceremonies, without
the heart? Let us not grieve the Lord with that Jewish motive: wherewith shall
I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Mic. 6.6, 7.
Shall I come before him with Calves of a year old? Will he be pleased with
thousands of rams, or with streams of oil? Thou fool, all these are his,
both of the forest, mountains, and field, Psalm. 50.10, 11, 12. If he be
hungry, he will not tell thee: for the world is his, and all that therein is.
Offer then unto God with David Psa. 116 17. the sacrifice of thanksgiving.
For who so offers him thanks and praise, he honors him, Psalm. 50.23.
Israel (to please God) would sacrifice the first borne for his transgression,
even the fruit of his body for the sin of his soul, Mich. 6.7. But the
Lords voice by his servant the prophet Micah, calls and cries better than
so, and shows thee (o man) what is good and what he requires of thee, verse.
and surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to humble thy self, and to
walk with thy God, in truth, and in a perfect heart, in duty and obedience
without hypocrisy: for the Lord has not as great pleasure in sacrifices, as
when his voice is obeyed, 1. Sam. 15.22. To obey with him is better than
sacrifice, and to hearken is better than the fat of rams. Rebellion (in his
sight) is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression is wickedness and
idolatry. Whereby we are taught, that the Lord hates nothing more than the
sins of ingratitude and disobedience; which in his own people he punished
diverse and sundry ways, that they might know and acknowledge the God that
had made them, and the mighty one of Israel that had redeemed them.

The Lord give us grace to amend the like faults by the correction and
punishment of them. Happy were we, if by their harms we could learn to
beware.

For (beloved) the workings of God, whether in blessing or afflicting, present
or past, to our selves or others particularly, well and carefully examined,
would learn us many a fruitful lesson, if we had the grace to consider
them. S. Paul feared the Corinthians (in his first Epistle written to them, the
tenth chapter and the sixth verse) with the examples of the Jews past long
before, that they should not use the like vices which they did, least they
should be destroyed as they were.

Now let us make those examples ours: for (as the same apostle says in the
eleventh verse of the forementioned chapter) they are written to admonish us
also, whom the ends of the world are more nighly come upon: that we lust not as
they lusted; that we be not idolaters, as were some of them; that we commit not
fornication, as some of them committed fornication; that we tempt not Christ,
as some of them tempted him; that we murmur not, as some of them murmured; and
to be short, that we rebel not, as some of them also rebelled, least following
the like impieties we incur the like punnishments; and (to our manifest and
just condemnation) cause and procure the heavens and earth, the hills and
mountains, the rocks and mighty foundations; yea, and the beasts of the land
and the fowls of the air (before mentioned) to testify against us and our
obstinacy.

As for the heavens and earth, they in great measure have already witnessed
Gods most heavy wrath and indignation against us, and that in regard of the
violating of his law, and contempt of his word. If these may not serve, yet
then greater tokens of his wrath than these, in his creatures about and under
us, shall appear toward us: and finalnally, (unless we repent) we shall perish
in his justice utterly, that in his mercy refused to embrace him and his truth
obediently. For if we regard not the bountifulnes and love of God our Savior
toward us; if we despise the riches of his goodness, patience and long
suffrance, Romans 2.4. if we contemn his word, the word of salvation; if the seed
thereof shall not fructify in our hearts; if the peace which we have with God,
engender impiety; if our civil peace breed nothing than beastly security; if
plenty work pride if with Israel, Number. 1^.6. we loathe Manna; if we fall a
lusting after flesh, and set a naught the food of angels; if we tempt God, as
weary of our profession; i^ we be waterlesse clouds, carried about of winds
Jude ver. 12. if we be corrupt trees without fruit; if we despise government,
and speak evil of them that are in authority, Jude 8. if we live as a people
caring neither for God, law nor religion; if we forsake Christ, and bid him
farewell; if we sit down and fall asleep in the seat of the scornful,
Psalm. 1.1. if with the deaf adder we stop our ears at the voice of the
charmer, Psa. 58 4.5. then shall all the blessings of God be turned into
curses: the message of life shall be unto us a savor of death unto death: our
vineyard shall be laid wast Esa. 5.5 6. the hedge thereof shall be eaten up, and
the wall broken and trodden down; it shall not be cut nor dug, but briers
and thorns shall grow up, and the clouds shall not rain upon it. Deutronom.
28.37. we shall be a wonder, a proverb, a common talk, a reproach, an
astonishment, an hissing, Ier. 24 9. a curse in all places, Jeremy the five
and twentieth, and the ninth and tenth verses: a just reward of our unkindness
and rebellion against the Lord, there shall be taken from us the voice of mirth,
and the voice of gladness: our laughter shall be turned into mourning, and our
joy into sorrow: our former wealth and pleasure shall but add a greater burden
unto our woe. Thus shall all the curses of God come upon us, and shall pursue
us, and overtake us, till we be consumed; and that because we would not obey
the voice of our God, to keep his commandments and his ordinances, which
he commanded us, Deuter, 28.45. For, would the Lord plague the City, where
his Name was called upon, Ierem. 25.29. and should we go free? But (o Lord
God, and Father of mercies) this be far from us and our posterity for ever.

And so (brethren) I will commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
Act. 20.32. which is able to build further, and to finish his work in you,
and to give you an inheritance among all them that are sanctified. And withal,
I give you that exhortation which Joshua gave to the Children of Israel, in the
three and twentieth chapter and eleventh verse, Take good heed unto your selves
that ye love the Lord your God. And in the seventh vearse, Join not your
selves to the Gentiles; company not with the Nations, which wander in and out
among you. I mean not Perizzites, but Papists; not Iebusites, but Jesuits:
for, as did the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.15. they compass sea and land,
to make one of their profession; and when he is made, they make him twofold
more the child of hell, than they themselves are. Wherefore (dear Brethren)
beware of them: for as Saint Paul warned the Galathians in the fourth chapter
and seventeenth verse, of the like sort of men) Depereunt vos non been, they
are jealous over you amiss, even to serve their own turn; they would exclude
you from the love that you bear to GOD and his truth, from the love that ye
bear to his Ministers, who preach not themselves, 2. Corinthians. 4.5. but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and themselves your servant for Jesus sake; to this end, that
ye should altogether love them and follow them.

But beloved, do not so. Stick fast unto the Lord your God, as ye have done
unto this day. Ios. 23.8. Ye know in all your hearts, and in all your souls
what and how great things the Lord has done for ye.

Now therefore fear the Lord, and serve him in vprightnes and in truth, and
away with those Gods, which your fathers served beyond the flood and in Egypt,
and serve ye the Lord, Ios. 24.14. Be not unequally yoked with the infidels. 2.
Cor. 6.14. the match is unequal. Come out from among them, verse. 17. and
separate your selves, and touch no unclean thing. The fruit will be this: You
shall eat your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in your City safely, Leuit.
26.5, 6. God will send peace in the land, and ye shall sleep, and none shall
make you afraid. He will cover you under his wings, Psalm. 91.4. and you shall
be safe under his feathers: his truth shall be your shield and buckler. You
shall not be afraid of the fear of the night, nor of the arrowe that flies by
day: for he shall give his Angels charge over you, verse. 11. to keep you in
all your ways. And this will the Lord do for you and much more, if you fear,
love, serve and obey him. For he will receive you, he will be a father unto
you, and you shall be his sons and daughters, 2. Corinthians. 6.17, 18. he will
dwell with you, and walk among ^ou; he will be your God, and you shall be ^^s
people, Leu. 26.12.

Finally (that I may conclude with the Prophet, with whom I began) if ye
consent and obey, ye shall eat the good things of the land, Esaie. 1.19.20.
But if ye refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be devoured with the sword; for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

This same our Lord and God, who alone pondereth, 2. Chron. 6.30. tries and
rules the hearts of the sons of men, Pro. 21.2. guide us and our hearts to the
love of him, 1 Thessalonians. 2.4. mollify and soften us, Act. 1.34. and them by the
gracious and mighty working of his holy and blessed spirit, 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. that
we may sensibly feel and perceive how good and loving a God and merciful
father he has been and is unto us, and that we may show our selves thankful
and obedient unto him, living unto his laws, and embracing his word, and
obeying his commandments? so doing, we shall be the Lords chief treasure
above all people; ^he will fight for us as he did for the Israelites his elect
and chosen children; he will carry us on Eagles wings as he did them,
throughout the dangers and troubles of this woeful Egypt, till we come to the
haven of perfect rest, to the land of the celestial Canaan, where we shall have
the fruition of endless joys 1. Cor. 2.6. which eye has not seen, neither e^re
has heard, neither have entered into the heart of man prepared of God for them
that love him. Of which joys God of his infinite mercy grant us all to be
partakers, through the merits and death of Jesus Christ his son, our Lord
and savior; to whom with the holy Ghost, triple in person, but one in
substance, be praise and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, honor, and power,
and might, for evermore, Apoc. 7.12.

Now let us pray.
O Lord, thou that live for ever, which beholdest from thy holy hill the
things that are done upon earth, hear and hearken we beseech thee, unto the
Prayers of thy servants, and receive into thine ears the petitions of thy
creatures. Look not (O Lord) upon the multitude of our iniquities, and have no
respect to the number of our sins: let it not be thy will to destroy us
which appear worse before thee than the Ox and Ass; for the Ox knows his
owner, and the Ass his Masters Cribbe: but we thy children (whom thou have
nourished and brought up as a most loving father) have not known: and we that
in time past were not a people, but now thine own people, have not
understand. We must acknowledge and confess unto thee our Lord and God, that
even the birds of the Air, as the Storke, and the Turtle, and the Crane, and
the Swallow do better know and observe the times of their coming, then we
the judgments of thee our God. Our misdeedes are great, and they press us
down as an heavy burden: Our iniquities are as the sand of the sea in number
before thee. Thou have (O Lord) many and just causes to do with us according
to our offenses, because we have not kept thy commandments, neither have
walked in duty and obedience before thee, but have rebelled as did thy people
the Jews. We have the sickness of our Fathers, we have done amiss, and
dealt wickedly. Notwithstanding (O Lord) we trust that thou will be favorable
and gracious unto us. In a contrite heart and an humble spirit let us be
received.

Deal with us thy servants which put their trust in thee, after thy loving
kindness, and according to the multitude of thy mercies: so shall thou be called
merciful, and we shall have great cause to praise and glorify thee, both for
this and all other thy former benefits: specially for that (as upon this day)
thou did deliver us and our City out of the hands of our wicked enemies
and hateful foes; which said, that they would burn our dwelling places, and
kill our young men with the sword, and dash our sucking children against the
ground, and make our infants as a pray, and our virgins a spoil: which also
said, we will divide the booty, our lust shall be satisfied upon them, and then
we will draw the weapon, and our hand shall destroy them. But thou the Lord of
Hoasts, which art great and glorious, marvelous and invincible in power, whose
voice no creature can abide, did soon bring them and their devises to
naught. Thy right hand was glorious in power; thy right arm bruised the enemy.
In thy great glory thou did overthrow them that rose against thee: thou
did send forth thy wrath, which consumed them as the stubble, and by the
blast of thy nostrels the waters came, which ran mightily through the channels
of our streets, and so drowned the labors of their hands. And so from that day
to this (as the Egle does her young ones) thou have carried us upon the wings
of thy mercy out of all dangers: for which and all other thy blessings (most
gracious and loving father) we shall from age to age remember thee and thy
goodness; this shall be a feast day unto us and our posterity; we that are now,
and they that are to come shall sing praises unto thee and exalt thy name. Thou
(O Lord) wast and art our strength and power, thou wast and art our salvation;
thou have been and art our refuge, our defense, our castle, and the rock of
our might: thou art our God; thou art the God of our fathers, we will magnify
thee. And here also we are bold to make our devout and hearty prayers unto
thee Lord almighty and father of us al, that thou (after thine accustomed
mercy) wilt vouchsafe continually to remember us, and from thy holy mount to
look down upon us. Keep us (Lord) as the apple of thine eye: grave us as
another Zion, upon the palm of thine hands, and let our walls be ever in
thy sight. When men shall rise up against us, and shall be wrathfully
displeased at us; if we turn to thee with all our hearts, and with all our
souls and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in
this house, hear thou then (O Lord) in heaven, in the dwelling place of thy
habitation, what prayer and supplication so ever shall be made of any man, or
of all thy people, and pardon the sin of thy servants and be merciful to
the transgressions of thy children; punish us not according to our deserts;
deliver us not whom thou have purchased, for a spoil unto captivity and death;
sell us not into the hands of our enemies round aabout us; give us not over for
a pray unto their teeth; make us not for a Proverb of reproach to the Nations
far and near, lest they ask, where is now their God? Let not the Heathen
say which have heard the fame of thee; because the Lord was not able to save
this people in the land that he gave them, or because he hated them, therefore
he has left them in the hands of spoilers to spoil them, and of the Nations
to reign as Lords over them. (Lord) we are thy people and thine inheritance,
which thou deliueredst of old by thy mighty power, and preseruedst by thy
stretched out arm, Let this greatness of thy power continue; withdraw not thy
accustomed favor from us; hide not thou thy face from us in the time of troble,
but be thou merciful unto us, according to thy great mercies: Let all the
earth be filled with the brightness of thy glory; let all such that bear
evil will at Zion, which seek to lay thy vineyard wast which thou so
graciously have planted and fortified on every part, and to bring thine
heritage to confusion, be confounded by thy great force and power, and let
their strength be broken, that they may know that thou, which art called
Jehovah, art alone, even the most High over all the earth. Finally, (O Lord)
carry us thy people by thy great mercy, whom thou deliueredst; bring us (we
beseech thee) in thy strength unto thy holy habitation; plant us in the
mountain of thine inheritance, which is the place that thou have prepared for
to dwell in, even in the Sanctuary (O Lord) which thine hands shall
stablish; make us joyful Citizens of thy holy City Jerusalem, which is
above; go before us both by day and by night in the pillar of thy favor and
goodness to lead us the way, that we may safely pass through this vale of
misery and wretchedness, and finish this our pilgrimage with joy: And lastly,
that (through the aid and assistance of our true Joshua, thy son Jesus Christ)
we thy children having passed all difficulties, may rest and dwell with thee
our father in the Kingdom of all happiness and felicity: Even so Lord Jesus.

Nomb. 6.24. The Lord bless you, and keep you; the Lord make his face to shine
upon you, and be merciful unto you; the Lord lift up his countenance upon you,
and give you peace to your City and your selves now and ever, Amen.
Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

