Bussy D'Ambois: A TRAGEDY: As it has been often presented at Paul's.

LONDON, Printed for William Aspley. 1607.

Bussy D'Ambois: A TRAGEDY.
Actus primi Scena prima.
Bussy solus. FOrtune, not Reason, rules the state of things,
Reward goes backwards, Honor on his head;
Who is not poor, is monstrous; only Need
Gives form and worth to every humane seed.
As Cedars beaten with incessant storms,
So great men flourish; and do imitate
Unskillful statuaries, who suppose
(In forging a Colossus) if they make him
Stroddle enough, stroote, and look big, and gape,
Their work is goodly: so our Tympanouse statists
(In their affected gravity of voice,
Sowernesse of countenance, manners cruelty,
Authority, wealth, and all the spawne of Fortune)
Think they bear all the kingdoms worth before them;
Yet differ not from those Colossicke Statues,
Which with Heroique forms, without o'respread,
Within are naught but mortar, flint and lead.
Man is a Torch borne in the wind; a Dream
But of a shadow, summed with all his substance;
And as great Seamen using all their powers
And skils in Neptunes deep invisible paths,
In tall ships richly built and ribd with brass,
To put a Girdle round about the world,
When they have done it (coming near their Haven)
Are glad to give a warning piece, and call
A poor staid fisherman, that never past
His Contries sight, to waft and guide them in:
So when we wander furthest through the waves
Of Glassie Glory and the Gulfes of State,
Topt with all Titles, spreading all our reaches,
As if each private Arm would sphere the world;
We must to virtue for her guide resort,
Or we shall shipwreck in our safest Port. Procumbit.

Monsieur with two Pages. There is no second place in Numerous State
That holds more than a Cipher: In a King
All places are contained. His words and looks
Are like the flashes and the bolts of Jove,
His deeds inimitable, like the Sea
That shuts still as it opes, and leaves no tracts,
Nor prints of President for poor men's facts:
There Is but a Thread betwixt me and a Croune;
I would not wish it cut, unless by nature;
Yet to prepare me for that likely Fortune,
It Is fit I get resolved spirits about me.
I followd D'Ambois to this green Retreat;
A man of spirit beyond the reach of fear,
Who (discontent with his neglected worth)
Neglects the light, and loves obscure Abodes;
But he is young and haughty, apt to take
Fire at advancement, to bear state and flourish;
In his Rise therefore shall my bounties shine:
None lothes the world so much, nor loves to scoff it,
But gold and grace will make him surfeit of it.
What, D'Ambois?

Buss. He sir.

Mons. Turned to Earth, alive?
Up man, the Sun shines on thee.

Buss. Let it shine.
I am no mote to play in it, as great men are.

Mons. Think thou men great in state, motes in the sun?
They say so that would have thee freeze in shades,
That (like the gross Sicilian Gurmundist)
Empty their Noses in the Cates they love,
That none may eat but they. Do thou but bring
Light to the Banquet Fortune sets before thee,
And thou will loath lean Darkness like thy Death.
Who would believe thy Metal could let sloth
Rust and consume it? If Themistocles
Had lived obscured thus in th'Athenian state,
Xerxes had made both him and it his slaves.
If brave Camillus had lurckt so in Rome,
He had not five times been dictator there,
Nor four times triumphed. If Epaminondas
(Who lived twice twenty years obscured in Thebs)
Had lived so still, he had been still unnamed,
And paid his Country nor himself their right:
But putting forth his strength, he rescude both
From imminent ruin; and like Burnisht Steel,
After long use he shined; for as the light
Not only serves to show, but render us
Mutually profitable; so our lives
In acts exemplarie, not only win
Our selves good Names, but does to others give
Matter for virtuous Deeds, by which we live.

Buss. What would you wish me do?

Mons. Leave the troubled streams,
And live as Thriuers do at the Well head.

Buss. At the Well head? Alas what should I do
With that enchanted Glass? See devils there?
Or (like a strumpet) learn to set my looks
In an eternal Brake, or practice iuggling,
To keep my face still fast, my heart still loose;
Or bear (like Dames Schoolemistresses their Riddles)
Two Tongues, and be good only for a shift;
Flatter great Lords, to put them still in mind
Why they were made Lords: or please portly Ladies
With a good carriage, tell them idle Tales,
To make their Physic work; spend a man's life
In sights and visitations, that will make
His eyes as hollow as his Mistress heart:
To do none good, but those that have no need;
To gain being forward, though you break for haste
All the Commandments ere you break your fast?
But Believe backewards, make your Period
And Creedes last Article; I believe in God:
And (hearing villainies preached) to unfold their Art
Learn to commit them, It Is a great man's Part.
Shall I learn this there?

Mons. No, thou needst not learn,
Thou have the Theorie, now go there and practice.

Buss. I, in a thridbare suit; when men come there,
They must have high Naps, and go from thence bare:
A man may drown the parts often rich men
In one poor suit; Brave Barks, and outward Gloss
Attract Court eyes, be in parts never so gross.

Mons. Thou shall have Gloss enough, and all things fit
T'enchase in all show, thy long smothered spirit:
Be ruled by me then. The rude Scythians
Painted blind Fortunes powerful hands with wings,
To show her gifts come swift and suddenly,
Which if her Favorite be not swift to take,
He loses them forever. Then be ruled: Exit Mons. Manet Buss.
Stay but a while here, and I Will send to thee.

Buss. What will he send? some Crounes? It is to sow them
Upon my spirit, and make them spring a Croune
Worth Millions of the feed Crounes he will send:
But he is no husband here; A smooth plain ground
Will never nourish any politic seed;
I am for honest Actions, not for great:
If I may bring up a new fashion,
And rise in Court with virtue; speed his plow:
The King has known me long as well as he,
Yet could my Fortune never fit the length
Of both their understandings till this hour.
There is a deep nicke in times restless wheel
For each man's good, when which nicke comes it strikes;
As Rhetoric, yet works not persuasion,
But only is a mean to make it work:
So no man rises by his real merit,
But when it cries Clincke in his Raisers spirit:
Many will say, that cannot rise at all,
Man's first hours rise, is first step to his fall.
I Will venture that; men that fall low must die,
As well as men cast headlong from the sky.
Ent. Maffe. Humor of Princes. Is this man indu'd
With any merit worth a thousand Crounes?
Will my Lord have me be so ill a Steward
Of his Revenue, to dispose a sum
So great with so small cause as shows in him?
I must examine this: Is your name D'Ambois?

Buss. Sir.

Maff. Is your name D'Ambois?

Buss. Who have we here?
Serve you the Monsieur?

Maff. How?

Buss. Serve you the Monsieur?

Maff. Sir, you are very hot. I serve the Monsieur;
But in such place as gives me the Command
Of all his other servants: And because
His Graces pleasure is, to give your good
A Pass through my Command; Methinks you might
Use me with more good fashion.

Buss. Cry you mercy.
Now you have opened my dull eyes, I see you;
And would be glad to see the good you speak of:
What might I call your name?

Maff. Monsieur Maffe.

Buss. Monsieur Maffe? Then good Monsieur Maffe,
Pray let me know you better.

Maff. Pray do so,
That you may use me better, For your self,
By your no better outside, I would judge you
To be a Poet; Have you given my Lord
Some Pamphlet?

Buss. Pamphlet?

Maff. Pamphlet sir, I say.

Buss. Did his wise excellency leave the good
That is to pass your charge, to my poor use,
To your discretion?

Maff. Though he did not sir,
I hope it is no bad office to ask reason,
How that his grace gives me in charge, goes from me?

Buss. That Is very perfect sir.

Maff. Why very good sir;
I pray then give me leave: If for no Pamphlet,
May I not know what other merit in you,
Makes his compunction willing to relieve you?

Buss. No merit in the world sir.

Maff. That is strange.
You Are a poor soldier, are you?

Buss. That I am sir.

Maff. And have Commanded?

Buss. I, and gone without sir.

Maff. I see the man: A hundred Crounes will make him
Swagger, and drink healths to his highness bounty;
And swear he could not be more bountiful.
So there is nine hundred Crounes, saft; here tall soldier,
His grace has sent you a whole hundred Crounes.

Buss. A hundred sire naie do his Highness right;
I know his hand is larger, and perhaps
I may deserve more than my outside shows:
I am a scholar, as I am a soldier,
And I can Poetise; and (being well encouraged)
May sing his Fame for giving; yours for delivering
(Like a most faithful Steward) what he gives.

Maff. What shall your subject be?

Buss. I care not much,
If to his excellence I sing the praise
Of fair great Noses, And to your Deserts
The reverend virtues of a faithful Steward;
What Qualities have you sir (beside your chain
And velvet Iacket) Can your worship dance?

Maff. A merry Fellow faith: It seems my Lord
Will have him for his Iester; And believe it,
Such men are now no fools, It Is a Knights place:
If I (to save my Lord some Crounes) should urge him
T'abate his Bounty, I should not be heard;
I would to heaven I were an errant Ass,
For then I should be sure to have the Ears
Of these great men, where now their Iesters have them:
It Is good to please him, yet I Will take no notice
Of his preferment, but in policy
Will still be grave and serious, lest he think
I fear his wodden dagger: Here sir Ambo,
A thousand Crounes I bring you from my Lord;
Serve God, play the good husband, you may make
This a good standing living, It Is a Bounty,
His Highness might perhaps have bestowed better.

D'Amb. Go, you are a Rascal; hence, Away you Rogue.

Maff. What mean you sir?

D'Amb. Hence; prate no more;
Or by thy villans blood thou prat'st thy last:
A Barbarous Groom, grudge at his masters Bounty:
But since I know he would as much abhor
His hind should argue what he gives his friend,
Take that Sir, for your aptness to dispute. Exit.

Maff. These Crounes are sown in blood, blood be their fruit.

Exit. Henry, Guise, Montsurry, Elenor, Tamyra, Beaupre, Pero, Charlotte, Pyr,
Annable. Henr. Duchess of Guise, your Grace is much enricht,
In the attendance of this English virgin,
That will initiate her Prime of youth,
(Disposed to Court conditions) under hand
Of your preferred instructions and Command,
Rather than any in the English Court,
Whose Ladies are not matched in Christendom,
For graceful and confirmed behauiours;
More than the Court, where they are bred is equaled.

Guis. I like not their Court form, it is too crestfalne,
In all observance; making Semi-gods
Of their great Nobles; and of their old Queen
An euer-yoong, and most immortal Goddess.

Henr. Assure you Cosen Guise, so great a Courtier,
So full of majesty and Royal parts,
No Queen in Christendom may boast her self,
Her Court approoues it, That's a Court indeed;
Not mixed with Rudeness used in common houses;
But, as Courts should be th'abstracts of their kingdoms,
In all the Beauty, State, and Worth they hold;
So is hers, amply, and by her informed.
The world is not contracted in a man,
With more proportion and expression
Than in her Court, her Kingdom: Our French Court
Is a mere mirror of confusion to it:
The King and subject, Lord and every slave
Dance a continual Haie; Our Rooms of State,
Kept like our stables; No place more observed
Than a rude Market place: And though our Custom
Keep this assured deformity from our sight,
It Is nere the less essentiallie vnsightlie,
Which they would soon see, would they change their form
To this of ours, and then compare them both;
Which we must not affect, because in Kingdoms,
Where the Kings change does breed the Subjects terror,
Pure Innovation is more gross than error.

Mont. No Question we shall see them imitate
(Though a far off) the fashions of our Courts,
As they have ever Ap't us in attire;
Never were men so weary of their Skins,
And apt to leap out of themselves as they;
Who when they travel to bring forth rare men,
Come home delivered of a fine French suit:
Their Brains lie with their Tailors, and get babies
For their most complete issue; He Is first borne
To all the moral virtues, that first greetes
The light with a new fashion, which becomes them
Like Apes, disfigured with the attires of men.

Henr. No Question they much wrong their real worth,
In affectation of outlandish Scumme;
But they have faults, and we; They foolish-proud,
To be the Pictures of our vanity;
We proud, that they are proud of foolerie.

Enter Monsieur, D'Ambois. Mons. Come mine own sweet heart I will enter thee.
Sir, I have brought this Gentleman to attend you;
And pray, you would vouchsafe to do him grace.

Henr. D'Ambois, I think.

D'Amb. That's still my name, my Lord, though I be something altered in attire.

Henr. I like your alteration, and must tell you,
I have expected th'offer of your service;
For we (in fear to make mild virtue proud)
Use not to seek her out in any man.

D'Amb. Nor does she use to seek out any man:
He that will win, must woo her; she is not shameless.

Mons. I urged her modesty in him, my Lord, and gave her those Rites, that he
says she merits.


Henr. If you have wooed and won, then Brother wear him.

Mons. Thou Art mine, my love; See here is the Guises Duches. The Countess of
Mountsurreaue; Beaupres, come I Will enseame thee; Ladies, you are too many to be
in Counsel: I have here a friend, that I would gladly enter in your Graces.


Duch. If you enter him in our Graces, me thinks by his blunt behavior, he
should come out of himself.


Tam. Has he never been Courtier, my Lord?


Mons. Never, my Lady.


Beaup. And why did the Toy take him in the head now?


D'Amb. It Is leap year, Lady, and therefore very good to enter a Courtier.


Tam. The man's a Courtier at first sight.


D'Amb. I can sing prickesong, Lady, at first sight; and why not be a Courtier
as suddenly?


Beaup. Here Is a Courtier rotten before he be ripe.


D'Amb. Think me not impudent, Lady, I am yet no Courtier, I desire to be
one, and would gladly take entrance (Madam) under your Princely Colors.


Gui. Sir, know you me?


D'Amb. My Lord?


Gui. I know not you: Whom do you serve?


D'Amb. Serve, my Lord?


Gui. Go to Companion; Your Courtship's too saucie.


D'Amb. Saucie? Companion? It Is the Guise, but yet those terms might have been
spared of the Guiserd.

Companion? He Is jealous by this light: are you blind of that side Sir? I Will
to her again for that. Forth Madam, for the honor of Courtship.


Gui. Cease your Courtshippe, or by heaven I Will cut your throat.


D'Amb. Cut my throat? cut a whetstone; good Accius Noeuius, do as much with
your tongue as he did with a Rasor; cut my throat?


Gui. I Will do it by this hand.


D'Amb. That hand dares not do it; you have cut too many
Throats already Guise; and Robbed the Realm of
Many thousand Souls, more precious than thine own.
Come Madam, talk on; Sfoote, can you not talk?
Talk on I say, more Courtship, as you love it.

Enter Barrisor, L' Anou, Pyrlot. Bar. What new-come Gallant have we here,
that dares mate the Guise thus?


L' An. Sfoote it is D'Ambois; The Duke mistakes him (on my life) for some Knight
of the new edition.


D'Amb. Cut my throat? I would the King feared thy cutting of his throat no
more than I fear thy cutting of mine.


Gui. So Sir, so.


Pyr. Here Is some strange distemper.


Bar. Here Is a sudden transmigration with D'Ambois, out of the Knights ward,
into the Duches bed.


L'An. See what a Metamorphosis a brave suit can work.


Pyr. Slight step to the Guise and discover him.


Bar. By no means, let the new suit work, we will see the issue.


Gui. Leave your Courtship.


D'Amb. I will not. I say mistress, and I will stand unto it, that if a woman
may have three servants, a man may have threescore mistresses.


Gui. Sirrah, I Will have you whipped out of the Court for this insolence.


D'Amb. Whipped? Such another syllable out a the presence, if thou dare for thy
Dukedom.


Gui. Remember, Poultron.


Mons. Pray thee forbear.


Buss. Passion of death! Were not the King here, he should strew the Chamber
like a rush.


Mons. But leave Courting his wife then.


Buss. I will not: I Will Court her in despite of him* Not Court her! Come Madam,
talk on; Fear me nothing: Well may thou drive thy master from the Court;
but never D'Ambois.


Mons. His great heart will not down, it is like the Sea
That partly by his own internal heat,
Partly the starr's daily and nightly motion,
Ardor and light, and partly of the place,
The diverse frames; And chiefly by the Moon,
Bristled with surges, never will be won,
(No, not when th'hearts of all those powers are burst)
To make retreat into his settled home,
Till he be croun'd with his own quiet foam.

Henr. You have the mate. Another.

Gui. No more.

Exit Guise, after him the King, Mons. whispering. Bar. Why here is the Lion,
skard with the throat of a dunghill Cock; a fellow that has newly shak'd off
his shackles; Now does he crow for that victory.


L' An. It Is one of the best Iigges that ever was acted.


Pry. Whom does the Guise suppose him to be troe?


L' An. Out of doubt, some new denizond Lord; and thinks that suit come new out
a the Mercers books.


Bar. I have heard of a fellow, that by a fixed imagination looking upon a
Bulbaiting, had a visible pair of horns grew out of his forhead: and I
believe this Gallant ouerioied with the conceit of Monsieurs cast suit,
imagines himself to be the Monsieur.


L' An And why not? as well as the Ass, stalking in the Lions case, bear
himself like a Lion, roaring all the huger beasts out of the Forest?


Pry. Peace, he looks this way.


Bar. Marry let him look sir, what will you say now if the Guise be gone to
fetch a blanquet for him?


L' An. Faith I believe it for his honor.


Pyr. But, if D'Ambois carry it clean?


Bar. True, when he curuets in the blanquet.


Pyr. I marie sir.


L' An. Sfoote, see how he stares on's.


Bar. Lord bless us, let us away.


Buss. Now sir, take your full view: how does the Object please ye?


Bar. If you ask my opinion sir, I think your suit sits as well as if it had
been made for you.


Buss. So sir, and was that the subject of your ridiculous ioilitie?


L' An. What Is that to you sir?


Buss. Sir, I have observed all your fleerings; and resolve your selves ye
shall give a strickt account for it.


Enter Brisac Melynell. Pyr. O strange credulity! Do you think your self
Such a singular subject for laughter, that none can fall into Our meriment but
you?


Bar. This jealousy of yours sir, confesses some close defect in your self,
that we never dreamed of.


L An. We held discourse of a perfumed Ass, that being disguised with a Lions
case, imagined himself a Lion: I hope that touched not you.


Buss. So sir: Your descants do marvelous well fit this ground, we shall
meet where your Buffonly laughters will cost ye the best blood in your bodies.


Bar. For life's sake let us be gone; he will kill's outright.


Buss. Go at your pleasures, I Will be your Ghost to haunt you, and ye sleep
an't, hang me.


L' An. Go, go sir, Court your mistress.


Pyr. And be advised: we shall have odds against you.


Buss. Tush, valor stands not in number: I Will maintain it, that one man may
beat three boys.


Bris. Nay you shall have no ods of him in number sir: he is a gentleman as
good as the proudest of you, and ye shall not wrong him.


Bar. Not sir.


Mely. Not sir: Though he be not so rich, he is a better man than the best of
you; And I will not endure it.


L' An. Not you sir?


Bris. No sir, nor I.


Buss. I should thank you for this kindness, if I thought these perfumed
muske-Cats (being out of this privilege) durst but once mew at us.


Bar. Does your confident spirit doubt that sir? Come follow us and try.


L'An. Come sir, we will lead you a dance. Exeunt.


Finis Actus primi.
Actus secundi Scena prima.
Henry, Guise, Beaumond, Nuncius. Henr. THis desperate quarrel sprung out of
their enuies
To D'Ambois sudden bravery, and great spirit.

Gui. Neither is worth their envy.

Henr. Less then either
Will make the Gall of Envy ouerflow;
She feeds on outcast entrails like a Kite:
In which foul heap, if any ill lies hid,
She sticks her beak into it, shakes it up,
And hurl's it all abroad, that all may view it.
Corruption is her Nutriment; but touch her
With any precious ointment, and you kill her:
When she finds any filth in men, she feasts,
And with her black throat bruits it through the world;
(Being sound and healthful) But if she but taste
The slenderest pittance of commended virtue,
She surfets of it, and is like a fly,
That passes all the bodies so undest parts,
And dwells upon the sores; or if her squint eye
Have power to find none there, she forges some:
She makes that crooked ever which is strait;
Call's valor giddiness, Justice Tyranny:
A wise man may shun her, she not her self;
Whither soever she flies from her Harms,
She bears her Foe still claspt in her own Arms:
And therefore cosen Guise let us avoid her.
Enter Nuncius. What Atlas, or Olympus lifts his head
So far past Covert, that with air enough
My words may be informed? And from his height
I may be seen, and heard through all the world?
A tale so worthy, and so fraught with wonder,
Sticks in my jaws, and labors with event.

Henr. Come thou from D'Ambois?

Nun. From him, and the rest
His friends and enemies; whose stern fight I saw,
And heard their words before, and in the fray.

Henr. Relate at large what thou have seen and heard.

Nun. I saw fierce D'Ambois, and his two brave friends
Enter the Field, and at their heels their foes;
Which were the famous soldiers; Barrisor,
L'Anou, and Pyrrhot, great in deeds of Arms:
All which arrived at the euenest piece of earth
The field affoorded; The three Challengers
Turned head, drew all their rapiers, and stood ranckt:
When face to face the three Defendants met them,
Alike prepared, and resolute alike,
Like bonfires of Contributorie wood:
Every man's look showed, Fed with eithers spirit,
As one had been a mirror to another,
Like forms of life and death, each took from other;
And so were life and death mixed at their heights,
That you could see no fear of death, for life;
Nor love of life, for death: But in their brows
Pyrrho's Opinion in great letters shone;
That life and death in all respects are one.

Henr. Past there no sort of words at their encounter?

Nun. As Hector, twixt the Hosts of Greece and Troy*
(When Paris and the Spartane King should end
The nine years war) held up his brazen lance
For signal, that both Hosts should cease from Arms,
And hear him speak: So Barrisor (advised)
Advanced his Naked Rapier twixt both sides,
Ripped up the Quarrel, and compared six lives;
Then laid in balance with six idle words,
Offered remission and contrition too;
Or else that he and D'Ambois might conclude
The others dangers. D'Ambois liked the last;
But Barrisors friends (being equally engaged
In the maine Quarrel) never would expose
His life alone, to that they all deserved.
And (for the other offer of remission)
D'Ambois (that like a Laurel put in fire,
Sparkl'd and spit) did much much more than scorn,
That his wrong should incense him so like chafe,
To go so soon out; and like lighted paper,
Approve his spirit at once both fire and ashes:
So drew they lots, and in them Fates appointed,
That Barrisor should fight with fiery D'Ambois;
Pyrhot with Melynell; with Brisac L'Anou:
And then like flame and Powder they commixt,
So spritely, that I wished they had been spirits,
That the never shutting wounds, they needs must open,
Might as they opened, shut, and never kill:
But D'Ambois sword (that lightened as it flew)
Shot like a pointed Comet at the face
Of manly Barrisor; and there it stuck:
Thrice plucked he at it, and thrice drew on thrusts,
From him, that of himself was free as fire;
Who thrust still as he plucked, yet (past belief!)
He with his subtle eye, hand, body, escaped;
At last the deadly bitten point tuggd'd off,
On fell his yet undaunted Foe so fiercely,
That (only made more horrid with his wound)
Great D'Ambois shrunk, and gave a little ground;
But soon returned, redoubled in his danger,
And at the heart of Barrisor sealed his anger:
Then, as in Arden I have seen an Oak
Long shook with tempests, and his lofty top
Bent to his root, which being at length made loose
(Even groaning with his weight) he began to Nodde
This way and that: as loath his curled Brows
(Which he had often wrapped in the sky with storms)
Should stoop: and yet, his radical fiuers burst,
Storme-like he fell, and hid the feare-cold Earth.
So fell stout Barrisor, that had stood the shockes
Often set Battles in your Highness war,
Against the sole soldier of the world, Navarre.

Gui. O pitious and horrid murder!

Beau. Such a life
Me thinks had metal in it to survive
An age of men.

Henr. Such, often soonest end.
Thy felt report calls on, we long to know
On what events the other have arrived.

Nun. Sorrow and fury, like two opposite fumes,
Met in the upper Region of a Cloud,
At the report made by this worthies fall,
Brake from the earth, and with them rose Revenge,
Entering with fresh powers his two noble friends;
And under that ods fell surcharged Brisac,
The friend of D'Ambois, before fierce L'Anou;
Which D'Ambois seeing, as I once did see
In my young travels through Armenia,
An angry Unicorn in his full carier
Charge with too quick an eye a Ieweller,
That watched him for the Treasure of his browe;
And ere he could get shelter of a tree,
Nail him with his rich Antler to the Earth:
So D'Ambois ran upon revenged L'Anou,
Who eying th'eager point borne in his face,
And giving back, fell back, and in his fall
His foes vncurbed sword stopped in his heart:
By which time all the life strings of the tw'other
Were cut, and both fell as their spirits flew
Upwards: and still hunt Honor at the view.
And now (of all the six) sole D'Ambois stood
Untouched, save only with the others blood.

Henr. All slain outright?

Nun. All slain outright but he,
Who kneeling in the warm life of his friends,
(All feebled with the blood, his Rapier raind)
He kissed their pale cheeks, and bade both farewell;
And see the brauest man the French earth bears.

Enter Monsieur, D'Amb. bare. Buss. Now is the time, you are Princely vowed my
friend,
Perform it Princely, and obtain my pardon.

Mons. Else Heaven, forgive not me: Come on brave friend.
If ever Nature held herself her own,
When the great Trial of a King and subject
Met in one blood, both from one belly springing:
Now prove her virtue and her greatness One,
Or make the the one the greater with the the other,
(As true Kings should) and for your brothers love,
(Which is a special species of true virtue)
Do that you could not do, not being a King.

Henr. Brother I know your suit; these wilful murders
Are ever past our pardon.

Mons. Manly slaughter
Should never bear th account of wilful murder;
It being a spice of justice, where with life
Offending past law, equal life is laid
In equal balance, to scourge that offense
By law of reputation, which to men
Exceedes all positive law, and what that leaves
To true men's valors (not prefixing rights
Of satisfaction, suited to their wrongs)
A free man's eminence may supply and take.

Henr. This would make every man that thinks him wronged,
Or is offended, or in wrong or right,
Lay on this violence, and all vaunt themselves,
Law-menders and suppliers though mere Butchers;
Should this fact (though of justice) be forgiven?

Mons. O no, my Lord; it would make Cowards fear
To touch the reputations of full men,
When only they are left to impe the law,
Justice will soon distinguish murtherous minds
From just reuengers: Had my friend been slain,
(His enemy suruiuing) he should die,
Since he had added to a murdered fame
(Which was in his intent) a murdered man;
And this had worthily been wilful murder:
But my friend only saved his fames dear life,
Which is above life, taking th'vnder value,
Which in the wrong it did, was forfeit to him;
And in this fact only preserues a man
In his uprightness; worthy to survive
Millions of such as murder men, alive.

Henr. Well brother, rise, and raise your friend withal
From death to life: and D'Ambois, let your life
(Refined by passing through this merited death)
Be purged from more such foul pollution;
Nor on your escape, nor valor more presuming,
To be again so violent.

Buss. My Lord,
I loath as much a deed of unjust death,
As law it self does; and to Tyrannise,
Because I have a little spirit to date,
And power to do, as to be Tyrannized;
This is a grace that (on my knees redoubled)
I crave to double this my short life's gift;
And shall your royal bounty Centuple,
That I may so make good what God and nature
Have given me for my good: since I am free,
(Offending no just law) let no law make
By any wrong it does, my life her slave:
When I am wronged and that law fails to right me,
Let me be King my self (as man was made)
And do a justice that exceedes the law:
If my wrong pass the power of single valor
To right and expiate; then be you my King,
And do a Right, exceeding Law and Nature:
Who to himself is law, no law does need,
Offends no King, and is a King indeed.

Henr. Enjoy what thou intreat'st, we give but ours.

Buss. What you have given, my Lord, is ever yours. Exit Rex cum Beau.

Gui. Mort dieu, who would have pardoned such a murder?

Mons. Now vanish horrors into Court attractions, Exit.
For which let this balm make thee fresh and fair.

Buss. How shall I quite your love?

Mons. Be true to the end:
I have obtained a Kingdom with my friend. Exit,

Montsur. Tamyra, Beaupre, Pero, Charlotte, Pyrha. Mont. He will have pardon
sure.

Tam. Twere pity else:
For though his great spirit something ouerflow,
All faults are still borne, that from greatness grow:
But such a sudden Courtier saw I never.

Beau. He was too sudden, which indeed was rudeness.

Tam. True, for it argued his no due conceit
Both of the place, and greatness of the persons:
Nor of our sex: all which (we all being strangers
To his encounter) should have made more manners
Deserve more welcome.

Mont. All this fault is found
Because he loved the Duchess and left you.

Tam. Ahlas, love give her joy; I am so far
From Envy of her honor, that I swear,
Had he encounterd me with such proud slight:
I would have put that project face of his
To a more test, than did her Dutchesship.

Be. Why (by your leave my Lord) I Will speak it here,
(Although she be my ante) she scarce was modest,
When she perceived the Duke her husband take
Those late exceptions to her servants Courtship
To entertain him.

Tam. I, and stand him still.
Letting her husband give her servant place:
Though he did manly, she should be a woman.
Enter Guise. D'Ambois is pardond: where is a king? where law?
See how it runs, much like a turbulent sea;
Here high, and glorious, as it did contend
To wash the heavens, and make the stars more pure:
And here so low, it leaves the mud of hell
To every common view: come count Montsurry
We must consult of this.

Tam. Stay not, sweet Lord.

Mont. Be pleased, I Will strait return. Exit cum Guise.

Tamy. Would that would please me.

Beau. I Will leave you Madam to your passions.
I see, there is change of weather in your looks. Exit cum suis.

Tamy. I cannot cloak it: but; as when a fume,
Hot, dry and gross: within the womb of earth
Or in her superficies begot:
When extreme cold has stroke it to her heart,
The more it is comprest, the more it rages;
Exceeds his prisons strength that should contain it,
And then it tosseth Temples in the air;
All bars made engines, to his insolent fury:
So, of a sudden, my licentious fancy
Riots within me: not my name and house
Nor my religion to this hour observed
Can stand above it: I must utter that
That will in parting break more strings in me,
Than death when life parts: and that holy man
That, from my cradle, counseld for my soul:
I now must make an agent for my blood.

Enter Monsieur. Mons. Yet, is my Mistress gracious?

Tamy. Yet unanswered?

Mons. Pray thee regard thine own good, if not mine,
And cheer my Love for that; you do not know
What you may be by me, nor what without me;
I may have power t'aduance and pull down any.

Tamy. That's not my study: one way I am sure
You shall not pull down me: my husbands height
Is crown to all my hopes: and his retiring
To any mean state, shall be my aspiring:
Mine honor's in mine own hands, spite of kings.

Mons. Honor, what is that? your second maidenhead:
And what is that? a word: the word is gone
The thing remains: the rose is plucked, the stalk
Abides: an easy loss where no lack's found:
Believe it there is as small lack in the loss,
As there is pain ith losing: archers ever
Have two strings to a bow: and shall great Cupid
(Archer of archers both in men and women)
Be worse provided than a common archer?
A husband and a friend all wise wives have.

Tamy. Wise wives they are that on such strings depend,
With a firm husband, weighing a dissolute friend.

Mons. Still you stand on your husband, so do all
The common sex of you, when yare encounterd
With one ye cannot fancy: all men know
You live in court here by your own election,
Frequenting all our solemn sports and triumphs,
All the most youthful company of men:
And wherefore do you this? To please your husband*
It Is gross and fulsome: if your husbands pleasure
Be all your Object, and you aim at Honor,
In living close to him, get you from Court,
You may have him at home; these common Puttofs
For common women serve: my honor? husband?
Dames maritorious, never were meritorious:
Speak plain and say I do not like you Sir,
You Are an illfauor'd fellow in my eye,
And I am answered.

Tamy. Then I pray be answered:
For in good faith my Lord I do not like you
In that sort you like.

Mons. Then have at you here:
Take (with a politic hand) this rope of Pearl;
And though you be not amorous: yet be wise:
Take me for wisdom; he that you can love
Is near the further from you.

Tamy. Now it comes
So ill prepared, that I may take a poison,
Under a medicine as good cheap as it:
I will not have it were it worth the world.

Mons. Horror of death: could I but please your eye,
You would give me the like, ere you would loose me:
Honor and husband?

Tamy. By this light my Lord
You Are a vile fellow: and I Will tell the King
Your occupation of dishonouring Ladies
And of his Court: a Lady cannot live
As she was borne; and with that sort of pleasure
That fits her state: but she must be defamed
With an infamous Lords detraction:
Who would endure the Court if these attempts,
Of open and professed lust must be borne?
Whose there? come on Dame, your are at your book
When men are at your mistress; have I taught you
Any such waiting woman's quality?

Mons. Farewell good husband. Exit Mons.

Mont. Farewell wicked Lord.

Enter Mont. Mont. Was not the Monsieur here?

Tam. Yes, to good purpose.
And your cause is as good to seek him too
And haunt his company.

Mont. Why what is the matter?

Tam. Matter of death, were I some husbands wife:
I cannot live at quiet in my chamber
For opportunities almost to rapes
Offered me by him.

Mont. Pray thee bear with him:
Thou know he is a Bachelor, and a Courtier,
I, and a Prince: and their prerogatives
Are, to their laws, as to their pardons are
Their reseruations, after Parliaments
One quits another: form gives al their essence:
That Prince does high in virtues reckoning stand
That will entreat a vice, and not command:
So far bear with him: should another man
Trust to his privilege, he should trust to death:
Take comfort then (my comfort) nay triumph,
And crown thy self, thou part'st with victory:
My presence is so only dear to thee,
That other men's appear worse than they be.
For this night yet, bear with my forced absence:
Thou know my business; and with how much weight,
My vow has charged it.

Tam. True my Lord, and never
My fruitless love shall let your serious profit,
Yet, sweet Lord, do no stay, you know my soul
Is so long time without me, and I dead
As you are absent.

Mont. By this kiss, receive
My soul for hostage, till I see my love.

Tam. The morn shall let me see you:

Mont. With the sun
I Will visit thy more comfortable beauties.

Tam. This is my comfort, that the sun has left
The whole worlds beauty ere my sun leaves me.

Mont. It Is late night now indeed: farewell my light. Exit.

Tam. Farewell my light and life: But not in him.
Alas, that in the wave of our affections
We should supply it with a full dissembling,
In which each yoongest maid is grown a mother,
Frailty is fruitful, one sin gets another:
Our loves like sparkles are that brightest shine,
When they go out most vice shows most divine:
Go maid, to bed, lend me your book I pray:
Not like your self, for form, I Will this night trouble
None of your services: Make sure the doors,
And call your other fellows to their rest.

Per. I will, yet I will watch to know why you watch. Exit.

Tam. Now all the peaceful regents of the night,
Silently-gliding exhalations,
Languishing winds, and murmuring falls of waters,
Sadness of heart, and ominous securenesse,
Enchantments, dead sleeps, all the friends of rest,
That ever wrought upon the life of man,
Extend your utmost strengths; and this charmed hour
Fix like the Center; make the violent wheels
Of Time and Fortune stand; and Great Existens
(The Makers treasury) now not seem to be,
To all but my approaching friends and me:
They come, alas they come, fear, fear and hope
Of one thing, at one instant fight in me:
I love what most I loath, and cannot live
Unless I compass that that holds my death:
For love is hateful without love again,
And he I love, will loath me, when he sees
I fly my sex, my virtue, my Renown,
To run so madly on a man unknown.
See, see the gulf is opening, that will swallow
Me and my fame for ever; I will in,
And cast my self off, as I never had been. Exit.

Com. Come worthiest son, I am past measure glad,
That you (whose worth I have approou'd so long)
Should be the Object of her fearful love;
Since both your wit and spirit can adapt
Their full force to supply her utmost weakness:
You know her worths and virtues, for Report
Of all that know, is to a man a knowledge:
You know besides, that our affections storm,
Raised in our blood, no Reason can reform.
Though she seek then their satisfaction,
(Which she must needs, or rest unsatisfied)
Your judgment will esteem her peace thus wrought,
Nothing less dear, than if your self had sought:
And (with another color, which my Art
Shall teach you to lay on) your self must seem
The only agent, and the first Orb Move,
In this our set, and cunning world of Love.

Buss. Give me the color (my most honored Father)
And trust my cunning then to lay it on.

Com. It Is this, good son; Lord Barrisor (whom you slew)
Did love her dearly, and with all fit means
Has urged his acceptance, of all which
She keeps one letter written in his blood:
You must say thus then, That you heard from me
How much her self was touched in conscience
With a Report (which is in truth dispersed)
That your maine quarrel grew about her love,
Lord Barrisor, imagining your Courtship
Of the great Guises Duchess in the Presence,
Was by you made to his elected mistress:
And so made me your mean now to resolve her,
Chosing (by my direction) this nights depth,
For the more clear avoiding of all note,
Of your presumed presence, and with this
(To clear her hands of such a lovers blood)
She will so kindly thank and entertain you,
(Me thinks I see how) I, and ten to one,
Show you the confirmation in his blood,
Lest you should think report and she did feign,
That you shall so have circumstantiall means,
To come to the direct, which must be used:
For the direct is crooked; Love comes flying;
The height of love is still won with denying.

D' Amb. Thanks honored Father.

Commolet. She must never know
That you know any thing of any love
Sustained on her part: For learn this of me;
In any thing a woman does alone,
If she dissemble, she thinks it is not done;
If not dissemble, nor a little chide,
Give her her wish, she is not satisfied;
To have a man think that she never seeks,
Does her more good than to have all she likes:
This frailty sticks in them beyond their sex;
Which to reform, reason is too perplex:
Urge reason to them, it will do no good;
Humor (that is the chariot of our food
In every body) must in them be fed,
To carry their affections by it bred.
Stand close.

Enter Tamyra. Tam. Alas, I fear my strangeness will retire him:
If he go back, I die; I must prevent it,
And cheer his onset with my sight at least,
And that's the most; though every step he takes
Goes to my heart, I Will rather die than seem
Not to be strange to that I most esteem.

Com. Madam.

Tamy. Ah.

Com. You will pardon me, I hope,
That, so beyond your expectation,
(And at a time for visitants so unfit)
I (with my noble friend here) visit you:
You know that my access at any time
Has ever been admitted; and that friend
That my care will presume to bring with me,
Shall have all circumstance of worth in him,
To merit as free welcome as my self.

Tamy. O father, but at this suspicious hour
You know how apt best men are to suspect us,
In any cause, that makes suspicious shadow
No greater than the shadow of a hair:
And you are to blame: what though my Lord and husband
Lie forth to night? and since I cannot sleep
When he is absent, I sit up to night,
Though all the doors are sure, and all our servants
As sure bound with their sleeps; yet there is one
That sits above, whose eye no sleep can bind:
He sees through doors, and darkness, and our thoughts;
And therefore as we should avoid with fear,
To think amiss our selves before his search;
So should we be as curious to shun
All cause that other think not ill of us.

D'Amb. Madam, it is far from that: I only heard
By this my honored father, that your conscience
Was something troubled with a false report;
That Barrisors blood should something touch your hand,
Since he imagined I was courting you,
When I was bold to change words with the Duchess,
(And therefore made his quarrel; which my presence
Presumed on with my father at this season,
For the more care of your so curious honor)
Can well resolve your Conscience, is most false.

Tam. And is it therefore that you come good sir?
Then crave I now your pardon and my fathers,
And swear your presence does me so much comfort,
That all I have, it binds to your requital:
Indeed sir, it is most true that a report
Is spread, alleging that his love to me
Was reason of your quarrel, and because
You shall not think I feign it for my glory,
That he importuned me for his Court service,
I Will show you his own hand, set down in blood
To that vain purpose: Good Sir, then come in.
Father I thank you now a thousand fold.

Com. May it be worth it to you honored daughter.

Finis Actus secundi.
Actus Tertij Scena Prima.
Bucy, Tamyra. Tam. O My dear servant, in thy close embraces,
I have set open all the doors of danger
To my encompast honor, and my life:
Before I was secure against death and hell;
But now am subject to the hartlesse fear:
Of every shadow, and of every breath,
And would change firmness with an aspen leaf:
So confident a spotless conscience is;
So weak a guilty: O the daugerous siege
Sin lays about us? and the tyranny
He exercises when he has expugn'd:
Like to the horror of a winters thunder,
Mixed with a gushing storm, that suffer nothing
To stir abroad on earth, but their own rages;
Is sin, when it has gathered head above us:
No roof, no shelter can secure us so,
But he will drown our cheeks in fear or woe.

Buc. Sin is a coward Madam, and insults
But on our weakness, in his truest valor:
And so our ignorance tames us, that we let
His shadows fright us: and like empty clouds
In which our faulty apprehensions fordge
The forms of Dragons, Lions, Elephants,
When they hold no proportion: the sly charms
Of the witch policy makes him, like a monster
Kept only to show men for Goddess money:
That false hagge often paints him: in her cloth
Ten times more monstrous than he is in troth:
In three of us, the secret of our meeting,
Is only guarded, and three friends as one
Have ever been esteemed: as our three powers
That in our one soul, are, as one united:
Why should we fear then? for my truth I swear
Sooner shall torture, be the Sire to pleasure,
And health be grievous to men long time sick,
Than the dear jewel of your fame in me,
Be made an outcast to your infamy;
Nor shall my value (sacred to your virtues)
Only give free course to it, from my self:
But make it fly out of the mouths of kings
In golden vapors, and with awful wings.

Tam. It rests as all kings seals were set in thee. Exit D' Amb. Manet Tamy.

Ta. It is not I, but urgent destiny,
That (as great states men for their general end
In politic justice, make poor men offend)
Enforces my offense to make it just:
What shall weak Dames do, when t'whole work of Nature
Has a strong finger in each one of us?
Needs must that sweep away the silly cobweb
Of our still-vndone labors; that lays still
Our powers to it: as to the line, the stone,
Not to the stone, the line should be opposed;
We cannot keep our constant course in virtue:
What is alike at all parts? every day
Differs from other: every hour and minute:
I, every thought in our false clock of life,
Often times inuerts the whole circumference:
We must be sometimes one, sometimes another:
Our bodies are but thick clouds to our souls;
Through which they cannnot shine when they desire:
When all the stars, and even the sun himself,
Must stay the vapors times that he exhales
Before he can make good his beams to us:
O how can we, that are but motes to him,
VVandring at randon in his orderd rays,
Disperse our passions fumes, with our weak labors,
That are more thick and black than all earths vapors?

Enter Mont. Mon. Good day, my love: what up and ready too!

Tam. Both, (my dear Lord) not all this night made I
My self unready, or could sleep a wink.

Mont. Ahlasse, what troubled my true love? my peace,
From being at peace within her better self?
Or how could sleep forbear to sease thy beauties
When he might challenge them as his just prise?

Tam. I am in no power earthly, but in yours;
To what end should I go to bed my Lord,
That wholly mist the comfort of my bed?
Or how should sleep possess my faculties,
VVanting the proper closer of mine eyes?

Mont. Then will I never more sleep night from thee:
All mine own Business, all the Kings affairs
Shall take the day to serve them: Every night
I Will ever dedicate to thy delight.

Tam. Nay, good my Lord esteem not my desires
Such doters on their humors, that my judgment
Cannot subdue them to your worthier pleasure:
A wives pleased husband must her object be
In all her acts, not her soothed fantasy.

Mont. Then come my love, Now pay those Rites to sleep
Thy fair eyes owe him: shall we now to bed?

Tam. O no my Lord, your holy Friar says,
All couplings in the day that touch the bed,
Adulterous are, even in the married;
Whose grave and worthy doctrine, well I know,
Your faith in him will liberally allow.

Mont. He Is a most learned and Religious man;
Come to the Presence then, and see great D'Ambois
(Fortunes proud mushrome shot up in a night)
Stand like an Atlas underneath the King;
Which greatness with him Monsieur now enuies
As bitterly and deadly as the Guise.

Tam. What, he that was but yesterday his maker?
His raiser and preserver?

Mont. Even the same.
Each natural agent works but to this end,
To render that it works on, like it self;
Which since the Monsieur in his act on D'Ambois,
Cannot to his ambitious end effect,
But that (quite opposite) the King has power
(In his love borne to D'Ambois) to convert
The point of Monsieurs aim on his own breast,
He turns his outward love to inward hate:
A Princes love is like the lightnings fume,
Which no man can embrace, but must consume. Exeunt.

Henry, D'Ambois, Monsieur, Guise, Monts. Elenor, Tam. Pero. Henr. Speak home
my Bussy, thy impartial words
Are like brave Faulcons that dare trusse a Foul
Much greater than themselves; Flatterers are Kites
That check at nothing; thou shall be my Eagle,
And bear my thunder underneath thy wings:
Truths words like jewels hang in the ears of Kings.

Buss. Would I might live to see no Jews hang there
In steed of jewels; sycophants I mean,
Who use truth like the Devil, his true Foe
Cast by the Angel to the pit of fears,
And bound in chains; truth seldom decks Kings ears:
Slave flattery (like a Rippiers legs rolled up
In boots of haie-ropes) with Kings soothed guts
Swadled and strappl'd, now lives only free.
O it is a subtle knave; how like the plague
Unfelt, he strikes into the brain of truth,
And rages in his entrails when he can,
Worse than the poison of a red hair'd man.

Henr. Fly at him and his brood, I cast thee off,
And once more give thee surname of mine Eagle.

Buss. I Will make you sport enough then, let me have
My lucerns too (or dogs inured to hunt
Beasts of most rapine) but to put them up,
And if I trusse not, let me not be trusted:
Show me a great man (by the peoples voice,
Which is the voice of God) that by his greatness
Bumbasts his private roofes, with public riches;
That affects royalty, rising from a clapdish;
That rules so much more than his suffering King,
That he makes kings of his subordinate slaves:
Himself and them graduate like woodmongers
(Piling a stacke of billets) from the earth,
Raising each other into steeples heights;
Let him convey this on the turning proppes
Of Protean Law, and (his own counsel keeping)
Keep all upright; let me but Hawlke at him,
I Will play the Vulture, and so thumpe his liver,
That (like a huge vnlading Argosea)
He shall confess all, and you then may hang him.
Show me a Clergy man, that is in voice
A Lark of Heaven; in heart a Mowle of earth;
That has good living, and a wicked life;
A temperate look, and a luxurious gut;
Turning the rents of his superfluous Cures
Into your Phesants and your Partriches;
Venting their Quintessence as men read Hebrew:
Let me but hawlke at him, and, like the other,
He shall confess all, and you then may hang him.
Show me a Lawyer that turns sacred law
(The equal rendrer of each man his own,
The scourge of Rapine and Extortion,
The Sanctuary and impregnable defense
Of retired learning, and oppressed virtue)
Into a Harpye, that eats all but's own,
Into the damned sins it punishes;
Into the Synagogue of thieves and Atheists;
Blood into gold, and justice into lust:
Let me but hawlke at him, as at the the other,
He shall confess all, and you then may hang him.

Gui. Where will you find such game as you would hawlke at?

Buss. I Will hawlke about your house for one of them.

Gui. Come, you are a glorious Ruffin, and run proud
Of the Kings headlong graces; hold your breath,
Or by that poisoned vapor not the King
Shall back your murtherous valor against me.

Buss. I would the King would make his presence free
But for one charge betwixt us: By the reverence
Due to the sacred space twixt kings and subjects,
Here would I make thee cast that popular purple,
In which thy proud soul sits and braues thy sovereign.

Mons. Peace, peace, I pray thee peace.

Buss. Let him peace first that made the first war.

Mons. He Is the better man.

Buss. And therefore may do worst?

Mons. He has more titles.

Buss. So Hydra had more heads.

Mons. He Is greater known.

Buss. His greatness is the peoples, mine is mine own.

Mons. He Is nobly borne.

Buss. He is not, I am noble.
And noblesse in his blood has no gradation,
But in his merit.

Gui. Thou Art not nobly borne,
But bastard to the Cardinal of Ambois.

Buss. Thou lie proud Guiserd; let me fly (my Lord.)

Henr. Not in my face; (my Eagle) violence flies
The Sanctuaries of a Princes eyes.

Buss. Still shall we chide? and some upon this bit?
Is the Guise only great in faction?
Stands he not by himself? Proves he The Opinion
That men's souls are without them? Be a Duke,
And lead me to the field.

Guis. Come, follow me.

Henr. Stay them, stay D'Ambois; Cosen Guise, I wonder
Your equal disposition brooks so ill
A man so good, that only would uphold
Man in his native noblesse, from whose fall
All our dissentions rise; that in himself
(Without the outward patches of our frailty,
Riches and honor) knows he comprehends
Worth with the greatest: Kings had never borne
Such boundless eminence over other men,
Had all maintained the spirit and state of D'Ambois;
Nor had the full impartial hand of nature
That all things gave in her original,
Without these definite terms of Mine and Thine,
Been turned unjustly to the hand of Fortune:
Had all preserved her in her prime, like D'Ambois;
No envy, no disjunction had dissolved,
Or plucked out one stick of the golden faggot,
In which the world of Saturn was comprised,
Had all been held together with the nerves,
The genius and th'ingenuous soul of D'Ambois.
Let my hand therefore be the Hermean rod
To part and reconcile, and so conserve you,
As my combined embracers and supporters.

Buss. It Is our Kings motion, and we shall not seem
(To worst eyes) womanish, though we change thus soon
Never so great grudge for his greater pleasure.

Gui. I seal to that, and so the manly freedom
That you so much profess, hereafter prove not
A bold and glorious license to deprave:
To me his hand shall prove the Hermean rod
His grace affects, in which submissiue sign
On this his sacred right hand, I lay mine.

Buss. It Is well my Lord, and so your worthy greatness
Engender not the greater insolence,
Nor make you think it a Prerogative,
To rack men's freedoms with the ruder wrongs;
My hand (stuck full of laurel, in true sign
It Is wholly dedicate to righteous peace)
In all submission kisseth the other side.

Hen. Thanks to ye both: and kindly I inuit ye
Both to a banquet where we will sacrifice
Full cups to confirmation of yours loves;
At which (fair Ladies) I entreat your presence. Exeunt Henry, D'Amb. Ely. Ta.

Mons. What had my bounty drunk when it raised him?

Gui. Y'ane stuck us up a very proper flag
That takes more wind than we with all our sails.

Mons. O so he spreds and flourishes.

Gui. He must down,
Vpstarts should never perch too near a crown.

Mons. It Is true my Lord; and as this doting hand,
Even out of earth, (like Juno) struck this giant,
So Jove's great ordinance shall be here implide
To strike him under th'Aetna of his pride:
To which work lend your hands and let us cast
Where we may set snares for his gadding greatness.
I think it best, amongst our greatest women:
For there is no such trap to catch an vpstart
As a loose downfall; and indeed their falls
Are th'ends of all men's rising: if great men
And wise; make scapes to please advantage
It Is with a woman: women that woorst may
Still hold men's candles: they direct and know
All things amiss in all men; and their women
All things amiss in them: through whose charmd mouths
We may see all the close scapes of the Court:
When the most royal beast of chase (being old,
And cunning in his choice of layres and haunts)
Can never be discovered to the bow
The piece or hound: yet where his custom is
To beat his vault, and he ruts with his hind,
The place is marked, and by his Venery
He still is taken. Shall we then attempt
The chiefest mean to that discovery here,
And court our greatest Ladies greatest women,
With shows of love, and liberal promises?
It Is but our breath. If something given in hand,
Sharpen their hopes of more; twilbe well venterd.

Gui. No doubt of that: and it is an excellent point
Of our devised inuestigation.

Mons. I have already broke the ice, my Lord,
With the most trusted woman of your Countess,
And hope I shall wade through to our discovery,

Mont. Take say of her my Lord, she comes most fitly
And we will to the other.

Enter Charlot, Anable, Pero. Gui. You Are engaged.

An. Nay pray my Lord forbear.

Mont. What skittish, servant?

An. No my Lord I am not so fit for your service:

Char. Pray pardon me now my Lord? my Lady expects me.

Gui. I Will satisfy her expectation, as far as an uncle may.

Mons. Well said: a s pirt of Courtship of all hands:
Now mine own Pero: have thou remembered me
For the discovery I entreated thee to make concerning
Thy Mistress? speak boldly, and be sure of all things I have promised.

Pero. Building on that you have sworn (my Lord) I may speak: and much the
rather, because my Lady has not trusted me with that I can tell you; for now I
cannot be said to betray her.


Mons. That Is all one: so it be not to one that will betray thee: forth I
beseech thee.


Per. To tell you truth, my Lord, I have made a strange discovery.


Mons. Excellent Pero thou reuiu'st me: may I sincke quick into earth here,
if my tongue discover it.


Per. It Is thus then: This last night my Lord lay forth: and I wondering my
Ladies sitting up, stole at midnight from my pallat: and (having before made a
hole both through the wall and arras to her inmost chamber) I saw D'Ambois and
she set close at a banquet.


Mons. D'Ambois?


Per. Even he my Lord.


Mons. Do thou not dream wench?


Per. No my Lord, he is the man.


Mons. The devil he is, and thy Lady his dam: infinite regions betwixt a
woman's tongue and her heart: is this our Goddess of chastity? I thought I
could not be so slighted: if she had not her freight besides: and therefore
plotted this with her woman: dear Pero I will advance thee for ever: but tell
me now: Gods precious it transformes me with admiration: sweet Pero, whom
should she trust with his conueiance? Or, all the doors being made sure, how
could his conueiance be performed?


Per. Nay my Lord, that amazes me: I cannot by any study so much as guess at
it.


Mons. Well, lets favor our apprehensions with forbearing that a little: for
if my heart were not hoopt with adamant, the conceit of this would have burst
it: but hark thee.


Char. I swear to your Grace, all that I can conjecture touching my Lady your
Niece, is a strong affection she bears to the English Mylor.


Gui. All quod you? it is enough I assure you, but tell me.


Mont. I pray thee resolve me: the Duke will never imagine that I am busy
about's wife: has D'Ambois any privy access to her?


An. No my Lord, D'Ambois neglects her (as she takes it) and is therefore
suspicious that either your Lady, or the Countess Beaupre has closely
entertaind him.


Mont. Ber lady a likely suspicion, and very near the life, if she marks it;
especially of my wife.


Mons. Come we will put off all, with seeming only to have courted; away dry
palm: she has a liver as hard as a biscuit: a man may go a whole voyage with
her, and get nothing but tempests at her windpipe.


Gui. Here Is one: (I think) has swallowd a porcupine, she casts pricks from
her tongue so.


Mont. And here is a peacock seems to have deuourd one of the Alps, she has so
swelling a spirit, and is so cold of her kindness.


Char. We be no windfals my Lord; ye must gather us with the ladder of
matrimony, or we will hang till we be rotten.


Mons. Indeed that is the way to make ye right openarses. But ahlas ye have no
portions fit for such husbands as we wish you.


Per. Portions my Lord, yes and such portions as your principality cannot
purchase.


Mons. What woman? what are those portions?


Per. Riddle my riddle my Lord.


Mons. I marry wench, I think thy portion is a right riddle, a man shall never
find it out: but lets hear it.


Per. You shall my Lord.
What Is that, that being most rar's most cheap?
That if you sow, you never reap?
That when it grows most, most you in it?
And still you lose it when you win it:
That when it is commonest, it is dearest,
And when it is farthest off'tis nearest?

Mons. Is this your portion?


Per. Even this my Lord.


Mons. Believe me I cannot riddle it.


Per. No my Lord, it is my chastity, which you shall neither riddle nor fiddle.


Mons. Your chastity? let me begin with the end of you; how is a woman's
chastity nearest a man, when it is furthest off?


Per. Why my Lord, when you cannot get it, it goes toth' heart on you; and that
I think comes most near you: and I am sure it shall be far enough off; and
so I leave you to my mercy. Exit.


Mons. Farewell riddle.


Gui. Farewell Medlar.


Mont. Farewell winter plum.


Mons. Now my Lords, what fruit of our inquisition? feel you nothing budding
yet? Speak good my Lord Mountsurry.


Mont. Nothing but this: D'Ambois is negligent in observing the Duchess, and
therefore she is suspicious that your Niece or my wife closely entertaines him.


Mons. Your wife, my Lord? Think you that possible?


Mont. Alas, I know she flies him like her last hour.


Mons. Her last hour? why that comes upon her the more she flies it: Does
D'Ambois so think you?


Mont. That's not worth the answering: It Is horrible to think with what monsters
women's imaginations engrosse them when they are once enamored, and what
wonders they will work for their satisfaction. They will make a sheep
valiant, a Lion fearful.


Mons. And an Ass confident, my Lord, it is true, and more
will come forth shortly, get you to the banquet. Exit Guise cum Mont.
O the vnfounded Sea of women's bloods,
That when it is calmest, is most dangerous;
Not any wrincle creaming in their faces,
When in their hearts are Scylla and Charibdis,
Which still are hid in monster-formed clouds,
Where never day shines, nothing ever grows,
But weeds and poisons, that no statesman knows;
Not Cerberus ever saw the damned nookes
Hid with the vailes of women's virtuous looks:
I will conceal all yet, and give more time
To D'Ambois trial, now upon my hook;
He awes my throat; else like Sybillas Cave
It should breath oracles; I fear him strangely,
And may resemble his advanced valor
Unto a spirit raised without a circle,
Endangering him that ignorantly raised him,
And for whose fury he has learned no limit.

Enter D'Ambois. Mons. How now, what leap'st thou at?

D'Amb. O royal object.

Mons. Thou dream'st awake: Object in th'emptie air?

D'Amb. Worthy the head of Titan, worth his chair.

Mons. Pray thee what mean thou?

D'Amb. See you not a Croune
Empale the forehead of the great King Monsieur?

Mons. O fie upon thee.

D'Amb. Sir, that is the Subject
Of all these your retired and sole discourses.

Mons. Will thou not leave that wrongful supposition?
This still has made me doubt thou do not love me.
Will thou do one thing for me then syncerelie?

D'Amb. I, any thing, but killing of the King.

Mons. Still in that discord, and ill taken note?

D'Amb. Come, do not doubt me, and command me all things.

Mons. I will not then, and now by all my love
Shown to thy virtues, and by all fruits else
Already sprung from that affection,
I charge thee utter (even with all the freedom
Both of thy noble nature and thy friendship)
The full and plain state of me in thy thoughts.

D'Amb. What, utter plainly what I think of you?
Why this swims quite against the stream of greatness:
Great men would rather hear their flatteries,
And if they be not made fools, are not wise.

Mons. I am no such great fool, and therefore charge thee
Even from the root of thy free heart, display me.

D'Amb. Since you affect it in such serious terms,
If your self first will tell me what you think
As freely and as heartily of me,
I Will be as open in my thoughts of you.

Mons. A bargain of mine honor; and make this,
That prove we in our full dissection
Never so foul, live still the sounder friends.

D'Amb. What else Sir? come begin, and speak me simply.

Mons. I will I swear. I think thee then a man,
That dares as much as a wild horse or Tiger;
As headstrong and as bloody; and to feed
The ravenous wolf of thy most Caniball valor,
(Rather than not employ it) thou would turn
Hackster to any whore, slave to a Jew,
Or English usurer, to force possessions,
And cut men's throats of morgaged estates;
Or thou would 'st tire thee like a Tinkers wife,
And murder market folks, quarrel with sheep,
And run as mad as Ajax; serve a Butcher,
Do any thing but killing of the King:
That in thy valor thou art like other naturals,
That have strange gifts in nature, but no soul
Diffused quite through, to make them of a piece,
But stop at humors, that are more absurd,
Childish and villainous than that hackster, whore,
Slave, cutthroat, Tinkers bitch, compared before:
And in those humors would envy, betray,
Slander, blaspheme, change each hour a religion;
Do any thing, but killing of the King;
That in that valor (which is still my dunghill,
To which I carry all filth in thy house)
Thou Art more ridiculous and vainglorious
Than any Mountibancke; and impudent
Than any painted bawd; which, not to sooth
And glorify thee like a Jupiter Hammon,
Thou eat'st thy heart in vinegar; and thy gall
Turns all thy blood to poison, which is cause
Of that Tode-poole that stands in thy complexion;
And makes thee (with a cold and earthie moisture,
Which is the damme of putrefaction,
As plague to thy damned pride) rot as thou live;
To study calumnies and treacheries;
To thy friends slaughters, like a Scrich-owle sing,
And to all mischiefs, but to kill the King.

D'Amb. So: Have you said?

Mons. How think thou? Do I flatter?
Speak I not like a trusty friend to thee?

D'Amb. That ever any man was blessed withal;
So here is for me. I think you are (at worst)
No devil, since you are like to be no king;
Of which, with any friend of yours I Will lay
This poor Stilladoe here, against all the stars,
I, and against all your treacheries, which are more;
That you did never good, but to do ill;
But ill of all sorts, free and for it self:
That (like a murdering piece, making lanes in armies
The first man of a rank, the whole rank falling)
If you have once wronged one man, you are so far
From making him amends, that all his race,
Friends and associates fall into your chase:
That you are for periuries the very prince
Of all intelligencers; and your voice
Is like an Eastern wind, that where it flies,
Knits nets of Catterpillars, with which you catch
The prime of all the fruits the kingdom yeeldes.
That your political head is the cursed fount
Of all the violence, rapine, cruelty,
Tyranny and Atheism flowing through the realm.
That you have a tongue so scandalous, twill cut
A perfect Crystal; and a breath that will
Kill to that wall a spider; you will jest
With God, and your soul to the devil tender
For lust; kiss horror, and with death engender.
That your foul body is a Lernean fenne
Of all the maladies breeding in all men.
That you are utterly without a soul:
And (for your life) the thread of that was spunne,
When Clotho slept, and let her breathing rock
Fall in the dirt; and Lachesis still draws it,
Dipping her twisting fingers in a boule
Defiled, and croun'd with virtues forced soul.
And lastly (which I must for Gratitude
Ever remember) That of all my height
And dearest life, you are the only spring,
Only in royal hope to kill the king.

Mons. Why now I see thou love me, come to the banquet.

Finis Actus terty.
Actus Quarti Scena Prima.
Henry, Monsieur, Guise, Montsurry, Bussy, Elynor, Tamyra, Beaupre, Pero,
Charlotte, Anable, Pyrha, with four Pages. Henr. LAdies, ye have not done our
banquet right,
Nor looked upon it with those cheerful rays
That lately turned your breaths to floods of gold;
Your looks, me thinks, are not drawn out with thoughts,
So clear and free as heretofore, but fare
As if the thick complexions of men
Gouernd within them.

Buss. It Is not like my Lord
That men in women rule; but contrary,
For as the Moon (of all things God created)
Not only is the most appropriate image
Or glass to show them how they wax and wane,
But in her light and motion, likewise bears
Imperial influences that command
In all their powers, and make them wax and wane;
So women, that (of all things made of nothing)
Are the most perfect images of the Moon
(Or still-vnweand sweet Moon-calues with white faces)
Not only are paternes of change to men:
But as the tender Moonshine of their beauties
Cleeres, or is cloudy, make men glad or sad.

Mons. But here the Moons are changed (as the King notes)
And either men rule in them, or some power
Beyond their voluntary motions:
For nothing can recover their lost faces.

Buss. None can be always one: our griefs and ioies
Hold several scepters in us, and have times
For their predominance: which grief now, in them
Does claim, as proper to his diadem:
And grief's a natural sickness of the blood,
That time to part, asks as his coming had;
Only slight fools grieved, suddenly are glad;
A man may say t'a dead man, be revived,
As well as to one sorrowful, be not grieved.
And therefore (Princely mistress) in all wars
Against these base foes that insult on weakness,
And still fight housed, behind the shield of Nature,
Of tyrannous law, treachery, or beastly need,
Your servant cannot help; authority here
Goes with corruption; something like some States,
That back woorst men: valor to them must creep
That (to themselves left) would fear him asleep.

Ely. Ye all take that for granted, that does rest
Yet to be proved; we all are as we were
As merry, and as free in thought as ever.

Gui. And why then can ye not disclose your thoughts?

Tamy. Me thinks the man has answered for us well.

Mons. The man? why Madam do you not know his name?

Tamy. Man is a name of honor for a King:
Additions take away from each chief thing:
The School of Modesty, not to learn, learnes Dames:
They sit in high forms there, that know men's names.

Mons. Hark sweet heart, hee'rs a bound set to your valor:
It cannot enter here; no, not to notice
Of what your name is; your great Eagles beak
(Should you fly at her) had as good encounter
An Albion cliffe, as her more craggy liver.

Buc. I Will not attempt her Sir; her sight and name
(By which I only know her) does deter me.

Henr. So do they all men else.

Mons. You would say so
If you knew all.

Tamy. Knew all my Lord? what mean you?

Mons. All that I know Madam.

Tamy. That you know? speak it.

Mons. No it is enough I feel it.

Henr. But me thinks
Her Courtship is more pure than heretofore:
True Courtiers should be modest, but not nice:
Bold, but not impudent: pleasure love, not vice.

Mons. Sweet heart: come hither, what if one should make
Horns at Mountsurry? would it strike him jealous
Through all the proofs of his chaste Ladies virtues?

Buc. No I think not.

Mons. Not if I named the man
With whom I would make him suspicious
His wife has armd his forehead?

Buc. So, you might
Have your great nose made less indeed: and slit:
Your eyes thrust out.

Mons. Peace, peace, I pray thee peace.
Who dares do that? the brother of his King?

Buc. Were your King brother in you: all your powers
(Stretched in the arms of great men and their bawds)
Set close down by you; all your stormy laws
Spouted with Lawyers mouths; and gushing blood,
Like to so many Torrents: all your glories:
(Making you terrible, like enchaunted flames
Fed with bare cockescombes: and with crooked hammes)
All your prerogatives, your shames and tortures:
All daring heaven, and opening hell about you:
Were I the man, ye wronged so and prouok'd:
(Though never so much beneath you) like a box tree
I would (out of the toughness of my root)
Ram hardness, in my lowness, and like death
Mounted on earthquakes, I would trot through all
Honors and horrors: through foul and fair,
And from your whole strength toss you into air.

Mons. Go, thou art a devil; such another spirit
Could not be stild, from all Th'Armenian dragons.
O my Loves glory: heir to all I have:
That Is all I can say, and that all I swear.
If thou outliue me, as I know thou must,
Or else has nature no proportiond end
To her great labors: she has breathed a spirit
Into thy entrails, of effect to swell
Into another great Augustus Caesar:
Organes, and faculties fitted to her greatness:
And should that perish like a common spirit,
Nature's a Courtier and regards no merit.

Henr. Here Is naught but whispering with us: like a calm
Before a tempest, when the silent air
Lays her soft ear close to the earth to hearken
For that she fears is coming to afflict her;
Some fate does join our ears to hear it coming.
Come, my brave eagle, let us to Covert fly:
I see Almighty Ether in the smoke
Of all his clouds descending: and the sky
Hid in the dim oftents of Tragedy. Exit Hen. with D'Amb.

Guis. Now stir the humor, and begin the brawle.

Mont. The King and D'Ambois now are grown all one.

Mons. Nay, they are two my Lord.

Mont. How Is that?

Mons. No more.

Mont. I must have more my Lord.

Mons. What more than two?

Mont. How monstrous is this?

Mons. Why?

Mont. You make me Horns.

Mons. Not I, it is a work, without my power,
Married men's ensigns are not made with fingers:
Of divine Fabrique they are, Not men's hands;
Your wife, you know, is a Mere Cynthia,
And she must fashion horns out of her Nature.

Mont. But does she? dare you charge her? speak false Prince.

Mons. I must not speak my Lord: but if yow'le use
The learning of a noble man, and read
Here Is something to those points: soft you must pawn
Your honor having read it to return it.

Mont. Not I, I pawn mine Honor, for a paper?

Mons. You must not buie it under. Ent. Tamy. Pero.

Mont. Keep it then!
And keep fire in your bosom.

Tam. What says he?

Mont. You must make good the rest.

Tam. How fares my Lord?
Takes my Love any thing to heart he says?

Mont. Come you are a.

Tam. What my Lord?

Mont. The plague of Herod
Feast in his rotten entrails.

Tam. Will you wreake
Your angers just cause given by him, on me?

Mont. By him?

Tamy. By him my Lord, I have admired
You could all this time be at concord with him,
That still has played such discords on your honor.

Mont. Perhaps it is with some proud string of my wives.

Tam. How Is that, my Lord?

Mont. Your tongue will still admire,
Till my head be the miracle of the world.

Tam. O woe is me.

Pero. What does your Lordship mean?
Madam, be comforted; my Lord but tries you.
Madam? Help good my Lord* are you not moved?
Do your set looks print in your words, your thoughts?
Sweet Lord, clear up those eyes, for shame of Noblesse:
Merciless creature; but it is enough,
You have shot home, your words are in her heart;
She has not lived to bear a trial now.

Mont. Look up my love, and by this kiss receive
My soul amongst thy spirits for supply
To thine, chased with my fury.

Tam. O my Lord,
I have too long lived to hear this from you.

Mont. It Was from my troubled blood, and not from me:
I know not how I fare; a sudden night
Flows through my entrails, and a headlong Chaos
Murmurs within me, which I must digest;
And not drown her in my confusions,
That was my lives joy, being best informed:
Sweet, you must needs forgive me, that my love
(Like to a fire disdaining his suppression)
Raged being discouraged; my whole heart is wounded
When any least thought in you is but touched,
And shall be till I know your former merits:
Your name and memory altogether crave
In loathed oblivion their eternal grave;
And then you must hear from me, there is no mean
In any passion I shall feel for you:
Love is a rasor cleansing being well used,
But fetches blood still being the least abused:
To tell you briefly all; The man that left me
When you appeared, did turn me worse than woman,
And stabbed me to the heart thus, with his hand.

Tamy. O happy woman! Comes my stain from him?
It is my beauty, and that innocence proves,
That slew Chymaera, rescued Peleus
From all the savage beasts in Peleon;
And raised the chaste Athenian prince from Hell:
All suffering with me; they for women's lusts,
I for a man's; that the Egean stable
Of his foul sin would empty in my lap:
How his guilt shunned me? sacred innocence
That where thou fear, art dreadful; and his face
Turned in flight from thee, that had thee in chase:
Come, bring me to him: I will tell the serpent
Even to his teeth (whence, in mine honors soil,
A pitched field starts up twixt my Lord and me)
That his throat lies, and he shall curse his fingers,
For being so governed by his filthy soul.

Mont. I know not, if himself will vaunt to have been
The princely author of the slavish sin,
Or any other; he would have resolved me,
Had you not come; not by his word, but writing,
Would I have sworn to give it him again,
And pawned mine honor to him for a paper.

Tam. See how he flies me still: It Is a foul heart
That fears his own hand: Good my Lord make haste
To see the dangerous paper: Be not nice
For any trifle, ieweld with your honor,
To pawn your honor; and with it confer
My nearest woman here, in all she knows;
Who (if the sun or Cerberus could have seen
Any stain in me) might as much as they:
And Pero, here I charge thee by my love,
And all proofs of it, (which I might call bounties)
By all that thou have seem seem good in me,
And all the ill which thou should spit from thee,
By pity of the wound, my Lord has given me,
Not as thy Mistress now, but a poor woman
(To death given over:) rid me of my pains,
Power on thy powder: clear thy breast of me:
My Lord is only here: here speak thy worst,
Thy best will do me mischief; If thou spar'st me,
Never shine good thought on thy memory:
Resolve my Lord, and leave me desperate.

Pero. My Lord? My Lord has played a prodigals part,
To break his Stock for nothing; and an insolent,
To cut a Gordian when he could not loose it:
What violence is this, to put true fire
To a false train? To blow up long crowned peace
With sudden outrage? and believe a man
Sworn to the shame of women, against a woman,
Borne to their honors: I Will attend your Lordship.

Tam. No, I will write (for I shall never more
Speak with the fugitive) where I will defy him,
Were he ten times the brother of my king. Exeunt.

Music: and she enters with her maid, bearing a letter. Tam. Away, deliver
it: O may my lines
(Filled with the poison of a woman's hate
When he shall open them) shrink up his eyes
With torturous darkness, such as stands in hell,
Stuck full of inward horrors, never lighted;
With which are all things to be feared, affrighted;
Father?

Asc^dit Bussy with Comolet. D' Amb. How is it with my honored mistress?

Tam. O servant help, and save me from the gripes
Of shame and infamy.

D' Amb. What insensate stock,
Or rude inanimate vapor without fashion,
Durst take into his Epimethean breast
A box of such plagues as the danger yeeldes,
Incurd in this discovery? He had better
Ventured his breast in the consuming reach
Of the hot surfets cast out of the clouds,
Or stood the bullets that (to wreake the sky)
The Cyclops ram in Jove's artillery.

Com. We soon will take the darkness from his face
That did that deed of darkness; we will know
What now the Monsieur and your husband do;
What is contained within the secret paper
Offered by Monsieur, and your loves events:
To which ends (honored daughter) at your motion,
I have put on these exorcising Rites,
And, by my power of learned holiness
Vouchsaft me from above, I will command
Our resolution of a raised spirit.

Tamy. Good father raise him in some beauteous form,
That with least terror I may brook his sight.

Com. Stand sure together then, what ere ye see,
And stir not, as ye tender all our lives.
Occidentalium legionum spiritalium imperator (magnus ille Behemoth) veni,
veni, comitatus cum Asaroth locotenente inuicto. Adiuro te per stygis
inscrutabilia arcana, per ipsos irremeabiles anfractus auerni: adesto o
Behemoth, tu cui peruia sunt Magnatum scrinia; veni, per Noctis and tenebrarum
abdita profundissima; Thunder.
per labentia sydera; per ipsos motus horarum furtiuos, Hecatesque altum
silentium: Appare in forma spiritali, lucente splendida and amabili. Ascendit.


Beh. What would the holy Friar?

Com. I would see
What now the Monsieur and Mountsurrie do;
And see the secret paper that the Monsieur
Offered to Count Montsurry, longing much
To know on what events the secret loves
Of these two honored persons shall arrive.

Beh. Why calledst thou me to this accursed light?
To these light purposes? I am Emperor
Of that inscrutable darkness, where are hid
All deepest truths, and secrets never seen,
All which I know, and command Legions
Of knowing spirits that can do more than these.
Any of this my guard that circle me
In these blew fires, and out of whose dim fumes
Vast murmurs use to break, and from their soundes
Articulat voices; can do ten parts more
Than open such slight truths, as you require.

Com. From the last nights black depth, I called up one
Of the inferior ablest ministers,
And he could not resolve me; send one then
Out of thine own command, to fetch the paper
That Monsieur has to show to Count Montsurry.

Beh. I will: Cartophylax: thou that properly
Have in thy power all papers so inscribde:
Glide through all bars to it and fetch that paper.

Car. I will. a torch remoues.

Com. Till he returns (great prince of darkness)
Tell me, if Monsieur and the Count Montsurry
Are yet encounterd.

Beh. Both them and the Guise
Are now together.

Com. Show us all their persons,
And represent the place, with all their actions.

Beh. The spirit will strait return: and then I Will show thee:
See he is come; why broughtst thou not the paper?

Cart. He has prevented me, and got a spirit
Raised by another, great in our command
To take the guard of it before I came.

Beh. This is your slacknesse, not t'nuoke our powers
When first your acts, set forth to their effects;
Yet shall you see it, and themselves: behold
They come here and the Earl now holds the paper. Ent. Mons. Gui. Mont.

Bus. May we not hear them?

Mons. No, be still and see.

Bus. I will go fetch the paper.

Com. Do not stir:
There Is too much distance and too many locks
Twixt you and them: (how near so e're they seem)
For any man to interrupt their secrets.

Tam. O honored spirit: fly into the fancy
Of my offended Lord: and do not let him
Believe what there the wicked man has written.

Pre. Persuasion has already enterd him
Beyond reflection; peace till their departure.

Mons. There is a glass of ink wherein you see
How to make ready black faced Tragedy:
You now discern, I hope through all her paintings
Her gasping wrinkles, and fames sepulchers.

Gui. Think you he faines my Lord? what hold you now?
Do we malign your wife: or honor you?

Mons. What stricken dumb? nay fie, Lord be not danted:
Your case is common: were it never so rare
Bear it as rarely: now to laugh were manly:
A worthy man should imitate the weather
That sings in tempests: and being clear is silent.

Gui. Go home my Lord, and force your wife to write
Such loving stuff to D'Ambois as she used
When she desired his presence.

Mons. Do my Lord,
And make her name her conceald messenger:
That close and most inennerable Pander
That passes all our studies to exquire:
By whom convey the letter to her love:
And so you shall be sure to have him come
Within the thirsty reach of your revenge;
Before which, lodge an ambush in her chamber
Behind the arras of your stoutest men
All close and soundly armd: and let them share
A spirit amongst them, that would serve a thousand.

Gui. Yet stay a little: see she sends for you.

Mons. Poor, loving lady, she will make all good yet,
Think you not so my Lord?

Gui. Ahlas poor soul.

Mons. This was ill done in faith. Exit Mont.

Per. It Was nobly done.
And I forgive his Lordship from my soul.

Mons. Then much good do it thee Pero: have a letter?

Per. I hope it be, at least, if not a volume
Of worthy curses for your perjury.

Mons. Now out upon her.

Gui. Let me see my Lord.

Mons. You shall presently: how fares my Pero?
Whose there? take in this maid she has caught a clap:
And fetch my surgeon to her; come my Lord,
We Will now peruse our letter. Exeunt Mons. Guise.

Per. Furies rise Lead her out.
Out of the black lines, and torment his soul.

Tam. Has my Lord slain my woman?

Beh. No, she lives.

Com. What shall become of us?

Beh. All I can say
Being called thus late, is brief, and darkly this:
If D'Ambois mistress, stay not her white hand
With his forced blood he shall remain untouched:
So father, shall your self, but by your self:
To make this Augurie plainer: when the voice
Of D'Ambois shall inuoke me I will rise,
Shining in greater light: and show him all
That will betide ye all; mean time be wise,
And let him curb his rage, with policy. Descendit cum suis:

Buc. Will he appear to me, when I inuoke him?

Com. He will: be sure.

Buc. It must be shortly then:
For his dark words have tied my thoughts on knots
Till he dissolve, and free them.

Tam. In mean time
Dear servant, till your powerful voice revoke him,
Be sure to use the policy he advised:
Lest fury in your too quick knowledge taken
Of our abuse, and your defense of me
Accuse me more than any enemy:
And Father, you must on my Lord impose
Your holiest charges, and the churches power
To temper his hot spirit: and disperse
The cruelty and the blood, I know his hand
Will shower upon our heads, if you put not
Your finger to the storm, and hold it up,
As my dear servant here must do with Monsieur.

Bus. I Will sooth his plots: and strew my hate with smiles
Till all at once the close mines of my heart
Rise at full date, and rush into his blood:
I Will bind his arm in silk, and rub his flesh,
To make the vain swell, that his soul may gush
Into some konnell, where it longs to lie,
And policy shall be flanckt with policy.
Yet shall the feeling center where we meet
Groan with the wait of my approaching feet:
I Will make th'inspired threshals of his Court
Sweat with the weather of my horrid steps
Before I enter: yet will I appear
Like calm security, before a ruin;
A politician, must like lightening melt
The very marrow, and not Print the skin:
His ways must not be seen: the superficies
Of the green center must not taste his feet:
When hell is plowd up with his wounding tracts:
And all his harvest reap't, from hellish facts.

Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quinti Scena Prima.
Montsurry bare, vnbrac't, pulling Tamyra in, Comolet, One bearing light, a
standish and paper, which sets a Table. Com. MY Lord remember that your soul
must seek
Her peace, as well as your reuengefull blood:
You ever, to this hour have proved your self
A noble, zealous, and obedient son,
To Our holy mother: be not an apostate:
Your wives offense serves not, (were it the woorst
You can imagine, without greater proofs)
To sever your eternal bonds, and hearts;
Much less to touch her with a bloody hand:
Nor is it manly (much less husbandly)
To expiate any frailty in your wife,
With churlish strokes, or beastly ods of strength:
The stony birth of clouds, will touch no laurel:
Nor any sleeper; your wife is your laurel:
And sweetest sleeper; do not touch her then
Be not more rude than the wild seed of vapor,
To her that is more gentle than it rude;
In whom kind nature sufferd one offense
But to set of, her other excellence.

Mont. Good father leave us: interrupt no more
The course I must run for mine honor sake.
Rely on my love to her, which her fault
Cannot extinguish; will she but disclose
Who was the hateful minister of her love,
And through what maze he served it, we are friends.

Com. It is a damned work to pursue those secrets,
That would open more sin, and prove springs of slaughter;
Nor is it a path for Christian feet to touch;
But out of all way to the health of souls,
A sin impossible to be forgiven:
Which he that dares commit;

Mont. Good father cease:
Tempt not a man distracted; I am apt
To outrages that I shall ever rue:
I will not pass the verge that bounds a Christian,
Nor break the limits of a man nor husband.

Com. Then God inspire ye both with thoughts and deeds
Worthy his high respect, and your own souls. Exit Com.

Mont. Who shall remove the mountain from my heart,
Open the seuentimes-heat furnace of my thoughts,
And set fit outcries for a soul in hell? Mont. turns a key.
O now it nothing fits my cares to speak,
But thunder, or to take into my throat
The trumpe of Heaven; with whose determinate blasts
The winds shall burst, and the enraged seas
Be drunk up in his soundes; that my hot woes
(Vented enough) I might convert to vapor,
Ascending from my infamy unseen;
Shorten the world, preventing the last breath
That kills the living, and regenerates death.

Tamy. My Lord, my fault (as you may censure it
With too strong arguments) is past your pardon:
But how the circumstances may excuse me
God knows, and your more temperate mind hereafter
May let my penitent miseries make you know.

Mont. Hereafter? It Is a supposed infinite,
That from this point will rise eternally:
Fame grows in going; in the scapes of virtue
Excuses damn her: They be fires in Cities
Enraged with those winds that less lights extinguish.
Come Siren, sing, and dash against my rocks
Thy ruffin Gallie, laden for thy lust:
Sing, and put all the nets into thy voice,
With which thou drew'st into thy strumpets lap
The spawne of Venus; and in which ye danced;
That, in thy laps steed, I may dig his toombe,
And quit his manhood with a woman's slight,
Who never is deceived in her deceit.
Sing, (that is, write) and then take from mine eyes
The mists that hide the most inscrutable Pandar
That ever lapt up an adulterous vomit:
That I may see the devil, and survive
To be a devil, and then learn to wiue:
That I may hang him, and then cut him down,
Then cut him up, and with my souls beams search
The crankes and cauernes of his brain, and study
The errant wilderness of a woman's face;
Where men cannot get out, for all the Comets
That have been lighted at it; though they know
That Adders lie a sunning in their smiles,
That Basilisks drink their poison from their eyes,
And no way there to coast out to their hearts;
Yet still they wander there, and are not stayed
Till they be fettered, nor secure before
All cares distract them; nor in humane state
Till they embrace within their wives two breasts
All Pelion and Cythaeron with their beasts.
Why write you not?

Tam. O good my Lord forbear
In wreake of great sins, to engender greater,
And make my loves corruption generate murder.

Mont. It follows needefully as child and parent;
The chaine-shot of thy lust is yet aloft,
And it must murder; it is thine own dear twinne:
No man can add height to a woman's sin.
Vice never does her just hate so provoke,
As when she rages under virtues cloak.
Write: For it must be; by this ruthlesse steel,
By this impartial torture, and the death
Thy tyrannies have invented in my entrails,
To quicken life in dying, and hold up
The spirits in fainting, teaching to preserve
Torments in ashes, that will ever last.
Speak: Will you write?

Tam. Sweet Lord enioine my sin
Some other penance than what makes it worse:
Hide in some gloomie dungeon my loathed face,
And let condemned murderers let me down
(Stopping their noses) my abhorred food.
Hang me in chains, and let me eat these arms
That have offended: Bind me face to face
To some dead woman, taken from the Cart
Of Execution, till death and time
In grains of dust dissolve me; I Will endure:
Or any torture that your wraths invention
Can fright all pity from the world withal:
But to betray a friend with show of friendship,
That is too common, for the rare revenge
Your rage affects; here then are my breasts,
Last night your pillowes; here my wretched arms,
As late the wished confines of your life:
Now break them as you please, and all the bounds
Of manhood, noblesse, and religion.

Mont. Where all these have been broken, they are kept,
In doing their justice there: Thine arms have lost
Their privilege in lust, and in their torture
Thus they must pay it.

Tam. O Lord.

Mont. Till thou writ'st
I Will write in wounds (my wrongs fit characters)
Thy right of sufferance. Write.

Tam. O kill me, kill me:
Dear husband be not crueller than death;
You have beheld some Gorgon: Feel, o feel
How you are turned to stone; with my heart blood
Dissolve your self again, or you will grow
Into the image of all Tyranny.

Mont. As thou art of adultery, I will still
Prove thee my like in ill, being most a monster:
Thus I express thee yet.

Tam. And yet I live.

Mont. I, for thy monstrous idol is not done yet:
This tool has wrought enough: now Torture use
This other engine on th'habituate powers
Of her thrice damned and whorish fortitude.
Use the most madding pains in her that ever
Thy venoms sok'd through, making most of death;
That she may weigh her wrongs with them, and then
Stand vengeance on thy steepest rock, a victor.

Tamy. O who is turned into my Lord and husband?
Husband? My Lord? None but my Lord and husband.
Heaven, I ask thee remission of my sins,
Not of my pains: husband, o help me husband.

Com. Ascendit Comolet.
What rape of honor and religion?
O wrack of nature.

Tam. Poor man: o my father,
Father? look up; o let me down my Lord,
And I will write.

Mont. Author of prodigies!
What new flame breaks out of the firmament,
That turns up counsels never known before?
Now is it true, earth mooues, and heaven stands still;
Even Heaven it self must see and suffer ill:
The too huge bias of the world has swai'd
Her backe-part upwards, and with that she braues
This Hemisphere, that long her mouth has mocked:
The gravity of her religious face:
(Now grown too weighty with her sacrilege
And here discernd sophisticate enough)
Turns to th'Antipodes: and all the forms
That her illusions have impressed in her,
Have eaten through her back: and now all see,
How she is riueted with hypocrisy:
Was this the way? was he the mean betwixt you?

Tam. He was, he was, kind innocent man he was.

Mont. Write, write a word or two.

Tamy. I will, I will.
I Will write, but in my blood that he may see,
These lines come from my wounds and not from me.

Mont. Well might he die for thought: me thinks the frame
And shaken ioints of the whole world should crack
To see her parts so disproportionate;
And that his general beauty cannot stand
Without these stains in the particular man.
Why wander I so far? here here was she
That was a whole world without spot to me:
Though now a world of spots; oh what a lightning
Is man's delight in women? what a bubble,
He builds his state, fame, life on, when he marries?
Since all earths pleasures are so short and small,
The way t'nioy it, is t'abiure it all:
Enough: I must be messenger my self,
Disguised like this strange creature: in, I Will after,
To see what guilty light gives this cave eyes,
And to the world sing new impieties.

D' Ambois with two Pages. D' Amb. Sit up to night, and watch, I Will speak with
none
But the old friar, who bring to me.

Pa. We will Sir. Exit.

D' Amb. What violent heat is this? me thinks the fire
Of twenty lives does on a sudden flash
Through all my faculties: the air goes high
In this close chamber, and the frighted earth!
Trembles, and shrinkes beneath me: the whole house
Crackes with his shaken burden; bless me, heaven.

Enter Vmb. Comol. Vmb. Note what I want, my son, and be forewarnd:
O there are bloody deeds past and to come,
I cannot stay: a fate does ravish me:
I Will meet thee in the chamber of thy love. Exit.

D' Amb. What dismal change is here? the good old Friar
Is murtherd; being made known to serve my love;
Note what he wants? he wants his utmost weed,
He wants his life, and body: which of these
Should be the want he means, and may supply me
With any fit forewarning? this strange vision,
(Together with the dark prediction
Used by the Prince of darkness that was raisd
By this embodied shadow) stir my thoughts
With reminiscion of the Spirits promise;
Who told me, that by any invocation
I should have power to raise him; though it wanted
The powerful words, and decent rites of art;
Never had my set brain such need of spirit,
T'instruct and cheer it; now then, I will claim,
Performance of his free and gentle vow,
T'appeare in greater light; and make more plain,
His rugged oracle: I long to know
How my dear mistress fares; and be informd
What hand she now holds on the troubled blood
Of her incensed Lord: me thought the Spirit,
(When he had vtterd his perplexed presage)
Threw his changed countenance headlong into clouds;
His forehead bent, as it would hide his face;
He knocked his chin against his darkened breast,
And struck a churlish silence through his powrs;
Terror of darkness: O thou King of flames,
That with thy Musique-footed horse do strike
The clear light out of crystal, on dark earth;
And hurlst instructiue fire about the world:
Wake, wake, the drowsy and enchanted night;
That sleeps with dead eyes in this heavy riddle:
Or thou great Prince of shades where never sun
Sticks his far-darted beams: whose eyes are made,
To see in darkness: and see ever best
Where sense is blindest: open now the heart
Of thy abashed oracle: that for fear,
Of some ill it includes, would feign lie hid,
And rise thou with it in thy greater light.

Surgit Spiritus cum suis. Sp. Thus to observe my vow of apparition,
In greater light: and explicate thy fate:
I come; and tell thee that if thou obey
The summons that thy mistress next will send thee,
Her hand shall be thy death.

D' Amb. When will she send?

Sp. Soon as I set again, where late I rose.

D' Amb. Is the old Friar slain?

Sp. No, and yet lives not.

D' Amb. Died he a natural death?

Sp. He did.

D' Amb. Who then,
Will my dear mistress send?

Sp. I must not tell thee.

D' Amb. Who lets thee?

Sp. Fate.

D' Am. Who are fates ministers?

Sp. The Guise and Monsieur.

D' Amb. A fit pair of sheeres
To cut the threads of kings, and kingly spirits,
And consorts fit to sound forth harmony,
Set to the falls of kingdoms: shall the hand
Of my kind Mistress kill me?

Sp. If thou yield,
To her next summons, you are fair warnd: farewell. Exit.

D' Amb. I must fare well, how ever: though I die
My death consenting with his augurie;
Should not my powers obey, when she commands
My motion must be rebel to my will:
My will: to life, If when I have obaid,
Her hand should so reward me: they must arm it,
Bind me and force it: or I lay my soul
She rather would convert it, many times
On her own bosom: even to many deaths:
But were there danger of such violence,
I know it is far from her intent to send:
And who she should send, is as far from thought
Since he is dead, whose only mean she used
Whose there? look to the door: and let him in,
Though politic Monsieur, or the violent Guise.

Enter Montsurry like the Friar. Mont. Hail to my worthy son.

D'Amb. O lying Spirit: welcome loved father
How fares my dearest mistress?

Mont. Well, as ever
Being well as ever thought on by her Lord:
Whereof she sends this witness in her hand
And prays, for urgent cause, your speediest presence.

D'Amb. What? writ in blood?

Mont. I, it is the ink of lovers.

D'Amb. O it is a sacred witness of her love.
So much elixer of her blood as this
Dropped in the lightest dame, would make her firm
As heat to fire: and like to all the signs,
Commands the life confinde in all my veins;
O how it multiplies my blood with spirit,
And makes me apt t'encounter death and hell:
But, come kind Father; you fetch me to heaven,
And to that end your holy weed was given. Exit.

Enter Monsieur, Guise above. Mons. Now shall we see, that nature has no end,
In her great works, responsiue to their worths,
That she who makes so many eyes, and souls,
To see and foresee, is stark blind herself:
And as illiterate men say Latin prayers
By root of heart, and daily iteration;
In whose hot zeal, a man would think they knew
What they ran so away with, and were sure
To have rewards proportioned to their labors;
Yet may implore their own confusions
For any thing they know, which oftentimes
It falls out they incur: So nature lays
A mass of stuff together, and by use,
Or by the mere necessity of matter,
Ends such a work, fills it, or leaves it empty,
Of strength, or virtue, error or clear truth;
Not knowing what she does; but usually
Gives that which we call merit to a man,
And believe should arrive him on huge riches,
Honor, and happiness, that effects his ruin;
Right as in ships of war, whole lasts of powder
Are laid (men think) to make them last, and guard them;
When a disordered spark that powder taking,
Blows up with sudden violence and horror
Ships that kept empty, had sailed long with terror.

Gui. He that observes, but like a worldly man,
That which does often succeed, and by th'euents
Values the worth of things; will think it true,
That nature works at random just with you:
But with as much decorum she may make
A thing that from the feet up to the throat
Has all the wondrous fabrike man should have,
And leave it headless for an absolute man,
As give a whole man valor, virtue, learning,
Without an end more excellent than those,
On whom she no such worthy part bestows.

Mons. Why you shall see it here, here will be one
Young, learned, valiant, virtuous, and full mand;
One on whom Nature spent so rich a hand,
That, with an ominous eye, she wept to see
So much consumed her virtuous treasury;
Yet, as the winds sing through a hollow tree,
And (since it lets them pass through) let it stand
But a tree solid, since it gives no way
To their wild rages, they rend up by the root:
So this full creature now shall reele and fall,
Before the frantic pufs of purblinde chance
That pipes through empty men, and makes them dance:
Not so the Sea raues on the Lybian sands,
Tumbling her billows in each others neck:
Not so the surges of the euxine Sea
(Near to the frostie Pole, where free Boots
From those darke-deepe waves turns his radiant Teame)
Swell being enraged, even from their inmost drop,
As Fortune swings about the restless state
Of virtue, now thrown into all men's hate.
Intrat vmbra, Comolet to the Countess, wrapped in a Canapie. Revive those
stupid thoughts, and sit not thus,
Gathering the horrors of your servants slaughter,
(So urged by your hand, and so imminent)
Into an idle fancy; but devise
How to prevent it; watch when he shall rise,
And with a sudden outcrie of his murder,
Blow his retreat before he be engaged.

Count. O father, have my dumb woes waked your death?
When will our humane griefs be at their height?
Man is a tree, that has no top in cares;
No root in comforts; all his power to live
Is given to no end, but to have power to grieve.

Vmb. It Is the just curse of our abused creation,
Which we must suffer here, and escape hereafter:
He has the great mind that submits to all,
He sees inevitable; he the small
That carps at earth, and her foundation shaker,
And rather than himself, will mend his maker.

D'Amb. at the gulf. Count. Away, (my love) away, thou will be murdered.

Buss. Murdered? I know not what that Hebrew means:
That word had never been named had all been D'Ambois.
Murdered? By heaven he is my murderer
That shows me not a murderer; what such bugge
Abhors not the very sleep of D'Ambois?
Murdered? Who dares give all the room I see
To D'Ambois reach? or look with any odds
His fight in the face, upon whose hand sits death;
Whose sword has wings, and every feather pierces?
Let in my politic visitants, let them in,
Though entering like so many moving armours,
Fate is more strong than arms, and sly than treason,
And I at all parts buckl'd in my Fate:
Dare they not come?

Tam. They come.

1. Come all at once.

Vmb. Back coward murderers, back.

Omn. Defend us heaven. Exeunt.

1. Come ye not on?

Buss. No, slave, nor go thou off.
Stand you so firm? Will it not enter here?
You have a face yet: so in thy life's flame
I burn the first rites to my mistress fame.

Vmb. Breath thee brave son against the other charge.

Buss. O is it true then that my sense first told me?
Is my kind father dead?

Tam. He is my love.
It Was the Earl my husband in his weed that brought thee.

Buss. That was a speeding slight, and well resembled.
Where is that angry Earl my Lord? Come forth
And show your own face in your own affair;
Take not into your noble veins the blood
Of these base villans, nor the light reports
Of blister'd tongues, for clear and weighty truth:
But me against the world, in pure defense
Of your rare Lady, to whose spotless name
I stand here as a bulwark, and project
A life to her renown, that ever yet
Has been untainted even in enuies eye,
And where it would protect a sanctuary.
Brave Earl come forth, and keep your scandal in:
It Is not our fault if you enforce the spot,
Nor the wreake yours if you perform it not.

Enter Mont with others. Mont. Cowards, a fiend or spirit beat ye off?
They are your own faint spirits that have forged
The fearful shadows that your eyes deluded:
The fiend was in you; cast him out then thus.

Tam. Favor (my Lord) my love, o favor him.

Buss. I will not touch him: Take your life, my Lord,
And be appeased: O then the coward fates
Have maimed themselves, and ever lost their honor.

Vmb. What have ye done slaves? irreligious Lord?

Buss. Forbear them, father; it is enough for me
That Guise and Monsieur, death and destiny
Come behind D'Ambois: is my body then
But penetrable flesh? And must my mind
Follow my blood? Can my divine part add
No aid to th'earthly in extremity?
Then these divines are but for form, not fact:
Man is of two sweet Courtly friends compact;
A mistress and a servant: let my death
Define life nothing but a Courtiers breath.
Nothing is made of naught, of all things made,
Their abstract being a dream but of a shade.
I Will not complain to earth yet, but to heaven,
And (like a man) look upwards even in death.
Proppe me, true sword, as thou have ever done:
The equal thought I bear of life and death,
Shall make me faint on no side; I am up
Here like a Roman Statue; I will stand
Till death has made me marble: o my fame
Live in despite of murder; take thy wings
And haste thee where the gray-eyd morn perfines,
Her Rosy chariot with Sabaean spices,
Fly, where the evening from th'Iberean vales,
Takes on her swarthy shoulders, Heccate
Cround with a grove of oaks: fly where men feel
The burning axeltree: and those that suffer
Beneath the chariot of the Snowy Bear:
And tell them all that D'Ambois now is hasting
To the eternal dwellers; that a thunder
Of all their sighs together (for their frailties
Beheld in me) may quit my worthless fall
With a fit volley for my funeral.

Vmb. Forgive thy murderers.

Buss. I forgive them all;
And you my Lord, their fautor; for true sign
Of which unfeigned remission, take my sword;
Take it, and only give it motion,
And it shall find the way to victory
By his own brightness, and the inherent valor
My fight has stilled into it, with charms of spirit.

Bus. And let me pray you, that my weighty blood
Laid in one skale of your impertiall spleen
May sway the forfeit of my worthy love
Waid in the other: and be reconcilde
With all forgiveness to your matchless wife.

Tam. Forgive thou me dear servant, and this hand
That lead thy life to this unworthy end,
Forgive it, for the blood with which it is staind
In which I writ the summons of thy death:
The forced summons, by this bleeding wound,
By this here in my bosom: and by this
That makes me hold up both my hands embrewd
For thy dear pardon.

Bus. O, my heart is broken
Fate, nor these murderers, Monsieur, nor the Guise.
Have any glory in my death, but this:
This killing spectacle: this prodigy:
My sun is turned to blood against whose red beams
Pindas and Ossa (hid in endless snow
Laid on my heart and liver; from their vains)
Melt like two hungry torrents: eating rocks
Into the Ocean of all humane life,
And make it bitter, only with my blood:
O frail condition of strength, valor; virtue,
(...) (like warning fire upon the top
Of some steep Beakon, on a steeper hill)
Made to express it: like a falling star
Silently glanc't, that like a thunderbolt,
Looked to have stuck and shook the firmament.

Vmb. Son of the earth, whom my vnrested soul,
^^es to have begotten in the faith of heaven;
(Since thy reuengefull Spirit has rejected
The charity it commands, and the remission
To serve and worship, the blind rage of blood)
Assay to gratulate and pacify,
The soul fled from this worthy by performing
The Christian reconcilement he besought
Betwixt thee and thy Lady, let her wounds
Manlesly digd in her, be easd and cured
With balm of thine own tears: or be assured
Never to rest free from my haunt and horror.

Mont. See how she merits this: still sitting by
And mourning his fall, more than her own fault.

Vmb. Remove, dear daughter, and content thy husband:
So piety wills thee, and thy servants peace.

Tamy. O wretched piety, that art so distract
In thine own constancy; and in thy right
Must be unrighteous: if I right my friend
I wrong my husband: if his wrong I shun,
The duty of my friend I leave undone;
Ill plays on both sides; here and there, it rises;
No place: no good so good, but ill compriseth;
My soul more scruple breeds, than my blood, sin,
Virtue imposes more than any stepdame:
O had I never married but for form,
Never vowed faith but purposd to deceive:
Never made conscience of any sin,
But clok't it privately and made it common:
Nor never honored been, in blood, or mind,
Happy had I been then, as others are
Of the like license; I had then been honored:
Lived without envy: custom had benumbd
All sense of scruple, and all note of frailty:
My fame had been untouched, my heart unbroken:
But (shunning all) I strike on all offense,
O husband? dear friend? O my conscience?

Mont. I must not yield to pity nor to love
So servile and so traitorous: cease my blood
To wrestle with my honor, fame and judgment:
Away, forsake my house, forbear complaints
Where thou have bred them: here all things full,
Of their own shame and sorrow, leave my house.

Tam. Sweet Lord forgive me, and I will be gone,
And till these wounds, that never balm shall close
Till death has enterd at them (so I love them
Being opened by your hands) by death be cured
I never more will grieve you with my sight:
Never endure that any roof shall part
Mine eyes and heaven: but to the open deserts
(Like to hunted Tygres) I will fly:
Eating my heart, shunning the steps of men,
And look on no side till I be arrived.

Mont. I do forgive thee, and upon my knees
With hands (held up to heaven) wish that mine honor
Would suffer reconcilement to my love:
But since it will not, honor, never serve
My Love with flourishing object till it sterue:
And as this Taper, though it upwards look,
Downwards must needs consume, so let our love;
As having lost his honey, the sweet taste
Runs into savor, and will needs retain
A spice of his first parents, till (like life)
It sees and dies; so let our love: and lastly,
As when the flame is sufferd to look up
It keeps his luster: but, being thus turned down
(His natural course of useful light inuerted)
His own stuff puts it out: so let our love,
Now turn from me, as here I turn from thee,
And may both points of heavens strait axeltree
Conioine in one, before thy self and me.

Vmb. My terrors are struck inward, and no more
My penance will allow they shall enforce
Earthly afflictions but upon my self:
Farewell brave relicts of a complete man:
Look up and see thy spirit made a star,
Join flames with Hercules: and when thou setst
Thy radiant forhead in the firmament,
Make the vast continent, crack with thy receipt,
Spread to a world of fire: and th'aged sky,
Chere with new sparks of old humanity.

Finis Actus Quinti and vltimi.

