A FREE AND OFFENCELES Justification, OF A LATELY PVBLISHT and most maliciously
misinterpreted Poem: ENTITVLED Andromeda liberata.

Veritatem qui amat, emat. LONDON, Printed for LAVRENCE L'ISLE and are to be
sold at his shop in Paul's churchyard at the sign of the Tigers-head, 1614.

A FREE AND OFFENCELES Justification: Of a lately published and most maliciously
misinterpreted Poem; Entitled* Andromeda liberata.
AS Learning, has delighted from her Cradle, to hide her self from the base
and profane Vulgar, her ancient Enemy* under diverse vailes of Hierogl^phikes
Fables, and the like; So has she pleased her self with no disguise more; then
in mysteries and allegorical fictions of Poesy. These have in that kind,
been of special reputation; as taking place of the rest, both for priority of
time, and precedence of use; being borne in the old world, long before
Hieroglyphics or Fabels were conceived: And delivered from the Fathers to the
Sons of Art; without any Aucthor but Antiquity. Yet ever held in high
Reverence and Aucthority; as supposed to conceal, within the utter bark (as
their Eternities approve) some sap of hidden Truth* As either some dim and
obscure prints of divinity, and the sacred history; Of the grounds of natural*
or rules of moral Philosophy, for the recommending of some virtue, torturing
some vice in general (For howsoever Physicians allege; that their medicines,
respect non Hominem, ^e^t Socratem; not every, but such a special body: Yet
Poets profess the contrary, that their phisique intends non Socratem sed
Hominem, not the individual but the universal) Or else recording some
memorable Examples for the use of policy and state: ever (I say) enclosing
within the Rind, some fruit of knowledge howsoever darkened; and (by reason of
the obscurity) of ambiguous and different construction. (...) etc. Est enim
ipsa Natura (...) Poe^^^ anigmatu^ plena, Pl^t. in A^^b. 2.
nec qu ^is eam dignostit: This Ambiguity in the sense, has given scope to the
variety of expositions; while Poem in all ages (challenging, as their
Birthrights, the use and application of these fictions) have ever been
allowed to fashion both, pro and contra, to their own offencelesse, and
judicious occasions. And borrowing to far the priuiledg'd license of their
professions; have enlarged, or (...) the Allegory, with inventions and
dispositions of their own, to extend it to their present doctrinall and
illustrous purposes* By which aucthority, my self (resolving amongst others,
to offer up my poor mite, to the honor of the late Nuptials; betwixt the two
most Noble personages, whose honored names renown the front of my Poem)
singled out (as in some parts harmelesly, and gracefully applicable to the
occasion) The Nuptials of Perseus and Andromeda, an innocent and spotless
virgin, rescued from the polluted throat of a monster; which I in this place
applied to the savage multitude; perverting her most lawfully-sought
propagation, both of blood and blessing, to their own most lawless and
lascivious intentions: from which in all right she was legally and formally
delivered. Nor did I ever imagine till now so farre-fetcht a thought in malice
(such was my simplicity) That the fiction being as ancient as the first world,
was originally intended to the dishonor of any person now living: but presumed,
that the application being free I might pro meo iure dispose it (innocenly) to
mine own object: if at least, in mine own wrighting, I might be reasonably
and conscionablie master of mine own meaning. And to this sense, I confinde
the allegory throughout my Poem; as every word thereof, (concerning that
point) does clearly and necessarily demonstrate: without the least intendment
(I vow to God) against any noble personages free state, or honor. Nor make I
any noble (whose mere shadows heerin, the vulgar perhaps may imitatate) any
thought the more mixed with the gross substance of the vulgar: but present the
vulgar only in their vnseuerd herd; as ever in ancient tradition of all
autenticall Aucthours they have been resembled: To whom they were never
beholding for any fairer Titles; Caligula.
then the base, ignoble, barbarous, giddie multitude; The Monster with many
heads (which the Emperor, in his displeasure, wished to have sprung all from one
neck; that all at one blow, he might have v^trunkt them) cui lumen (...);
without an Eye; or, at most, seeing all by one fight (like the Lamiae, who had
but one eye to serve all their directions, which, as any one of them went
abroad, she put on, and put off when she came home) giving up their
understandings to their affections, and taking up their affections on other
men's credits, ^
never examining the causes of their Loves or hates, but (like curres) always
ba^king at all they know not: whose most honored deseruings (were they known
to them as to others of nearer and truer observation) might impresse in them as
much reverence as their ignorance does rudeness: Evermore baying lowdest at
the most eminent Reputations, and with who^ as in the kingdom of Frogs) the
most loud Crier, is the loftiest Rule^* No reason nor aucthority able to stoop
them; though never so iudicially and religiously vrdging them: whose impartial
and clear truth; not their own bold blindness can deny; unless they will
dare to mutter with the Orator touching the Delphicke Oracles, and say our
Oracles of Truth, (...)
did likewise (...) incline to Philip putting no difference betwixt Illusion
and Truth, the consciences of learned religious men* and the cunnings of
profane. And then how may my poor endeauours, in duty to Truth, and my most
dear Conscience (for Reputation, since it stands, for the most part, on beasts
feet, and Deserts hand is nothing to warrant it, let it go with the beastly)
reform or escape their unrelenting detractions? The Loves of the right
virtuous and truly noble, I have ever as much esteemed, as despised the rest*
finding ever of the first sort, in all degrees, as worthy as any of my rank,
till (having enough to do in mine own necessary ends, hating to insinuate and
labor their confirmation, and increase of opinion, further then their own
free judgments would excite and direct them) I still met with undermining
laborers for themselves, who (esteeming all worth their own, which they detract
from others) deminisht me much in some changeable estimations ( Amicu^^ (...)
Animal facile mutabil^) whose supplies yet far better have still brought me
unfought: and till this most unequal impression oppressed me, I stood firm up
with many, now only, with God and my self. For the violent hoobub, setting my
song to their own tunes, have made it yield so harsh and distastefull a sound
to my best friends, that my Integrity* even they hold, affected with the
shrill echo thereof, by reflection receiving it from the mouths of others. And
thus (to (...), as struck dumb with the disdain of it, their most unmanly
lie both of my ba^^^ing and wounding, saying* Take this for your Andromeda, not
being so much as touched, I witness God, nor one syllable suffering) I will
descend to a conclusion with this, that in all this my seed time, sowing
others honors, (...)super semi^auit Zizania etc. Whiles I slept in mine
innocence, the envious man has been here, who like a venomous spider,
drawing this subtle thread out of himself, cunningly spread it into the ears of
the many (who as they see all with one eye, so hear all with one ear, and
that always the left) where multiplying and getting strength it was spread into
an Artificial web, to entangle my poor poetical fly; being otherwise (God
knows) for enough from all venom, save what has been ^oro'st into her, by
her poisonous enemy to sting her to death. But the allusion (you will say) may
be extended so far; but qui nimium emulget elicet sanguinem; a malicious
reader by straining the Allegory past his intentionall limits, may make it
give blood, where it yeeldes naturally milk, and ouercurious wits may discover
a sting in a fly: But as a guiltless prisoner at the bar said to a Lawyer
thundering against his life, Number quia tu disertus es, ego peribo? because malice
is witty, must Innocence be condemned? Or if some other, not sufficiently
examining what I have written, shall by mistaking the title, suppose it carry
such an understanding; does any Law therefore cast that meaning upon me? Or does
any rule of reason make it good, that let the writer mean what he list, his
writing notwithstanding must be construed in mentem Legentis? to the intendment
of the Reader? If then, for the mistaking of an envious or unskillful Reader,
who commonly being praeiudicia pro iudicijs, I shall be exposed to the hate of
the better sort, or taken forciblie into any powerful displeasure, I shall
esteem it an act as cruel and tyranous, as that of the Emperor, who put a
Consul to death for the error of a public Crier; misnaming him Emperor in
stead of Consul. For my self I may justly say thus much, that if my whole life
were laid on the rack, it could never accuse me for a Satyrist or Libeller, to
play with worthy men's reputations; or if my vain were so addicted, yet could
I so far be given over, as without cause or end, to adventure on personages
of renownd nobility? having infallible reason to assure my self, that even
those most honored personages, to whose graces I chiefly intended these
labors, might they but in the lest degree have suspected any such allusion by
me purposed, as is now most injuriously surmised against me, they would have
abhorred me and banished me their sight. To conclude Hic Rhodus, hic saltus; as
I said of my life, so of my lines; here is the Poem; let every syllable of
it be tortured by any how partial and preiudicate so ever (for as the case
has been carried: I can now look for no difference) and if the least
particle thereof, can be brought, necessarily or justly to confess, any
harmefull intention of mine to the height imagined, having already past the
test of some of the most Judicial and Noble of this Kingdom: if Malice will
still make unanswerably mine, what her self has merely invented, and say
with Physicians, that the fault of the first concoction cannot be corrected in
the second, (my meat supposed Harpylike ravished at first, into her vicious
stomach) And that as Herodotus is unjustly said to praise only the Athenians,
that all Grecians else he might the more freely deprave, so Malice will as
licentiously affirm, that my Poem has something honorably applicable,
that the rest might the more safely discover my malignance: And lastelie, If my
Judges (being preiudicd with my accusation, have no ear left to hear my
defense) will therefore powerfullie continue their hostility both against my
life and reputation, then Collu^ securi, I must endure at how inhumane hands
soever (at least) my poor credits amputation: humbly retiring my self within
the Castle of my Innocence, and there in patience possessing my Soul, quietly
abide their uttermost outrage: dedefending my self, as I may, from the better
sort, by a clear conscience, from the baser, by an eternal contempt.

Pereas, qui calamitates hominum colligis.

Eur: The worst of the greatest Act.

Aetna quenched.

Did: Two Plants in one soil fruitless; Both transplanted:
(Untouched) find fit means for posterity granted.
The worst of the least.
The spleenelesse Fly.
Did: The Innocent deliuerd, her destroier
Her trophe is: Her Sauer, Her Enioyer.
Tamen haec fremit Plebs.
Live: Yet further opposd; admit a little further answer.

Dialogus.
The Persons Pheme and Theodines. Phe. HO! you! Theodines you must not dream
You Are thus dismissed in Peace, se as too extreme
Your song has stird up, to becalmd so soon:
Nay, in your haven you shipwreck, you are undone,
Your Perseus is displeasd, and sleighteth now
Your work, as idle, and as servile, you.
The Peoples god-voice, has exclamd away
Your mistie clouds, and he se^s clear as day
You Have made him scandald for another wrong,
Wishing vnpublisht your vnpopular song.

Theo. O thou with peoples breaths and bubbles filled.
Ever de^iuered, evermore with child:
How Court and City burnish with the breed
Of news and ni^les? seasoning all their feed
With nothing, but what only (dressed like thee)
Of surfeit tastes and superfluity?
Let all thy bladder-(...)still inspire*
And make embroderd facte-^als for the mire
With thy suggestions: On the cloven feet
Of thy Chymaera tossed from street to street;
Out Perseus (...) with the pre^s^
Or like the inconstant Moon be, that like these
M^kes her self ready by her glass the (...)
The common Rendes vous of all rude streams:
And fed in some part, with our common Thames
As that is hourly served with sewers and sinckes,
Strengthening and cleansing our sweet meats and drinks,
Our Perseus by Mineruaes perfect Mirror
Informs his beauties: that reformd from th'^rror
Which Change and Fashion in most others find,
Like his fair body, he may make his mind,
Deck that with knowing ornaments, and then
Effuse his radiance, upon knowing Men,
Which can no more fail then the sun to show
By his in-^ight, his outward ouerflow.
Perseus? (that when Minerua in her spring
Which renders deathlesse, every noble thing
Clarified in it, thri^^ (...) has his (...))
Take from a Sow, that washes in her stood
(The common ken^ell) every gut she feeds?
His food then thinking cleaner? And (...) then
Take it for manly; when unfit for Men?
Can I seem servile to him, when ahlas
My whole Life's freedom, shows I never was?
If I be rude in speech, or not express
My Plain Mind, with affected Courtlines
His Insight can into the Fountain reach,
And knows, sound meaning nere used glosing speech.

Phem. Well, be he as you hope, but this believe,
All friends have left you, all that knew you gri^ue
(For fair condition in you) that your Thrall,
To one Man's humor, should so lose them all:

Theo. One may be worth all, and they thus implie
Themselves are all bad, that our Good ^^uie*
Goodness and Truth they are ( the All-good knows)
To whom my free Sole all her labors vows.
If friends for this forsake me, let them fly;
And know that (...) their inconstancy
Grieves, or disheartens my resolved endeauours
Then I had shaken off so many fea^ers.
M^ fair condition moves them ^ Even right thus
Fared the Physician, (...)
With still poor Socrates; who terming rude,
Lust^ull, vnlearnd* and with no wit indude,
The most wise Man, did add yet, he is just.
And with that praise, would give his dispraise trust.
For as a man, whom Art has flattery taught,
And is at all parts, master of his Craft;
With long and varied praises, does sometimes
Mix by the way, some slight and peruiall crimes
As sauce; to give his flatteries taste and scope,
So, that Malignitie, may give her hope
Of faults believed effect, she likewise lays
In her strowd passage, some light flowers of praise.
But it is not me ahlas, they thus pursue
With such vnprofiting, Cunning, nor embrue
Their bitter spent mouths, with such bloud-mixt some,
In chase of any action that can come
From my poor form, but from the foot they tread
Those passages, that thence affect the head.
And why? who knows? not that next spirit that is
Organe to all their knowing faculties,
Linceus.
Or else, I know I often have read of one
So sharpe-eyd, he could see through Oak and Stone,
Callicrates.
Another that high set in Sicilie
Mirmecides.
As far as Carthage numbered with his eye,
The Navy under sail* which was dissite
A night and days sail; with winds most fore-right;
And others, that such curious chariots made
As with a flies wing, they hid all in shade,
And in a Ses^^^ine (small Indian grain)
Engrau'd a page of Homers verses plain.
These farre-seene meruailes, I could never see
Being made of down right, flat simplicity,
How near our curious Craftsmen come to these
They must demonstrate, ere they win the wise:

Phe. But who are those you reckon Homicides
In your rackt Poem? I swear, that diuides
Your wondering Reader, far from your applause.

Theo. I joy in that, for weighing with this cause
Their other Reason, men may clearly see,
How sharp and pregnant their constructions be.
I prove by Argument, that he that loves
Is dead, and only in his lover moves.
His Lover as it were taking life from him:
And praising that kind slaughter I condemn
As churlish Homicides, See my reasons in their places.
who will deny
In love twixt two, the possibility
To propagate their lives into descent
Needful and lawful, and that argument
Is Platoes, Quippe non minus homicida censendus est qui hominem praecipit
nasciturum; quam qui natum tollite medio. Audacior autem, qui presentem
ab^umpit vitam, crudelio^, qui lucem inuidet naseituro, and nondum natos filios
suos enecat. Plat. in Sympo.
to a word, which much commends
The two great personages, who wanting th'ends
Of wedlock, as they were; with one consent
Sought clear distunction, which (with blessed event)
May join both otherwise, with such increase
Of worthy Offspring, that posterities
May bless their fautors, and their favors now:
Whom now such bans and poisons ouerflow.

Phem. Bound to a barraine rock, and death expected,
See that with all your skill then clean dissected.
That (barraine) clear your edge of, if you can.

Theo. As if that could applied be to a Man?
O barraine Malice! was it ever said
A man was barraine? or the burden laid
Of bearing fruit on Man? if not, nor this
Epithete barraine, can be construed his
In least propriety: but that such a one
As was Andromeda; Virgo sane egreg^^, and omnibus animi and corporis dotibus
ornatissima Natal: Co: de Andromeda.
in whose parts shone
All beauties, both of body and of mind
The sea dame to a barraine rock should bind
In envy least some other of her kind
Should challenge them for beauty any more;
Encreast the cause of making all deplore
So dear an innocent, with all desert
No more then (for Humanities shame) pervert
For of your whole huge reckonings here is the sum,
O saeclum insipiens, and inficetum.

Quod dignis adimit, transit ad Impios.

