THE MEMORABLE MASK of the two Honorable Houses or Inns of Court; the Middle
Temple, and Lyncolns Inn.

As it was performd before the King, at White Hall on Shroue Monday at night;
being the 15. of February. 1613.

At the Princely celebration of the most Royal Nuptials of the Palfgraue, and
his thrice gracious Princess Elizabeth. etc.

With a description of their whole show; in the manner of their march on
horseback to the Court from the Master of the Rolls his house: with all
their right Noble consorts, and most showfull attendants.

Invented, and fashioned, with the ground, and special structure of the whole
work,

By our Kingdoms most Artfull and Ingenious Architect INNIGO JONES.

Supplied, Aplied, Digested, and written, By GEO: CHAPMAN.

AT LONDON, Printed by G. Eld, for George Norton and are to be sold at his
shop near Temple Bar.

TO THE MOST NOble, and constant Combiner of Honor, and Virtue, Sir EDWARD
PHILIPS, Knight, Mr. of the Rolls.
THis Noble and Magnificent performance, renewing the ancient spirit, and Honor
of the Innes of Court; being especially furthered and followed by your most
laborious and honored endeavors, (for his Majesty's service; and honor of the
all-grace-deseruing Nuptials, of the thrice gracious Princess Elizabeth, his
Highness daughter) deserves especially to be in this sort consecrate, to your
worthy memory and honor. Honor, having never her fair hand more freely and
nobly given to Riches (being a fit particle of this Invention) then by yours,
at this Nuptial solemnity. To which assisted, and memorable ceremony; the
ioin'd hand and industry, of the worthily honored Knight, Sir H. Hubberd, his
Majesty's Atturny general, deserving, in good part, aioint memory with yours;
I have submitted it freely to his noble acceptance. The poor pains I added to
this Royal service, being wholly chosen, and commanded by your most constant,
and free favor; I hope will now appear nothing neglectiue of their expected
duties. Hearty will, and care enough, I am assured was employed in me; and the
only ingenuous will, being first and principal step to virtue; I beseech you
let it stand for the performing virtue it self. In which addition of your
euer-honour'd favors, you shall ever bind all my future service to your most
wished Commandment.

God send you long health, and your Virtues will endue you with honor enough,

By your free merits ever vowed honorer, and most unfeignedly affectionate
Obseruant. GEO. CHAPMAN.

THE MASK OF THE Gentlemen of the two combined houses, or Inns of Court, the
Middle Temple, and Lincolns Inn.
AT the house of the most worthily honored preferrer and gracer of all
honorable Actions, and virtues, (Sir Edward Philips Knight, Master of the
Rolls) all the Performers and their Assistents made their Rendes vous, prepared
to their performance, and thus set forth.

Fifty Gentlemen, richly attirde, and as gallantly mounted, with Footmen
perticularly attending, made the noble vant-guarde of these Nuptial forces.
Next (a fit distance observed between them) marched a mock-Maske of Baboons,
attired like fantastical Trauailers, in Neapolitane suits, and great ruffes,
all horst with Asses; and dwarf Palfries, with yellow foot-cloathes, and
casting Cockle-demois about, in courtesy, by way of lardges; Torches boarn on
either hand of them; lighting their state as ridiculously, as the rest Nobly.
After them were sorted two Carrs Triumphall, adornd with great Mask heads,
Festones, scroules, and antic leaves, every part inricht with silver and
gold. These were through-varied with different invention, and in them
advanced, the choice Musitions of our Kingdom, six in each; attired like
Virginean Priests, by whom the Sun is there adored; and therefore called the
Phoebades. Their Robes were tuckt up before; strange Hoods of feathers, and
scallops about their necks, and on their heads turbants, stuck with several
colored feathers, spotted with wings of Flies, of extraordinary bigness; like
those of their country: And about them marched two ranks of Torches. Then rode
the chief Maskers, in Indian habits, all of a resemblance: the ground cloth
of silver, richly embroidered, with golden Sunns, and about every Sun, ran a
traile of gold, imitating Indian work,: their bases of the same stuff and
work, but betwixt every pane of embroidery, went a row of white Estridge
feathers, mingled with sprigs of gold plate; under their breasts, they woare
bawdricks of gold, embroidered high with purle, and about their necks, Ruffes
of feathers, spangled with pearl and silver. On their heads high
sprig'd-feathers, compast in Coronets, like the Virginian Princes they
presented. Betwixt every set of feathers, and about their brows, in the
vnder-part of their Coronets, shined Suns of gold plate, sprinkled with
pearl; from whence sprung rays of the like plate, that mixing with the
motion of the feathers, showed exceedingly delightful, and gracious. Their
legs were adorned, with close long white silke-stockings: curiously
embroidered with gold to the Middelegge.

And over these (being on horse back) they drew greaues or buskins embrodered
with gould, and enterlac't with rewes of feathers; Altogether estrangfull, and
Indian like.

In their Hands (set in several postures as they rode) they brandisht cane
darts of the finest gould. Their vizerds of olive color; but pleasingly
visag'd: their hair, black and lardge, wauing down to their shoulders.

Their Horse, for rich show, equalld the Maskers themselves; all their
caparisons being enchac't with suns of Gould and Ornamentall Jewels. To
every one of which, was tackt a Scarffing of Silver; that ran sinnuousely in
works over the whole caparison, even to the daseling of the admiring
spectators.

Their heads, no less gracefully and properly decked with the like light
skarffing that hung about their ears wantonly dangling.

Every one of these horse, had two Moors, attired like Indian slaves, that for
state sided them; with swelling wreaths of gould, and watshed on their heads,
which arose in all to the number of a hundred.

The Torch-bearers habits were likewise of the Indian garb, but more strauagant
then those of the Maskers; all showfully garnisht with seueral-hewd feathers.
The humble variety whereof, stuck off the more amply, the Maskers high
beauties, shining in the habits of themselves; and reflected in their kind, a
new and delightfully-varied radiance on the beholders.

All these sustaind torches of Virgin wax, whose staves were great canes al
over gilded; And these (as the rest) had every Man his Moore, attending his
horse.

The Maskers, riding single; had every Masker, his Torch-bearer mounted before
him.

The last Chariot, which was most of all adornd; had his whole frame filled
with molded work; mixed all with paintings, and glittering scarffings of
silver; over which was cast a Canopie of gold, boarne up with antic figures,
and all composed a la Grotesea. Before this in the seat of it, as the
Chariotere; was advanced a strange person, and as strangely habited, half
French, half Swizz; his name Capriccio; wearing on his head a pair of golden
Bellows, a guilt spur in one hand, and with the other mannaging the reigns
of the four Horses that drew it:

On a seat of the same Chariot, a little more eleuate, sat Eunomia, the
Virgin Priest of the Goddess Honor, together with Phemis, her Herald: The
habit of her Priest, was a Robe of white silk, gathered about the neck; a
pentacle of siluered stuff about her shoulders, hanging foldedly down, both
before and behind.

A vestall veil on her head of Tiffany, strip'twith silver, hanging with a
train, to the earth.

The Herrald was attyr'd in an Antique Curace of silver stuff, with labells at
the wings and basses; a short gown of gould stuff; with wide sleeves, cut in
panes: A wreath of gould on his head, and a Rod of gould in his hand.

Highest of all in the most eminent seat of the Tryumphall sat, side to side,
the celestial Goddess, Honor; and the earthy Deity, Plutus; or Riches. His
attire; a short robe of gould, frindg'd; his wide sleeuesturn'd up, and
out-showd his naked arms: his Head and Beard sprinckl'd with showrs of gould:
his Buskins, clinckant, as his other attire. The Ornaments of Honor were these:
a rich full robe of blew silk girt about her, a mantle of silver worn
ouer-thwart, full gathered, and descending in folds behind: a veil of netlawne,
enbrodered with Oos and Spangl'd; her tresses in tucks, braided with silver:
The hinder part shadowing in waves her shoulders.

These, thus perticularly, and with propriety adorned, were strongly attended
with a full Guard of two hundred Halbardiers: two Marshals (being choice
Gentlemen, of either house) Commaunder-like attired, to and fro coursing, to
keep all in their orders.

A show at all parts so novel, conceitfull and glorious, as has not in this
land, (to the proper use and object it had porpos'd) been ever before beheld.
Nor did those honorable Inns of Court, at any time in that kind, such
acceptable service to the sacred Majesty of this kingdom, nor were returned by
many degrees, with so thrice gracious, and royal entertainment and honor. But,
(as above said) all these so marching to the Court at White Hall, the King,
Bride, and Bridegroom, with all the Lords of the most honored privy Council, and
our chief Nobility, stood in the Gallery before the Tilt-yeard, to behold their
arrival; who, for the more full satisfaction of his Majesty's view, made one
turn about the yeard, and dismounted: being then honorably attended through the
Gallery to a Chamber appointed, where they were to make ready for their
performance in the Hall, etc.

The King being come forth, the Maskers ascended unseen to their scoene. Then
for the works.

First there appeared at the lower end of the Hall, an Artificial Rock, whose
top was near as high as the hall it self. This Rock, was in the undermost
part craggy, and full of hollow places, in whose concaues were contrived, two
winding pair of stairs, by whose greeces the Persons above might make their
descents, and all the way be seen: all this Rock grew by degrees up into a
gold-colour; and was run quite through, with veins of gold: On the one side
whereof, eminently raised on a fair hill, was erected a silver Temple of an
octangle figure, whose Pillars were of a composed order, and bore up an
Architraue, Freese, and Cornish: Over which stood a continued Plinthe; whereon
were aduaunc't Statues of silver: Above this, was placed a bastard Order of
Architecture, wherein were keru'd Compartements: In one of which was written in
great gold Capitalls, HONORIS FANVM: Above all, was a Coupolo, or Type, which
seemed to be scaled with silver Plates.

For finishing, of all, upon a Pedistall, was fixed a round stone of silver,
from which grew a pair of golden wings, both faign'd to be Fortunes: the
round stone (when her feet trod it) ever affirmed to be rouling; figuring her
inconstancy: the golden wings, denoting those nimble Powers, that pompously
bear her about the world; On that Temple (erected to her daughter, Honor; and
figuring this kingdom) put off by her, and fixed, for assured sign she would
never forsake it.

About this Temple, hung Festones wreathed with silver from one Pillars head to
another. Besides, the Freese was enricht with keruings, all showing Greatness
and Magnificence.

On the other side of the Rock, grew a Grove, in whose utmost part appeared a
vast, withered, and hollow Tree, being the bare receptacle of the Baboonerie.

These following should in duty have had their proper places, after every
fitted speech of the Actors; but being prevented by the unexpected haste of the
Printer, which he never let me know, and never sending me a proof, till he had
past those speeches; I had no reason to imagine he could have been so forward.
His fault is therefore to be supplied by the observation, and reference of the
Reader, who will easily perceive, where they were to be inserted.

After the speech of Plutus (who as you may see after, first entered) the middle
part of the Rock began to move, and being come some five paces up toward the
King, it split in pieces with a great crack; and our brake Capriccio, as before
described. The pieces of the Rock vanished and he spoke as in his place.

At the singing of the first Song, full, which was sung by the Virginian
Priests; called the Phoebades, to six Lutes (being used as an Orphean virtue,
for the state of the Mines opening): the upper part of the Rock was suddenly
turned to a Cloud, discovering a rich and refulgent Mine of gold; in which
the twelve Maskers were triumphantly seated: their Torch-bearers attending
before them. All the lights being so ordered, that though none were seen, yet
had their luster such virtue, that by it, the least spangle or spark of the
Maskers rich habites, might with ease and cleerenesse be discerned as far off
as the seat.

Over this golden Mine, in an Evening sky, the ruddy Sun was seen ready to be
set; and behind the tops of certain white Cliffes, by degrees descended,
casting up a bank of Clouds; in which, a while he was hidden: but then
gloriously shining, gave that vsually-obseru'd good Omen, of succeeding fair
weather.

Before he was fully set, the Phoebades (showing the custom of the Indians to
adore the Sun setting) began their observance with the Song, to whose place,
we must refer you for the manner and words; All the time they were singing;
the Torch-bearers holding up their Torches to the Sun; to whom the Priests
themselves, and the rest, did as they sung obeisance: Which was answred by
other Music and voices, at the commandment of Honor, with al'obseruances
used to the King etc. As in the following places.

TO answer certain insolent objections made against the length of my speeches,
and narrations; being (for the probability of all accidents, rising from the
invention of this Mask; and their aplication, to the persons, and places: for
whom, and by whom it was presented) not convenient, but necessary; I am
enforct to affirm this; That: as there is no Poem nor Oration so general; but
has his one particular proposition; Nor no river so extrauagantly ample, but
has his neuer-so-narrow fountain, worthy to be namd; so all these courtly,
and honoring inventions (having Poesy, and Oration in them, and a fountain,
to be expressed, from whence their Rivers flow) should expressiuely-arise; out of
the places, and persons for; and by whom they are presented; without which
limits, they are luxurious, and pain. But what rules soever are set down, to
any Art, or Act (though, without their observation; No Art, nor Act, is true,
and worthy) yet are they nothing the more followd; or those few that follow
them credited. Every vulgarly-esteemd vpstart; dares break the dreadful
dignity of ancient and autenticall Poesy: and presume Luciforously, to
proclaim in place thereof, repugnant precepts of their own spaune. Truth, and
Worth, have no faces, to enamour the Lycentious, but vainglory, and humor.
The same body: the same beauty, a thousand men seeing: Only the man whose
blood is fitted, has that which he calls his soul, enamourd. And this, out
of infallible cause; for, men understand not these of Maenander -- est morbus
oportunitas

Animae, quodictus, vulnus accipit grave. But the cause of all Men's being
enamourd with Truth. And of her slight respect, in others; is the divine
Freedom; one touching with his aprehensiue finger, the other, passing. The Hill
of the Muses (which all men must clime in the regular way, to Truth) is said of
old, to be forcked. And the two points of it, parting at the Top; are Insania,
and, diuinus furor. Insania, is that which every Ranck-brainde writer; and
judge of Poetical writing, is rapt withal; when he presumes either to write
or censure the height of Poesy; and that transports him with humor,
vainglory and pride, most profane and sacrilegious: when diuinus furor;
makes gentle, and noble, the never so truly inspired writer --

Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros. And the mild beams of the most holy
inflamer; easily, and sweetly enter, with all understanding sharpness, the
soft, and sincerely humane; but with no Time; No Study; No means under heaven:
any arrogant, all-occupation deuourer (that will Chandler-like set up with all
wares; selling, Poesies Nectar and Ambrosia; as well as musterd, and vineagar.)
The chaste and restraind beams of humble truth will ever enter; but only
grase, and glaunce at them: and the further fly them.

The aplicable argument of the Mask.
HOnor, is so much respected, and adored; that she has a Temple erected to
her, like a Goddess; a Virgin Priest consecrated to her (which is Eunomia, or
Law; since none should dare access to Honor, but by Virtue; of which Law
being the rule, must needs be a chief) and a Herrald (called Phemis, or Fame)
to proclaim her institutions, and commandments. To amplefie yet more the
divine graces of this Goddess; Plutus, (or Riches) being by Aristophanes,
Lucian. etc. presented naturally blind, deformd, and dull witted; is here by
his love of Honor, made see, made sightly, made ingenious; made liberal: And
all this converted and consecrate to the most worthy celebration of these
sacred Nuptials; all issuing (to conclude the necessary application) from an
honorable Temple. etc. Non est certa fides, quam non Iniuria versat.
-- Fallit portus and ipse fidem.


Errata.
In Capri. first speech, for many* read maine, in c. 1. for Pot, re. post. in
c. 3. for answer, re. austerity, for purposes, re. purses, in c. 3. for
seemingly, re. securely, in d. 2. for law, and virtue, re. love and beauty, in
the first stance of the second song, for this re. his. for sweet devotions, re.
fit devotions.

THE NAMES OF THE SPEAKERS.
Honor, a Goddess. Plutus, (or Riches) a God. Eunomia (or law) Priest of
honor. Phemis, Honors Herrald. Capriccio, a man of wit, etc.
THE PRESENTMENT.
Plutus appeared suruaying the work with this speech. PLVTVS. Rocks? Nothing
but Rocks in these masking deu^ces? Is Invention so poor she must needs
ever dwell amongst Rocks? But it may worthily have chaunc'd (being so often
presented) that their vain Custom is now become the necessary hand of
heaven, transforming into Rocks, some stony hearted Ladies, courted in former
masks; for whose loves, some of their repulst servants have perished: or perhaps
some of my flintie-hearted Usurers have been here metamorphosed; betwixt whom
and Ladies, there is resemblance enough: Ladies using to take interest, besides
their principal, as much as Usurers. See, it is so; and now is the time of
restoring them to their natural shapes: It moves, opens, excellent! This
metamorphosis I intend to ouek-heare.


A ROCK, MOOVING and breaking with a crack about Capriccio, he enters with a
pair of Bellows on his head, a spur in one hand, and a peeece of gold Ore in
the other, etc. He speaks, vt sequitur. CAPRICCIO. HOw hard this world is to a
man of wit? he must eat through many Rocks for his food, or fast; a restles
and tormenting stone, his wit is to him: the very stone of Sisyphus in hell;
nay, the Philosophers stone, makes not a man more wretched: A man must be a
second Proteus, and turn himself into all shapes (like Ulysses) to wind
through the straites of this pinching vale of misery; I have turned my self
into a Tailor, a Man, a Gentleman, a Nobleman, a Worthy man; but had never the
wit to turn my self into an Alder-man. There are many shapes to perish in,
but one to live in, and tha's an Aldermans: It Is not for a man of wit to take
any rich Figure upon him: your bold, proud, ignorant, that is brave and
clinkant, that finds crowns put into his shoes every morning by the Fayries
and will never tell; whose Wit is humor, whose Judgment is fashion, whose
Pride is emptiness, Birth his full man, that is in all things something, in
Sum total, nothing. He shall live in the land of Spruce, milk and honey
flowing into his mouth sleeping.


PLVTVS. This is no transformation, but an intrusion into my golden mines: I
will hear him-further.


CAPRIC. This breach of Rocks I have made, in needy pursuit of the blind
Deity, Riches: who is myraculously arrived here. For (according to our rare men
of wit) heaven standing, and earth moving, her motion (being circular) has
brought one of the most remote parts of the world, to touch at this
all-exceeding Island: which a man of wit would imagine must needs move
circularly with the rest of the world, and so ever maintain an equal distance.
But, Poets (our chief men of wit) answer that point directly; most
ingeniously affirming: That this I Will is (for the excellency of it) divided from
the world ( diuisus ab orb Britannus) and that though the whole World besides
moves; yet this I Will stands fixed on her own feet, and defies the Worlds
mutability, which this rare accident of the arrival of Riches, in one of his
furthest-off-scituate dominions, most demonstratiuely proves.


PLVTVS. This is a man of wit indeed, and knows of all our arriuals.


CAPRIC. With this dull Deity Riches, a rich Island lying in the South Sea,
called Poeana, (of the Poeans (or songs) sung to the Sun, whom they there adore
(being for strength and riches, called the Nauill of that South Sea) is by
earths round motion moved near this Brittan Shore. In which Island (being yet
in command of the Virginian continent.) A troop of the noblest Virginians
inhabiting; attended hither the God of Riches, all triumphantly shyning in a
Mine of gould. For hearing of the most royal solemnity, of these sacred
Nuptials; they crossed the Ocean in their honor, and are here arrived. A poor
snatch at some of the goulden Ore, that the feet of riches have turned up as he
trod here, my poor hand has purchased; and hope the Remainder of a greater
work, will be shortly extant.


PLVT. You Sir, that are miching about my goulden Mines here.


CAPR. What, can you see Sir? you have heretofore been presented blind: like
your Mother Fortune; and your Brother Love.


PLVT. But now Sir, you see I see.


CAPR. By what good means, I beseech you Sir.


PLVT. That means, I may vouchsafe you hereafter; mean space, what are you?


CAPR. I am Sir a kind of Man; A Man of wit: with whom your worship has
nothing to do I think.


PLVT. No Sir, nor will have any thing to do with him: A Man of wit? what is
that? A Beggar.


CAPR. And yet no Devil Sir.


PLV. As I am, you mean.


CAPR. Indeed sir your Kingdom is under the Earth.


PLVT. That Is true; for Riches is the Atlas that holds it up, it would sink
else.


CAPR. It Is rather a wonder, it sinks not with you Sir, you are so sinfully, and
damnably heavy.


PLVT. Sinful? and damnable? what a Puritan? These Bellows you wear on your
head, show with what matter your brain is pufft up Sir: A Religion-forger I
see you are, and presume of inspiration from these Bellows; with which ye
study to blow up the settled governments of kingdoms.


CAPR. Your worship knockes at a wrong door Sir, I dwell far from the person
you speak of.


PLVT. What may you be then, being a man of wit? a Buffon, a Iester. Before I
would take upon me the title of a man of wit, and be baffled by every man of
wisdom for a Buffon; I would turn Banckrout, or let up a Tobacco shop,
change clokes with an Alchemist, or serve an Usurer, be a watering pot for
every Groom; stand the push of every rascal wit; enter lifts of jests with
trencher-fooles, and be foold down by them, or (which is worse) put them
down in fooling: are these the qualities a man of wit should run proud of?


CAPR. Your worship I see has obtaind wit, with sight, which I hope yet my poor
wit will well be able to answer; for touching my jesting, I have heard of some
Courtiers, that have run themselves out of their states with Iusting; and why
may not I then raise my self in the State with jesting? An honest Shoemaker,
(in in a liberal Kings time) was knighted for making a clean boot, and is it
impossible, that I for breaking a clean Jest, should be aduaunct in Court, or
Counsel? or at least, served out for an Ambassador to a dull Climate? Jests,
and Merriments are but wild weeds in a rank soil, which being well manured,
yield the wholesome crop of wisdom and discretion at time ath'yeare.


PLV. Nay, nay, I commend thy judgment for cutting thy cote so just to the
breadth of thy shoulders; he that cannot be a courser in the field, let him
learn to play the Iack-an-Apes in the Chamber, he that cannot personate the
wiseman well amongst wisards, let him learn to play the fool well amongst
dizzards.


CAPR. It Is passing miraculous, that your dull and blind worship should so
suddenly turn both sightfull, and witfull.


PLVT. The Riddle of that miracle, I may chance dissolve to you in sequel;
mean time, what name sustain'st thou? and what toies are these thou bear so
phantastically about thee?


CAPR. These, toies Sir, are the Ensigns that discover my name and quality:
my name being Capriccio, and I wear these Bellows on my head, to show I can
pusse up with glory all those that affect me: and besides, bear this spur,
to show I can spur gall, even the best that contemn me.


PLVT. A dangerous fellow, But what make thou (poor man of wit) at these
pompous Nuptials;


CAPRIC. Sir, I come hither with a charge; To do these Nuptials, I hope, very
acceptable service; And my charge is; A company of accomplished Trauailers; that
are excellent at Antemaskes; and will tender a taste of their quallity, if your
worship please.


PLVT. Excellent well pleased; of what virtue are they besides.


CAPR. Passing grave Sir, yet exceeding acute: witty, yet not ridiculous; never
laugh at their own jests: laborious yet not base, having cut out the skirts of
the whole world, in amorous quest of your gould and silver.


PLVT. They shall have enough; call them: I beseech thee call them: how far
hence abide they?


CAPR. Sir (being by another eminent quality the admired soldiers of the
world) in contempt of softnes, and delicacie, they lie on the naturally hard
boords of that naked tree; and will your worship assure them rewards fit for
persons of their freight.


PLVT. Do thou doubt my reward being pleased?


CAPR. I know Sir, a man may sooner win your reward, for pleasing you, the^
deserving you. But you great wise persons, have a fetch of State; to employ
with countenance, and encouragement, but reward with answer and disgrace, save
your purposes, and lose your honors.


PLVT. To assure thee of reward, I will now satisfy thee touching the
miraculous cause, both of my sight and wit, and which consequently moves me to
humanity, and bounty; And all is, only this; my late being in love, with the
lovely Goddess Honor.


CAPRIC. If your Worshipp love Honor, indeed, Sir you must needs be
bountiful. But where is the rare Goddess you speak of to be seen?


PLVTVS. In that Rich Temple, where Fortune fixed those her goulden wings, thou
see; And that rolling stone she used to tread upon, for sign she would
never for-sake this Kingdom; There is adored, the worthy Goddess Honor. The
swetnesse of whose voice, when I first heard her persuasions, both to my self,
and the Virginian Princes arrived here, to do honor and homage, to these
heavenly Nuptials, so most powerfully enamored me, that the fire of my love
flew up to the sight of mine eyes: that have lighted within me a whole
firmament of Bounty, which may semingly assure the, thy reward is certain: and
therefore call thy accomplished company to their Antemaske.


CAPRIC. See Sir, The time, set for their apperance, being expired; they
appear to their service of themselves.


Enter the Baboones after whose dance, being Anticke, and delightful, they
returned to their Tree, when Plutus spoke to Capriccius. PLVTVS. Gramercy now
Capriccio, take thy men of complement, and travail with them to other
marriages. My Riches to thy Wit; they will get something some-where.


CAPR. What Is this?


PLVT. A strain of Wit beyond a Man of Wit. I have imployd you, and the grace
of that, is reward enough; hence; pack, with your complemental Fardle: The
sight of an attendant for reward, is abominable in the eyes of a turne-seru'd
Politician, and I fear, will strike me blind again. I can not abide these
bellows of thy head, they and thy men of wit have melted my Mines with them,
and consumed me, yet take thy life and be gone. Neptune let thy predecessor,
Ulysses, live after all his slain companions, but to make him die more
miserably living; gave him up to ship wracks, enchantments; men of wit are but
enchanted, there is no such thing as wit in this world. So, take a tree, inure
thy soldiers to hardness, it is honorable, though not clinkant.


CAPR. Can this be possible?


PLVT. Alas! poor man of wit, how want of reward daunts thy virtue? But
because I must send none away discontented, from these all-pleasing Nuptials;
take this wedge of gold, and wedge thy self into the world with it,
renouncing that loose wit of thine, it will spoil thy complexion.


CAPR. Honor, and all Argus eyes, to Earths all-commaunding Riches. Pluto etiam
cedit Jupiter

Exit Capr.
After this low Induction, by these succeeding degrees, the chief Maskers
were advanced to their discovery PLVTVS. These humble objects can no high eyes
draw, Plutus, calls to Eunomia.

Eunomia? (or the sacred power of Law)
Daughter of Jove, and Goddess Honors Priest;
Appear to Plutus, and his love assist.

EVN. What would the god of Riches? Eunomia in the Temple gates.


PLVT. Join with Honor:
In purposed grace of these great Nuptials;
And since to Honor none should dare access,
But helped by virtues hand (thy self, chaste Love
Being Virtues Rule, and her directfull light)
Help me to th'honor of her speech and sight.

EVN. Thy will shall straight be honored; all that seek
Access to Honor, by clear virtues beam,
Her grace preuents their pains, and comes to them.

Loud Music, and Honor appears, descending with her Herrald Phemis, and
Eunomia (her Priest) before her. The Music ceasing Plutus spoke. PLVT. Crown
of all merit, Goddess, and my Love;
It Is now high time, that the end for which we come
Should be endeuor'd in our utmost right,
Done to the sweetness of this Nuptial night.

HON. Plutus? The Princes of the Virgin land,
Whom I made cross the Britan Ocean
To this most famed I Will, of all the world,
To do due homage to the sacred Nuptials
Of Law, and Virtue, celebrated here,
By this Hour of the holy Eeuen I know,
Are ready to perform the rites they owe
To setting Phoebus; which (for greater State
To their appearance) their first act aduances.
And with songs Vshers their succeeding dances,
Herrald! give summons to the Virgin Knights,
No longer to delay their purposed Rites.

HER. Knights of the Virgin Land, whom bewties lights
Would glorify with their inflaming sights;
Keep now obscured no more your fair intent,
To add your Beams to this nights ornament,
The golden-winged Hour strikes now a Plain,
And calls out all the pomp ye entertain;
The Princely Bridegroom, and the Brides bright eyes,
Sparkle with grace to your discoueries.

At these words, the Phoebades (or Priests of the Sun) appeared first with
six Lutes, and six voices, and sung to the opening of the Mine and Maskers
discovery, this sul Song. The first Song.
Open Earth thy womb of gold,
Show Heaven thy cope of stars.
All glad Aspects unfold,
Shine out, and clear our Cares:
Kiss Heaven and Earth, and so combine
In all mixed joy our Nuptial Twine.
This Song ended, a Mount opened, and spread like a Sky, in which appeared a
Sun setting; beneath which, sat the twelve Maskers, in a Mine of gold;
twelve Torch-bearers holding their torches before them, after which Honor, etc.
HON. Se now the setting Sun, casts up his bank,
And shows his bright head at his Seas repair,
For sign that all days future shall be fair.

PLVT. May he that rules the nights and days confirm it.

HON. Behold the Suns fair Priests the Phaebades,
Their evening service in an Hymn address
To Phoebus setting; which we now shall hear,
And see the forms of their devotions there.

The Phoehades sing the first Stance of the second song, vt sequitur. One alone
1.
Descend (fair Sun) and sweetly rest,
In Tethis Cristal arms, thy toil,
Fall burning on her Marble breast,
And make with Love her billows boil.

Another alone. 2.
Blow blow, sweet winds, O blow away,
Al vapors from the fined air:
That to this golden head no Ray,
May languish with the least empaire.

CHO. Dance Tethis, and thy loves red beams,
Embrace with Joy he now discends:
Burns burns with love to drink thy streams,
and on him endless youth attends.

After this Stance, Honor etc. HON. This superstitious Hymn, sung to the Sun,
Let us encounter with fit duties done
To our clear Phoebus; whose true piety,
Enioyes from heaven an earthly deity.

Other Music, and voices; and this second Stance was sung, directing their
observance to the King. One alone 1.
Rise, rise O Phoebus, ever rise,
descend not to the inconstant stream,
But grace with endless light, our skies,
to thee that Sun is but a beam.

Another 2.
Dance Ladies in our Suns bright rays,
in which the Bride and Bridegroom shine:
Clear sable night with your eyes days,
and set firm lights on Hymen's shrine.

CHO. O may our Sun not set before,
he sees his endless seed arise:
And deck his triple crowned shore,
with springs of humane Deities.

This ended the Phoebades sung the third Stance. 1.
Set Set (great Sun) our rising love
shall ever celebrate thy grace:
Whom entering the high court of Jove,
each God greetes rising from his place.
2.
When thou thy silver bow do bend,
all start aside and dread thy draughtes:
How can we thee enough commend,
commanding all worlds with the shafts?

CHO. Blessed was thy mother bearing thee,
and Phoebe that delights in darts:
Thou artful Songs do set; and she
winds horns, loves hounds, and high pallmd hearts

After this Honor. HON. Again our Music and conclude this Song,
To him, to whom all Phoebus beams belong:

The other voices sung to other Music the third stance. 1
Rise still (clear Sun) and never set,
but be to Earth her only light:
All other Kings in thy beams met,
are clouds and dark effects of night.
2.
As when the Rosy Morn does rise,
Like Mists, all give thy wisdom way;
A learned King, is, as in skies,
To poor dim stars, the flaming day*

CHO. Blessed was thy Mother, bearing Thee,
Thee only Relick of her Race,
Made by thy virtues beams a Tree,
Whose arms shall all the Earth embrace.

This done Eunomia spoke to the Maskers set yet above. EVN. Virginian Princes,
ye must now renounce
Your superstitious worship of these Suns,
Subject to cloudy darknings and descents,
And of your sweet devotions, turn the events
To this our Britan Phoebus, whose bright sky
(Enlightened with a Christian Piety)
Is never subject to black Errors night,
And has already offered heavens true light,
To your dark Region, which acknowledge now;
Descend, and to him all your homage vow.

With this the Torch-bearers descended, and performed another Antemaske,
dancing with Torches lighted at both ends; which done, the Maskers descended,
and fell into their dances, two of which being past, and others with the
Ladies. Honor spoke. Musiquely our voices, now tune sweet and hie,
And singe the Nuptial Hymn of Love, The Bride and Bride groom were figured
in Love and Beauty.
and Beauty.
Twinns, as of one age, so to one desire
May both their bloods give, an vnparted fire.
And as those twinns that Fame gives all her prise,
Combind their life's power in such Symphathies; Twinns of which Hippocrates
speaks.

That one being merry; mirth the other graced:
If one felt sorrow, the other grief embraced.
If one were healthful; Health the other pleased:
If one were sick: the other was diseasd;
And all ways joined in such a constant troth
That one like cause had like effect in both,
So may these Nuptial Twynnes, Called Twynns being both of an Age.
their whole lives store,
Spend in such even parts, never grieuing more,
Then may the more set off their joys divine;
As after clouds, the Sun, does clerest shine.

This said, this Song of Love, and Bewty was sung; single. Bright Panthaea
borne to Pan,
Of the Noblest Race of Man,
Her white hand to Eros giving,
With a kiss, ioin'd Heaven to Earth
And begot so fair a birth,
As yet never graced the living.

CHO. ATwinne that all worlds did adorn,
For so were Love and Bewty borne.
2.
Both so loved, they did contend
Which the other should transcend,
Doing either, grace, and kindness;
Love from Bewty did remove,
Lightness called her stain in love,
Beauty took from Love his blindness.

CHO. Love sparks made flames in Bewties sky,
And Beauty blew up Love as hie.

3
Virtue then commixt her fire;
To which Bounty did aspire,
Innocence a Crown conferring;
Mine, and Thine, were then vnusde,
All things common: Naught abusde,
Freely earth her frutage bearing.

CHO. Naught then was cared for, that could fade,
And thus the golden world was made.

This sung, the Maskers danced again with the Ladies, after which Honor. HON.
Now may the blessings of the golden age,
Swim in these Nuptials, even to holy rage,
A Hymn to Sleep prefer, and all the joys
That in his Empire are of dearest choice,
Betwixt his golden slumbers ever flow,
In these; And Theirs, in Springs as endless grow.

This said, the last Song was sung full. The last Song.
Now sleep, bind fast, the flood of Air,
strike all things dumb and deaf,
And, to disturbbe our Nuptial pair,
Let stir no Aspen leaf.
Send flocks of golden Dreams
That all true joys presage,
Bring, in thy oily streams,
The milk and honey Age.
Now close the world-round sphere of bliss,
And fill it with a heavenly kiss.

After this Plutus to the Maskers. PLVT. Come Virgin Knights, the homage ye
have done,
To Love and Bewty, and our Britan Sun,
Kind Honor, will requite with holy feasts
In her fair Temple; and her loved Guests,
Gives me the grace t^inuite, when she and I
( Honor and Riches) will eternally
A league in favor of this night combine,
In which Loves second hallowed Tapers shine;
Whose Ioies, may Heaven and Earth as highly please
As those two nights that got great Hercules.

The speech ended; they concluded with a dance, that brought them off; Plutus,
with Honor and the rest conducting them up to the Temple of Honor. FINIS.
A Hymn to Hymen for the most timefitted Nuptials of our thrice gracious
Princess Elizabeth* etc.
SInge, Singe a Rapture to all Nuptial ears,
Bright Hymen's torches, drunk up Parcaes tears:
Sweet Hymen; Hymen, Mightiest of Gods,
Attoning of all-taming blood the odds;
Two into One, contracting; One to Two
Dilating, which no other God can do.
Make sure, with change, and lett'st the married try,
Of Man and woman, the Variety.
And as a flower, half scorcht with days long heat Simil.
Thirsts for refreshing, with Nights cooling sweat,
The wings of Zephire, fanning still her face,
No chere can ad to her heart-thirsty grace;
Yet wears she against those fires that make her fade,
Her thick hayrs proof, al hyd, in Midnights shade;
Her Health, is all in dews; Hope, all in showers,
Whose want bewailde, she pines in all her powers:
So Loue-scorch't Virgins, nourish quenchles fires;
The Fathers cares; the Mothers kind desires.
Their Gould, and Garments, of the newest guise,
Can nothing comfort their scorcht Fantasies,
But, taken rauish't up, in Hymen's arms,
His Circkle holds, for all their anguish, charms:
Then, Simil. ad ea^dem explicat.
as a glad Graft, in the spring Sun shines,
That all the helps, of Earth, and Heaven combines
In Her sweet grouth: Puts in the Morning on
Her cherefull airs; the Suns rich fires, at Noone;
At Even the sweet deaws, and at Night with stars,
In all their virtuous influences shares;
So, in the Bridegroomes sweet embrace; the Bride,
All varied Ioies tastes, in their naked pride:
To which the richest weeds: are weeds, to flowers;
Come Hymen then; com close these Nuptial hours
With all years comforts. Come; each virgin keeps
Her odorous kisses for thee; Goulden sleeps
Will, in their humors, never steep an eye,
Till thou inuit'st them with thy Harmony.
Why staiest thou? see each Virgin does prepare
Embraces for thee; Her white breasts lays bare
To tempt thy soft hand; let us such glances fly
As make stars shoot, to imitate her eye.
Puts Arts attires on, that put Natures down:
Singes, Dances, sets on every foot a Crown,
Sighs, in her songs, and dances; kisseth Air
Till Rites, and words past, thou in deeds repair;
The whole court Io sings: Io the Air:
Io, the floods, and fields: Io, most fair,
Most sweet, most happy Hymen; Come: away;
With all thy Comforts come; old Matrons pray,
With young Maids Languors; Birds bill, build, and breed
To teach thee thy kind, every flower and weed
Looks up to gratulate thy longed for fruits;
Thrice given, are free, and timely-granted suites:
There is a seed by thee now to be sown,
In whose fruit Earth, shall see her glories show'n,
At all parts perfect; and must therefore loose
No minutes time; from times use all fruit flows;
And as the tender Hyacinth, that grows
Where Phoebus Simil.
most his golden beams bestows,
Is propt with care; is watered every hour;
The sweet winds adding their increasing power,
The scattered drops of Nights refreshing dew,
Hasting the full grace, of his glorious hew,
Which once disclosing, must be gatherd straight,
Or hew, and Odor both, will lose their height;
So, of a Virgin, high, and richly kept,
The grace and sweetness full grown must be reap't,
Or, forth her spirits fly, in empty Air;
The sooner fading; the more sweet and fair.
Gentle, O Gentle Hymen, be not then
Cruel, That kindest arts to Maids, and Men;
These two, One Twynn are; and their mutual bliss,
Not in thy beams, but in thy Bosom is.
Nor can their hands fast, their hearts joys make sweet;
Their hearts, in breasts are; and their Breasts must meet.
Let, there be Peace, yet Murmur: and that noise,
Beget of peace, the Nuptial battles joys.
Let Peace grow cruel, and take wrake of all,
The wars delay brought thy full Festival.
Hark, hark, O now the sweet Twyn murmur sounds;
Hymen is come, and all his heat abounds;
Shut all Doors; None, but Hymen's lights advance.
No sound styr; let, dumb Joy, enjoy a trance.
Sing, sing a Rapture to all Nuptial ears,
Bright Hymen's Torches drunk up Parcaes tears.
FINIS.

