The High and Mighty Prince Charles, Prince of Wales, etc. The Manner of his
Arrival at the Spanish Court, the Magnificence of his Royal Entertainment
there: His happy Return, and hearty welcome, both to the King and Kingdom of
England, the fifth of October, 1623. Here lively and briefly described,
together with certain other delightful passages, obseruable in the whole
Trauatle.


NO longer let sad dolours dark your eyes,
Nor longer fears your doubtful hearts surprise,
Leave gazing on each other, over the Land,
As if the Countries state were at a stand:
The solitary night is past away,
Succeeded by the glorious light of day,
Which brought the brightfull Sun, again to rear
His rays above our British Hemispheare;
That now the Land, which thirty weeks did mourn,
Dries her tear'd face, and finds her joy return.
His Departure, and Journey.
This grief did grow (without a feigned pretense)
Upon departure of our gracious Prince;
Whose often perils, mixed with trauaile-paine,
And often distempers which he did sustain,
Both on the Sea, and that huge tract of way,
That in a hundred forty a stages lay,
While to, and through the very heart of France
He past, deseru'dly do his fame advance.
In morning of the Spring he 'gan to go,
And made it Winter here, which was not so;
Whose Winters visiting us now again,
Makes us new Spring of gladness entertain.
On Marche's seventh day, to Spaines Courtly air
Unto Madrid was made his first repair;
Where both our Kings b Ambassadors, on knee,
With wonderment him welcomed heartily;
With whom he privately himself reposed
Till to that Monarch there, he was disclosed.
His Entertainment there.
His Coming known, the Majesty of Spain,
That ever to his Highness did maintain
Royal respect, him graciously saluted,
And as his c Second Self the Prince reputed;
Yielding large Quarter, and the Courtliest place,
With store of Nobles to attend his Grace:
Who from all d coasts (as their Lords will imported)
Eight hundred of the chiefest there resorted:
These striving, pressed with serviceable love,
Themselves even as his Leigemen still to prove:
Devising often e Masks, Tilt, Tournament,
Barriers, Flights, Chase, each thing to cause content;
Sparing no cost, exposing (the greatest treasure)
Their persons to assault (to show him pleasure)
Fierce f Bulls, untamed, untied: nor was this all;
Spaines Sovereign held himself a g Festival,
To Honor Englands Heir, t'adorne which, were
The Queen, and fair Infanta present there.
Never Prince such liking, so much grace accrewde,
Both of King, Nobles, Gentry, Multitude:
And this for six months stay. But leaving these,
Haste we to see'em upon, and past the Seas.
His Return, Arrival, and welcome.
Bidding the King, his Court, these sports adieu,
T'embarke at Biscay shore he strait withdrew,
And waited long to meet a luckie wind,
At last, his wish was answered to his mind:
Heaven proves propitious, wind his love imparts,
Drawn by the prayers, driu'n by the sighs, from hearts
Of thousands here: So thence he forward set,
And Portsmouths Port, in seven days sail he fet.
But being arrived, no tongue can half express
The ravished Countries wondrous ioyfulnesse,
The Peoples clamor, Trumpets clangor, sound
Of Drums, Fifes, Violls, Lutes, these did abound;
Loud Cannons thundering from the Castles, Towers,
And Ships, shook Air and Earth, all to their powers,
Pourde healths of wine for welcome; Bells were rung,
Bonefires were kindled, fire-workes each-where flung:
Yet's not enough high fires in streets to frame,
Unless the fire of zeal your hearts inflame;
And that in Churches Psalms of thanks be singing,
As well as in the Steeples Bells a ringing.
Yee' have prayed, your prayer's heard; now this is done,
Laud God, and love your King, and Kingdoms Son.
His arrival at London, his welcome to the Court, with the general
Applaudite's of all the People.
Yet lovingly his loving mind he shows
To London, where his Subjects love bestows;
Some for mere joy, burning their whole estate;
That Britains Prince might not find them ingrate:
All showed their loves, all did forbear to mourn,
When Englands Joy, with joy did safe return.
Thus did he haste to see his Fathers Court,
Where thousand hearts with Joy did free resort,
To give their best of welcomes: Englands Dear,
Was never more welcome; when their Heart was here,
That Heart, that dead did lay so many hearts,
When he from Brittany so freely parts,
Did with his sight revive those hearts again.
Which his long absence has a long time slain.
The Royal Caesar of Great Brittaynes I Will,
Did entertain his Son; a gracious smile,
And blessing he upon his head does power,
Rejoicing at that happy joyful hour.
Britains chief Dear did thus embrace his Dear,
Just in the form you see pourtraied here.
Then since all count these days the happy days,
To Him that makes man happy, be the Praise.
These Notes, with their directory letters, are here inserted, for the better
explayning some of the Verses, and Story.
a His Journey by Land, consisted of 141. Stages, here in England, France, and
Spain; some of them contain but 8 or 10, some 12 or 16 miles in length; so
that the computation of the way that his Highness rode Post, amount to about
1100. miles.

b The Lord Digby, Earl of Bristoll, Ambassador extraordi^nary for the Kings
Majesty; and Sir Walter Aston, Leiget there.

c For the King of Spain appointed him half his Guard, and a most sumptious
Quarter in the Court, for his residence; as also caused him to ride in Triumph
through Madrid.

d The Catholic King, because other triumphs were preparing, sent mandatory
letters about, especially to the Principal Nobility of Aragon, that they
should come and give attendance at the Court, upon the Princes pleasure;
because they have the reputation to be excellent men at Arms.

e Of which Masks, the most magnificent, was on Easter day last, presented by
the Lord Admiral of Castile and Leon, in celebration of our most Illustrious
Princes Arrival there; wherein the King also was thought to have been an
Actor.

f It has bin, and is a custom of that Country, at some great solemnities,
for their Noblemen, as Dukes, Earls, Lords, and others of best note, to enter
the lists, and maintain combat with Lances, Targets, Swords, and Darts,
against loose furious Bulls, in which they exercise their Courage and
abilities, sometimes not without danger; and as they merit, purchase
estimation. This was performed at Whitsontide.

g That Festival before mentioned, was made by the King of Spain at Madrid,
the 21 of August last, 1623. to honor the Espousall Treaties of Prince
Charles, with the Lady Infanta Maria of Austria; and the manner was by darting
with Canes, after the use there.

And this may suffice for a brief, yet plain description of our Noble Princes
sudden Journey thither, his Royal entertainment there, and most happy Return
hither, and wel-come home again: To Gods glory, and the exceeding joy and
comfort of all true loyal hearted Subjects.

FINIS.
Printed at London, 1623.


