MAY DAY. A vvitty Comedy, diverse times acted at the Black Friars.

Written by GEORGE CHAPMAN.

LONDON. Printed for John Brown; dwelling in Fleetstreete in Saint Dunstones
Churchyard. 1611.

MAY DAY.
Actus prima,
Scaena prima.
Chorus Iuuenum cantantes and saltantes. Exeunt saltan. Interim, Intrat
Lorenzo, Papers in his hand. Lor. WEll done my lusty bloods, Well done. Fit,
fit observance for this May-morning; Not the May-Moneth alone, they take when
it comes; Nor the first week of that Month; Nor the first day; but the first
minute of the first hour, of the first day. Loose no time bloods, loose no
time; though the Sun go to bed never so much before you, yet be you up
before him; call the golden sluggard from the silver arms of his Lady, to
light you into yours, when your old father January here in one of his last
days, thrusts his forehead into the depth of Mayes fragrant bosom: What may
you Aprilles perform then? O what may you do? Well yet will I say thus much
for my self, wheresoever the affections of youth are, there must needs be the
instruments, and where the instruments are, there must of necessity be the
faculties; What am I short of them then? A sound old man, ably constituted,
holsomly dyeted, that took his May temperately at their ages, and continued
his own; why should he not continue their ages in his own? By the Mass I
feel nothing that stands against it, and therefore sweet May I salute thee
with the youngest: I have love to employ thee in, as well as the prowdest young
princock, and so have at you Mistress Frances China: have at you Mistress Frank:
I'^e sprede my nets for you in faith, though they be my very purse nets, wherein
what heart will not willingly lie panting? (Enter Angelo.)


Ang. How now? Gods my life, I wonder what made this May-morning so cold, and
now I see it is this January that intrudes into it; what paper is that he holds
in hand trow we?


Lor. Here have I put her face in rhyme, but I fear my old vain will not
stretch to her contentment. O hair, no hair but beams stolen from the Sun.


Ang. Out upon her, if it be she that I think, she has a Fox red cranion;


Lor. A forehead that disdaines the name of fair.


Ang. And reason, for it is a folwe one.


Lor. A matchless eye.


Ang. True, her eyes be not matches.


Lor. A cheek, vermillion red.


Ang. Painted I warrant you.


Lor. A far commanding mouth.


Ang. It stretches to her ears in deed.


Lor. A nose made out of wax.


Ang. A red nose, in sincerity.


Lor. This could I send, but person, person does it: A good presence, to bear
out a good wit; a good face, a pretty Court leg, and a deft dapper personage,
no superfluous dimensions, but fluent in competence; for it is not Hector but
Paris, not the full armefull, but the sweet handful that Ladies delight in.


Ang. O notable old whyniard.


Lor. Such a size of humanity now, and brain enough in it, it is not in the
strength of a woman to withstand; well she may hold out a parl^e or two, for
it is a weak fort that obeyes at the first or second summons, if she resist
the third she is discharged, though she yield in future: for then it appears
it was no fault of hers: but the man that would take no denial. What rests
now? means for access: True. O an honest Baude were worth gold now.


Ang. A plague upon him, I had thought to have appeared to him, but now if I
do, he will take me for the man he talks on: I will therefore post by his dull
eyesight, as in have of business.


Lor. What Signior Angelo? soft I command you.


Ang. Gods precious, what mean you Sir?


Lor. I would be loath to be out-runne I assure you Sir: was I able to stay you?


Ang. Your ability stood too stiff Sir, beshrow me else.


Lor. O most offencelesse fault, I would thou would blaze my imperfection to
one thou know, in faith.


Ang. Well Sir another time, tell me where she is, and I Will do so much for you
gratis. Good morrow Sir.


Lor. Nay stay good Angelo.


Ang. My business says nay Sir, you have made me stay to my pain Sir, I
thank you.


Lor. Not a whit man I warrant thee.


Ang. Go to then, briefly, to whom shall I commend your imperfections, will
you tell me if I name her?


Lor. That I will, y^aith Boy.


Ang. Is not her hair, no hair, but beams stolen from the Sun?


Lor. Black, black as an Ouzell.


Ang. A forehead that disdaines the name of fair.


Lor. Away Witch, away:


Ang. A matchless eye.


Lor. Nay fie, fie, fie. I see thou art a very Devil Angelo. And in earnest, I
iested, when I said my desire of thy friendship touched my self, for it
concerns a friend of mine just of my standing.


Ang. To whom then would he be remembered that I can solicit?


Lor. To sweet Mistress Franciscina: with whom I hear thou art ready to lie
down, thou art so great with her.


Ang. I am as great as a near Kinseman may be with her Sir, not otherwise:


Lor. A good consanguinity: and good Angelo, to her with thou deliver from my
friend, in all secrecy, these poor brace of bracelets?


Ang. Perhaps I will Sir, when I know what the Gentleman and his intent is.


Lor. Never examine that man; I would not trouble you with carrying too much at
once to her, only tell her, such a man will resolve her, naming me: and I do
not greatly care, if I take the pains to come to her, so I stay not long, and
be let in privily: and so without making many words: here they be* put them up
closely I beseech thee, and deliver them as closely.


Ang. Well Sir, I love no contention with friends, and therefore pocket many
things, that otherwise I would not: but I pray Sir licen^e me a question. Do
not I know this Gentleman that offers my Cozen this kindness?


Lor. Never saw him in thy life, at least never knew'st him; but for his
bounty sake to all his well willers, if this message be friendly discharged, I
may chance put a dear friend of him into your bosom: Sir, and make you
profitably acquainted.


Ang. But I pray you Sir, is he not a well elderly Gentleman?


Lor. Wide, wide; as young as day, I protest to thee.


Ang. I know he is young too, but that is in ability of body, but is he not a
pretty little squat Gentleman, as you shall see amongst a thousand?


Lor. Still from the cushion, still, tall and high, like a Cedar.


Ang. I know he is tall also, but it is in his mind Sir, and it is not Hector
but Paris, not thy full armefull, but the sweet handful that a Lady delights
to dandle.


Lor. Now the good Devil take thee, if there be any such in hell, hell I
beseech thee.


Ang. Well, well Signior Lorenzo, in faith the little Squire is thought to be as
parlesse a piece of flesh, for a piece of flesh, as any hunts the hole pale of
Venus I protest to you.


Lor. I cannot contain my self, in faith Boy, if the Wenches come in my walk,
I give 'em that they come for, I dally not with hem.


Ang. I know you do not Sir, his dallying days be done.


Lor. It is my infirmity, and I cannot do withal, to die for it.


Ang. I believe you Sir.


Lor. There are certain envious old fellows, my neighbors, that say, I am
one vnwieldly and stiff: Angelo, did ever hear any wench complain of my
stiffenesse?


Ang. Never in my life: your old neighbors measure you by themselves.


Lor. Why there is the matter then?


Ang. But in faith Sir: do you ever hope to win your purpose at my losing
hands, knowing her (as all the world does) a woman of that approved lowlynesse
of life, and so generally tried?


Lor. As for that take thou no care, she is a woman, is she not?


Ang. Sure I do take her to have the flesh and blood of a woman.


Lor. Then good enough, or then bad enough, this token shall be my Gentleman
Usher to prepare my access, and then let me alone with her.


Ang. I marry Sir, I think you would be alone with her; Well Sir, I will do
my best, but if your Gentleman Usher should not get entrance for you now, it
would be a grief to me. (Enter Gasparo an old Clown.)


Lor. Fear it not man: Gifts and gold, take the strong'st hold; Away, here
comes a snudge that must be my son in law: I would be loath he should suspect
these tricks of youth in me, for fear he fear my daughter will trot after me.


Ang. Fare you well Sir. Exit.


Gasp. Godge you God morrow Sir, godge you God morrow.


Lor. God morrow neighbor Gasparo: I have talked with my daughter, whom I do
yet find a green young plant, and therefore unapt to bear such ripe fruit, I
think I might have said rotten, as your self: But she is at my disposition,
and shall be at yours in the end, here is my hand, and with my hand take hers.


Gasp. Nay by my faith Sir, you must give me leave to shake her portion by the
hand first.


Lor. It is ready told for you Sir, come home when you will and receive it,
(Enter Aemilia.) and see, yonder she comes; away, she cannot yet abide you,
because she fears she can abide you too well.


Gasp. Well, I will come for her potion Sir, and till then, God take you to his
mercy. Exit.


Lor. Adieu my good son in law, I Will not interrupt her, let her meditate a my
late motion. Exit.


Aemi. It Is strange to see the impiety of parents,
Both priuiledgd by custom, and professed,
The holy institution of heaven;
Ordeyning marriage for proportiond minds,
For our chief humane comforts; and t'encrease
The loved images of God in men:
Is now perverted to the increase of wealth;
We must bring riches forth, and like the Cuckoe
Hatch others eggs; Join house to house, in choices
Fit timber-logs and stones, not men and women: (Enter Aurelio.)
Ay me, here is one I must shun, woude embrace. Exit.

Aur. O stay and hear me speak or see me dye. (Enter Lodouico and Giacono.)


Lod. How now? what have we here? what a loathsome creature man is being
drunk: Is it not pity to see a man of good hope, a toward Scholar, writes a
theme well, scannes a verse very well, and likely in time to make a proper
man, a good leg, specially in a boot, valiant, well spoken, and in a word,
what not? and yet all this overthrown as you see, drowned, quite drowned in a
quarte pott.


Giac. O these same wicked healths, breed monstrous diseases.


Lod. Aurelio, speak man, Aurelio?


Giac. Pray heaven all be well.


Lod. O speak, if any spark of speech remain.
It is thy dear Aemilia that calls.

Aur. Well, well, it becomes not a friend to touch the deadly wounds of his
friend with a smiling countenance.


Lod. Touch thee? sblood I could find in my heart to beat thee; up in a
fools name, up: what a Scene of foppery have we here?


Aur. Prithee have done.


Lod. Up Cuckoe Cupids bird, or by this light I Will fetch thy father to thee.


Aur. Good Lodouico, if thou love me, leave me; thou come to consaile me
from that, which is joined with my soul in eternity: I must and will do what I
do.


Lod. Do so then, and I protest thou shall never lick thy lips after my
Kinsewoman, while thou live: I had thought to have spoken for th^e, if thou
had taken a manly course with her: but to fold up thy self like an Vrchine,
and lie a caluing to bring forth a husband: I am ashamed to think on it: sblood
I have heard of wenches that have been won with singing and dancing, and some
with riding, but never heard of any that was won with tumbling in my life.


Aur. If thou knew'st how vain thou seem.


Lod. I do it of purpose, to show how vain I hold thy disease, S'hart art
thou the first that has shot at a wenches heart and mist it? must that shot
that mist her wound thee? let her shake her heels in a shrowes name: were she
my Cozen a thousand times, and if I were as thee, I would make her shake her
heels too, before I would shake mine thus.


Aur. O vanity, vanity.


Lod. God's Death, if any wench should offer to keep possession of my heart
against my will, I Would fire her out with Sack and Sug^r, or smoke her out with
Tobacko, like a hornet, or purge for her, for love is but a humor: one way or
other I would vent her, that's infallible.


Aur. For shame hold thy tongue, me thinks thy wit should feel how stale are
these love storms, and with what general privilege love pierses the
worthiest. Seek to help thy friend, not mock him.


Lod. Marry, seek to help thy self then, in a halters name, do not lie in a
ditch, and say God help me, use the lawful tools he has lent thee. Up I say
I will bring thee to her.


Aur. She Will not endure me:


Lod. She shall endure thee do the worst thou can to her, I and endure thee
till thou can not endure her; But then thou must use thy self like a man,
and a wise man, how deep soever she is in thy thoughts, carry not the prints
of it in thy looks; be bold and careless, and stand not sautring a far of,
as I have seen you, like a Dog in a firmetypot, that licks his chops and
wags his tail, and feign would lay his lips to it, but he fears it is too hot
for him: that's the only way to make her too hot for thee. He that holds
religious and sacred thought of a woman, he that bears so reverend a respect
to her, that he will not touch her but with a kissed hand and a timorous heart;
he that adores her like his Goddess: Let him be sure she will shun him like
her flaue. Alas good souls, women of themselves are tractable and tactable
enough, and would return Quid for Quod still, but we are they that spoile'em,
and we shall answer for it another day. We are they that put a kind of wanton
Melancholy into 'em, that makes 'em think their noses bigger then their
faces, greater then the Sun in brightness; and where as Nature made 'em but
half fools, we make 'em all fool. And this is our palpable flattery of them,
where they had rather have plain dealing Well, in conclusion, I Will to her
instantly, and if I do not bring her to thee, or at the least some special
favor from her, as a feather from her fan, or a string from her shoo, to
wear in thy hat, and so forth, then never trust my skill in poultry whilst
thou live again. Exit.


Enter Quintiliano, A purse of twenty pound in gold.
Innocentio, Fransischina, Angelo, and Fannio. Fran. THou shall not to the
wars, or if thou do I Will bear thee company, dear Quint. do not offer to
forsake me.


Quint. Hands off wife, hang not upon me thus; how can I maintain thee but by
using my valor? and how can I use that, but in action and employment? go in,
play at cards with your Cozen Angelo here, and let it suffice I love thee.


Ang. Come sweet Cozen, do not cloy your husband with your love so, especially
to hinder his preferment; who shall the Duke have to employ in these Marshall
necessities if not Captain Quintiliano, he bears an honorable mind, and it is
pity but he should have employment. Let him get a company now, and he will be
able to maintain you like a Duches hereafter.


Innoc. Well said Signior Angelo, gossaue me you speak like a true Cozen
indeed, does he not Quint?


Quint. He does so, and I thank him; yet see how the fool puts finger in the
eye still.


Ang. I Will cheer her up, I warrant you Captain; come Cuze, lets in to tables.


Innoc. Farewell sweet Mistress.


Fran. Farewell my good servant.


Ang. Now take away thy hand, and show thou did laugh all this while; good
Lord who would not marry to have so kind a wife make much on him? Exit.


Quint. After Boy, give your attendance.


Fann. Could you not spare me money for mine hostess, where you put me to
boarde? you are a whole fortnight arr^rages.


Quint. Attend I say, the hosts of the Lion has a leg like a Cyant, want for
nothing Boy, so she score truly.


Fann. Faith Sir, she has chaulk't up twenty shillings already, and swears
she will chaulke no more.


Quint. Then let her choke, and choke thou with her: S'blood hobby horse, and
she had chaulkt up twenty pounds, I hope the world knows I am able to pay it
with a wet finger.


Fann. Alas Sir, I think you are able, but the world does not know it.


Quint. Then the worlds an ignorant Sir, and you are an innocent, vanish Boy,
away.


Fann. I hope he will foist some money for my score, out of this gull here.
Exit.


Innoc. It Is a plaguey good wagge Quint. is it not?


Quint. I Will make him a good one 'ere I ha done with him; but this same loving
fool my wife now, will never leave weeping, till I make her believe I will not
have a company. Who would be combred with these soft hearted creatures, that
are ever in extremes, either too kind, or too unkind?


Innoc. Save me, it is true, it is a hard thing must please'em in sadness.


Quint. Damn me, if I do not pity her with my heart; plague on her
kindness, she has half persuaded me to take no company.


Innoc. Nay sweet Quint: then how shall I be a Lieftenant?


Quint. Well, and my promise were not past to thee, I am a villain if all the
world should part Frank and me; think I love thee therefore, and will do
thee credit: It will cost me a great deal a this same foolish money to buy me
drum and ensign, and furnish me thoroughly, but the best is I know my credit.


Innoc. Sfut Quint, we will want no money man, I Will make my row of houses fly
first.


Quint. Let Them walk, let them walk; Candle rents: if the wars hold, or a
plague come to the town, theill be worth nothing.


Innoc. True, or while I am beyond Sea, some sleepy wench may set fire ith
bed-straw.


Quint. Right, or there may come an earthquake, and ouerturne'em.


Innoc. Just, or there may be coniuring, and the wind may down with them.


Quint. Or some crafty petty-fogger may find a hole in the title, a thousand
casualties belongs to 'em.


Innoc. Nay, they shall walk, that's certain, I Will turn 'em into money.


Quint. That's thy most husbandly course in faith Boy, thou may have twenty in the
hundred for thy life, I Will be thy man for two hundred.


Innoc. Will It in faith Quint? gossaue me it is done.


Quint. For your life, not otherwise.


Innoc. Well, I desire no more, so you will remember me for my Lieftenantship.


Quint. Remember thee? it is thine own already Boy, a hundred pounds shall not
buy it from thee; give me thy hand. I do here create thee Lieftenant
Innocentio.


Innoc. If you have a company Captain.


Quint. If I have: damn me if such another word do not make me put thee out
ath' place again; if I have a company, Sfut, let the Duke deny me one, I would
twere come to that once, that employment should go with the vndeseruer, while
men of service sit at home, and feed their anger with the blood of red
lattices. Let the Duke deny me to day, I Will renounce him to morrow. I Will to the
enemy point blanke, I Am a villain else:


Innoc. And I by heaven I swear.


Quint. Well if that day come, it will prove a hot day with some body.


Innoc. But Captain, did not you say that you would enter me at an Ordinary,
that I might learn to converse?


Quint. When thou will Lieftenant; No better time then now, for now thou art in
good clothes, which is the most material point for thy entrance there.


Innoc. I but how should I behave my self?


Quint. Marry Sir, when you come first in, you shall see a crew of Gallants of
all sorts:


Innoc. Nay Captain if I come first in I shall see no body.


Quint. Tush man, you must not do so, if you have good clothes and will be
noted let am all come in before you, and then as I said shall you see a lusty
crew of Gallants, some Gentlemen, some none; but that's all one: he that bears
himself like a Gentleman, is worthy to have been borne a Gentleman: some aged
have beards, and some have none, some have money, and some have none, yet all
must have meat: Now will all these I say at you^ first entrance wonder at you,
as at some strange Owl: Examine your person, and observe your bearing for a
time. Do you then ath' the other side seem to neglect their observance as fast,
let your countenance be proof against all eyes, not yielding or confessing in
it any inward defect. In a word be impudent enough, for that's your chief
virtue of society.


Innoc. Is that? faith and I need not learn that, I have that by nature I
thank God.


Quint. So much the better, for nature is far above Art, or judgment. Now
for your behavior; let it be free and negligent, not clogged with ceremony or
observance, give no man honor, but upon equal terms; for look how much thou
give any man above that, so much thou take from thy self: he that will
once give the wall, shall quickly be thrust into the kennell: measure not thy
carriage by any man's eye, thy speech by no man's ear, but be resolute and
confident in doing and saying, and this is the grace of a right Gentleman as
thou art.


Innoc. Sfut, that I am I hope, I am sure my father has been twice Warden on's
company.


Quint. That's not a pear matter man, there is no prescription for Gentility, but
good clothes and impudence: for your place, take it as it falls, but so as you
think no place to good for you; fall too with ceremony whatsoever the company
be: and as near as you can, when they are in their Mutton, be thou in thy
Wood-cocke, it shows resolution. Talk any thing, thou car'st not what, so it
be without offense, and as near as thou can without sense.


Innoc. Let me alone for that Captain I warrant you.


Quint. If you chance to tell a lie, you must bind it with some oath, as by
this bread, for breads a binder you know.


Innoc. True.


Quint. And yet take heed you swear by nomans bread but your own, for that
may breed a quarrel: above all things you must carry no coals.


Innoc. By heaven not I, I Will freeze to death first.


Quint. Well Sir, one point more I must remember you of. After dinner there
will be play, and if you would be counted complete, you must venture amongst
them; for otherwise, theill take you for a Scholar or a Poet, and so fall into
contempt of you: for there is no virtue can escape the account of baseness if
it get money, but gaming and law; yet must you not loose much money at once,
for that argues little wit at all times.


Innoc. As gossaue me, and that's my fault; for if I be in once, I shall loose
all I have about me.


Quint. Is true, Lieftenant? birlady Sir I Will be your moderator, therefore let
me see how much money have you about you?


Innoc. Not much, some twenty mark or twenty pound in gold.


Quint. It Is too much to loose by my faith, Lieftenant; give me your purse Sir,
hold ye, heers two brace of Angels, you shall venture that for fashion sake,
I Will keep the rest for you, till you have done play.


Innoc. That will be all one, for when that's lost I shall never leave till I
get the rest from you: for I know thou will let me have it if I ask it.


Quint. Not a penny by this gold.


Innoc. Prithee do not then, as gossaue me and you do:


Quint. And I do, hang me; Come lets to the Duke.


Exeunt. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus Secundi,
Scaena prima.
Enter Lucretia and Temperance, several ways. Tem. NAy Mistress, pray eene go
in again, for I have some inward news for you.


Lucr. What are those pray.


Tem. It Is no matter Mistress till you come in, but make much a time in the mean
time, good fortune thrusts her self upon you in the likeness of a fine young
Gentleman, hold up your apron and receive him while you may, a Gods name.


Lucr. How say by that? you are a very wise counsailer.


Tem. Well Mistress, when I was a Maid, and that is a good while ago I can tell
you.


Lucr. I think very well.


Tem. You were but a little one then I wisse.


Lucr. Nor you neither I believe.


Tem. Faith it is one of the furthest things I can remember.


Lucr. But what when you were a Maid?


Tem. Marry Mistress I took my time, I warrant you. And there is Signior Leonoro
now, the very flower of Venice, and one that loves you dearly I ensure you.


Lucr. God forgive him if he do, for I Will be sworn I never deserved his love,
nor never will while I live.


Tem. Why then, what say to Signior Collatin^! there is a dainty piece of Venzon
for you, and a fervent lover indeed.


Lucr. He? I dare say, he knows not what wood loves shafts are made of, his
Signiory would think it the deepest disparagement could be done to him, to say
that ever he spent sigh for any Dame in Italy.


Tem. Well, you have a whole brown dozen a suitors at least, I am sure; take
your choice amongst'em all, if you love not all, yet you may love three or
four on 'em to be doing withal.


Lucr. To be doing withal? love three or four?


Tem. Why not, so you love 'em moderately. What must that strange made piece
Theagines that you cry out upon so often, have all from other, and yet know not
where he is?


Lucr. O my Theagine, not Theagines, thy love has turned me woman like thy
self, shall thy sight never turn me man again. Come lets to the Minster, God
hear my prayers as I intend to stop mine ears against all my suitors.


Tem. Well Mistress, yet peradventure, they may make you open before the Priest
have a penny for you,


Exeunt. Enter Lodouico and Aemilia. Lodo. Here Is a coil to make wit and women
friends: come hither wench, let me have thee single; now sit thee down, and
hear good counsel next thy heart, and God give thee grace to lay it to thy
heart.


Aem. Fie Cozen, will this wild tongue of yours never receive the bridle?


Lod. Yes, thou shall now see me stroke my beard, and speak sententiously:
thou tell^st me thy little father is in hand with a great rich marriage for
thee, and would have thee commit matrimony with old Gasparo, art thou willing
with it?


Aem. I rather wish my self married to a thousand deaths.


Lod. Then I perceive thou know him not; did he never woo thee?


Aem. I protest, I never changed three words with him in my life; he has once
or twice woo'de my father for me, but never me.


Lod. Why that's the reason thou love him not, because thou take in none of
his valiant breath to inflame thee, nor vouchsaf'st his knowledge; I Will tell
thee what he is, an old saplesse trunk, fit to make touch-wood of hollow, and
bald like a blasted Oak, on whose top Ravens sit and croke the portents of
funerals; one that noints his nose with clow^ed cream, and Pomatum. His breath
smells like the butt end of a shoo-makers horn. A leprous scaly hide like an
Elephant. The son of a Sow-gelder, that came to town (as I have heard thy
father himself say) in a tottred ^uffer cote, high shoes, and yet his hose
torn aboue'em; A long pike-staffe in his neck (and a tord in his teeth) and a
wa^et on his right shoulder, and now the cullion has with Nouerint vniuersi
eaten up some hundred Gentlemen: he must needs rise a Gentleman as 'twere out
of their Ashes, or disparage a Gentlewoman, to make himself a Gentleman, at
least by the wives side.


Aem. The wurse my fortune to be entangled with such a winding bramble.


Lod. Entangl'd? Nay if I thought twould ever come to that, I Would hire some
shag-ragge or other for half a chickeene to cut's throat, only to save thy
hands from doing it; for I know thou would poison him within one month; love
thee he will never, and that must be thy happiness: for if he do, look to be
coop't up like a prisoner, condemned to execution, scarce suffered to take the
air, so much as at a window, or waited on continually by an old beldame: not
to keep thee company, but to keep thee from company: thy pocket searched, thy
cabinets ransackt for letters: ever in opposition, unless (like the Moon)
once a Month in conjunction; wealth thou may have indeed, but enjoy it as
in a dream, for when thou wak'st thou shall find nothing in thy hand; (Enter
Gasparo) and (to keep my tale in goodness) see how all the ill that can be
spoken of him is expressed in his presence.


Aem. O ougly, and monstrous spectacle.


Lod. Now tell me whether thou would make choice of him or a young gallant in
prime of his choicenesse; one that for birth, person, and good parts, might
m^ritoriously marry a Countess; and one to whom his soul is not so dear as
thy self. (Enter Aurelio) For all the world such another as he that comes here
now: mark him well, see whether Gasparo and he be not a little different. Exit
Aemilia. How now? Sownds Aurelio? stay beast, will thou make such a blessed
opportunity curse thee? I Will fetch her out to thee. Exit Lod.


Aure. Wretch that I am, how she lothes me? if I abide her, I shall consume in
the lightnings of her anger. (Enter Lodouico with Aemilia.)


Exit Aure. Lod. Here Is a life indeed; what is he gone? passion of death, what
a babe it is? I could find in my heart to ierke him, but temper me friendship,
no remedy now; now wit turn his defects to perfection. Why Cuze he is quite
out of sight. By my life I commend him; why this is done like thy self
Aurelia, were she the Queen of love and woude run from thee, fly thou from
her; why now I love thee, for I see thou art worthy of my love, thou carriest a
respect to thine own worth, and wilt express it with spirit; I dare say, thou
look to have had him fall on his knees, and adored thee, or beg his life
at thy hands: or el^e turned Queen Dido, and pierce his tender heart with
sword full sharp; no faith wench, the case is altered, love made Hercules
spin, but it made him rage after: there must go time to the bridling of every
passion; I hope my friend will not love a wench against her will, if she woude
have met his kindness half way, so: if she skit and recoile, he shootes her
off warily, and away he goes: I marry Sir, this was a Gentlemanly part indeed.
Farewell Cuze, be thou free in thy choice too, and take a better and thou can
a Gods name. Exiturus.


Aem. Nay dear Cuze, a word.


Lod. A word? what is the matter? I must needs after him, and clap him
ath'backe, this spirit must be cherisht.


Aem. Alas what would you wish me to do?


Lod. Why, nothing.


Aem. Would you counsel me to marry him against my fathers will?


Lod. Not for the world, leave him, leave him, leave him: you see he is
resolved, he will take no harm an you, never fear to embrew your hands with
his liver I warrant you.


Aem. Come you are such an other.


Lod. This same riches with a husband, is the only thing in the world, I
protest; good Gasparo, I am sorry I have abused thee in faith, for my Cozens
sake; how prettily the wretch came crawling by with his crooked knees even now:
I have seen a young Gentlewoman, live as merry a life with an old man, as with
the proudest young vpstart on'em all: farewell Cuze, I am glad thou art so wise
in faith.


Aem. If you go, I die: fie on this affection, it rages with suppression.
Good Cuze, I am no longer able to continue it, I love, Aurelio better then it
is possible for him to love me.


Lod. Away, away, and could not this have been done at first, without all
these superfluous disgracings? O this same vnhearty niceness of women, is good
for nothing but to keep their huswife hands still occupied in this warp of
dissembling.

Wel^ wench redeem thy fault, and write a kind letter to him presently,
before this resolution of his take too deept root in him.


Aem. Nay sweet Cuze, make me not so immodest, to write so suddenly, let me
have a little time to think upon it.


Lod. Think me on nothing till you write: think as you write, and then you
shall be sure to write as you think. Women do best when they least think
on it.


Aem. But rather then write I will meet him at your pleasure.


Lod. Meet him? do thou think that I shall ever draw him again to meet
thee, that rush't from thee even now with so just a displeasure?


Aem. Nay good Cuze, urge not my offense so bitterly, our next meeting shall
pay the forfeit of all faults.


Lod. Well thou art my pretty Cuze, and I Will do my best to bring him to thee
again, if I cannot, I shall be sorry in faith, thou wr't so injuriously strange
to him. But where shall this interview be now.


Aem. There is the mischief, and we shall hardly avoid it, my father plies my
haunts so closely: and uses means by our maid to entrap us, so that this
Tarrasse at our back gate is the only place we may safely meet at: from
whence I can stand and talk to you. But sweet Cuze you shall swear, to keep
this my kindness from Aurelio, and not intimate by any means that I am any
thing acquainted with his coming.


Lod. Slife, do think I am an Ass? to what end should I tell him? he and
I Will come wandering that way to take the air, or so, and I Will discover thee.


Aem. By mere chance as it were.


Lod. By chance, by chance, and you shall at no hand see him at first, when I
bring him for all this kindness you bear him.


Aem. By no means Cuze.


Lod. Very good: And if you endure any conference with him, let it be very
little; and as near as you can, turn to your former strangeness in any case.


Aem. If do not Cuze, trust me not.


Lod. Or if you think good, you may flirt away again as soon as you see him,
and never let your late fault be any warning to you.


Aem. I will do all this, I warrant thee Cuze.


Lod. Will you so Cozen fool? can thou be brought to that silly humor
again by any persuasions? by Gods Lord, and you be strange again, more then
needs must, for a temperat modesty, I Will break's neck down from thee, but he
shall do as he did to thee.


Aem. Now, fie upon you Cuze, what a fool do you make me?


Lod. Well Dame, leave your superfluous nicety in earnest* and within this
hour I will bring him to this Tarrasse.


Aem. But good Cuze if you chance to see my chamber window open, that is upon
the Tarrasse, do not let him come in at it in any case.


Lod. Sblood how can he? can he come over the wall think?


Aem. O Sir, you men have not devices with ladders of topes to scale such
walls at your pleasure, and abuse us poor wenche^.


Lod. Now a plague of your simplicity, would you discourage him with prompting
him? well Dame, I Will provide for you.


Aem. As you love me Cuze, no words of my kindness from me to him.


Lod. Go to, no more ado. Exit Lodouico and Aemilia.


Enter Leonoro Lionell and Temperance. Tem. GOd ye God morrow Sir, truly I
have not heard a sweeter breath then your Page has.


Leo. I am glad you like him Mistress Temperance.


Tem. And how dee Sir?


Leo. That I must know of you Lady, my welfare depends wholly upon your good
speed.


Tem. How say Sir? and by my soul I was coming to you in the morning when
your young man came to me; I pray let him put on, unless it be for your
pleasure.


Leo. He is young, and can endure the cold well enough bare-headed.


Tem. A pretty sweet child it is I promise you.


Leo. But what good news Mistress Temperance, will your Mistress be won to our
kind meeting?


Tem. Faith I Will tell you Sir, I took her in a good mood this morning, and
broke with her again about you, and she was very pleasant as she will be
many times.


Leo. Very well, and is there any hope of speed?


Tem. No by my troth Gentleman, none in the world, an obstacle young thing it
is, as ever I broke with all in my life: I have broke with a hundred in my
days, tho I say it, yet never met her comparison.


Leo. Are all my hopes come to this Mistress Temperance?


Tem. Nay it is no matter Sir, this is the first time that ever I spoke to any
in these matters, and It shall be the last God willing.


Leo. And even now she had broke with a hundred and a hundred.


Tem. But do you love her Sir indeed?


Leo. Do thou make a question of that?


Tem. Pardon me I pray Sir, I mean dee love her as a Gentleman ought to do,
that is, to consumi^ate matrimony with her as they say?


Leo. That's no matter to you Mistress Temperance, do you procure our meeting,
and let my favor be at her hands as I can enforce it.


Tem. You say like an honest Gentleman; a woman can have no more: and faith Sir
I wish you well, and every day ter dinner my Mistress uses to go to her chair
or else lie down upon her bed, to take a nappe or so, to avoid idleness as
many good huswifes do, you know, and then do I sit by her and ^ew, or so: and
when I see her fast a-sleepe, Lord do I think to my self, (as you know we
waiting women have many light thoughts in our heads) Now if I were a man, and
should bear my Mistress an ill will, what might I do to her now.


Leo. Indeed then you have very good opportunity.


Tem. The best that may be, for she sleeps like a sucking P^gge, you may
jogge her a hundred times, and she will stir no more then one of your stones,
here.


Leo. And could you put a friend in your place think you?


Tem. Nay birlady Sir, back with that leg, for if any thing come on it but
well, all the burden will lie upon me.


Leo. Why what can come of it? only that by this means I may solicit her love
my self.


Tem. I but who knows if the Devil (God bless us) should be great wee', how
you would use her?


Leo. What do thou take me for a beast, to force her that I would make my
wife?


Tem. Beast Sir; Nay there is no beastliness in it neither, for a man will show
like a man in those cases: and besides, you may mar the bed, which every
body will see that comes in; and that I would not for the best gown I shall
wear this twelve Month.


Leo. Well, to put thee out of that fear, it shall be worth such a gown to
thee.


Tem. I thank you for that Sir, but that's all one, and thus Sir, my old Master
Honorio, at two a clock will be at Tilting, and then will his son Signior
Aurelio, and his man Augelo, be abroad; at which hour if you will be at the
back gate, and muffle your self handsomely, you may linger there till I call
you.


Leo. I marry Sir, so I may be there long enough.


Tem. Nay, but two a clock, now, now is my hour Sir.


Leo. Very well, and till then farewell.


Tem. Boy to you heartily.


Leo. Boy to him indeed if he knew all. Exeunt.


Enter Lodouico and Aurelio. Lod. I Have provided thee a ladder of ropes,
therefore resolve to meet her, go wash thy face, and prepare thy self to
die, I Will go make ready the ladder.


Aur. But when is the happy hour of our meeting?


Lod. Marry Sir, that's something uncertain, for it depends wholly upon her
fathers absence, and when that will be God knows: but I doubt not it will
happen once within this twelue-Moneth.


Aur. Sownds a twelue-Moneth.


Lod. Nay hark you, you are all upon the spur now, but how many lovers have
served seven twelue-Moneths prenticeships, for the freedom of their Mistress
favors? notwithstanding to shorten your torments, your man Angelo must be the
mean, to draw the lap wing her father from his nest, by this device that I
tell you. Enter Angelo.


Ang. I did ever dream that once in my life good fortune would warm her cold
hand in my naked bosom. And that once is now come, I Will lay hold upon it,
in faith; I have you my little squire, I have you upon mine Anueill, upon which I
will mallet you and work you; coining crowns, chickins, bracelets, and what
not out of you; for procuring you the dear gullage of my sweet heart
mistress Francischina.


Aure. I am glad it rests in my kind servant Angelo. Angelo, well met, it lies
in thee now, make me no more thy master, but thy friend, and for ever happy in
thy friendship.


Ang. In what part of me does that lie Sir, that I may pull it out, for you
presently?


Aure. My friend Lodouico here has told me, what thou reuealedst to him to
day, touching his uncle Lorenzo, and his louesute to Francischina.


Ang. Slight I told it him in secret sir.


Lod. And so did I tell it him Angelo, I am a Jew else.


Ang. It may well be sir, but what of that?


Lod. This Angelo, he would have thee procure my old uncles absence from home
this afternoon, by making him meet or pretending his meeting with his
mistress, and thy sweet heart Francischina.


Aure. Which if thou do Angelo, be sure of reward to thy wishes.


Ang. What talk you of reward sir? to the loving and dutiful servant, it is a
greater encouragement to his service to hear his master say, God a mercy
Angelo, spy out Angelo, I Will think of thy pains one day Angelo, then all your
base rewards and preferments: yet not to hinder your hand sir, I will extend
mine to his service presently, and get your old uncle ( Signior Lorenzo) out of
the ways long enough I warrant you.


Lod. It Is honestly said, which when thou have performed, enforce us Exeunt.


Ang. I will not fail sir, I was resolved to make him away before they spoke to
me, in procuring his access to Francischina, for what is his presence at her
house, but his absence at his ownes? and thus shall I with one trewell daube
two walls, (Enter Francisc.) see how fitly she meets me. I will stand close
here as if it were in my shop of good fortune, and in respect of all ornaments
I can help her to, I will out of the fullness of my joy, put her out of her
study and encounter her thus; Hold up the bracelets.
Do You lack gentlewoman, do you lack: very fair new gowns, kirtles, petticots,
wrought smocks, bracelets, do you lack gentlewoman, do you lack?


Fran. What means my love by these strange salutations?


Ang. Pre thee ask me no questions; hold take these bracelets, put up this
purse of gold quickly, and if thou will have any of these things, I have cried
to thee, speak and it is performed.


Fran. From whose treasury comes all this, I pre thee?


Ang. Lorenzo, Lorenzo, a gentleman of much antiquity, and one that for his
love has burned hundreds of hearts to powder; yet now it falls out, that his
tree of life is scorch't and blasted with the flames of thy beauty, ready to
wither eternally, unless it be speedily comforted with the sweet drops of thy
nose.


Fran. Gods my life, is that old squire so amorous?


Ang. You wrong him to term him old, he can draw his bow, ride his horse, use
his sword, and traile his pike under Loves colors, as well as ever he did.


Fran. I believe that easily.


Ang. Well, go thy ways in and prepare to entertain him now thy husband is
from home, only with good words, and best kindnesses, making him put all into
deeds till his treasury be deedlesse.


Fran. You speak as if I had nothing to respect but his entertainment, when
you know how close and timely it must be put in execution, considering with
what envious eyes my neighbors survey me.


Ang. Think thou, I consider not all this? he shall come in disguised,
wench, and do thou devise for our mirth, what ridiculous disguise he shall come
in, and he shall assume it.


Fran. What a magnifico of the City, and one of the Senate, think thou he
will not see into that inconvenience?


Ang. No more then no Senator, for in this case, my assurance is that Cupid
will take the scarf from his own eyes, and hoodwinke the old buzzard, while
two other true turtles enjoy their happiness: get thee in I beseech thee love,
tell thy gold, and say thy prayers. (Enter Lorenzo.) Now for a far fetched
device to fetch over my loue-squire. Exit


Fran. I see him within eare-shot; well may beauty inflame others, riches may
tempt others; but for me, mine ears and mine eyes, are proof against all the
Sirens, and Venusses, in all the seas of the world; beauty is a whore, riches a
baud, and I Will trust none an you.


Lor. What ailes poor Angelo?


Ang. Nay mistress Frank, if you prove disloyal once, farewell all constancy
in women.


Lor. How now man? what is the matter?


Ang. O Sir are you so near? I shall trust your experience in women the better
while I live.


Lor. I pre thee why so?


Ang. Say true Sir, did you never solicit your loue-sute to fair mistress
Francischina?


Lor. Never I protest Angelo.


Ang. Upon my life it is a strange thing; I would have sworn all Italy, could
not so suddenly have fastened a favor upon her, I looked for a siege of Troy at
least, to surprise the turrets of her continence; but to yield at the first
sight of her assaylants colors, and before any Cannon was mounted before her,
it is one of the loosest parts of a modest woman that ever I heard of.


Lor. How say thou? did not I tell thee as much? beware of an old colt while
you live, he can tell when to strike I warrant you.


Ang. Women and feathers? now fie on that affinity.


Lor. Alas Angelo, a feeble generation, soon overcome God knows, the honester
mind, the sooner overcome.


Ang. Gods my life, what light huswife would yield at first to a stranger, and
yet does this whirligig stand upon terms of honor forsooth? tenders her
reputation as the Apple of her eye; she has a ielous and a cutting husband,
envious neighbors, and will die many deaths rather then by any friends open
access to her, be whip't naked with the tongues of scandal and slander; and a
whole sanctuary of such ceremonies.


Lor. O she does worthily in that Angelo, and like a woman of honor, thou have
painted her perfection in her faults thou find'st, and tickil'st me with her
appetite.


Ang. And to avoid all sight of your entrance, you must needs come in some
disguise she says; so much she tenders your high credit in the City, and her
own reputation, forsooth.


Lor. How, come in some disguise?


Ang A toy, a very toy which runs in her head with such curious feet Sir,
because if there be any resemblances of your person seen to enter her house,
your whole substantial self will be called in question; any other man she
says, might better adventure with the least thing changed about 'em then you
with all; as if you were the only noted mutton-monger in all the City.


Ang. Well Angelo, heaven forgive us the sins of our youth.


Ang. That Is true Sir, but for a paltry disguise, being a magnifico, she shall
go snicke up.


Lor. Soft good Angelo, soft, let us think on it a little: what disguise would
serve the turn says she?


Ang. Faith, I know not what disguise she would have for you: she would have
you come like a Calfe with a white face, I think, she talks of Tinkers,
pedlers, porters, chimney-sweepers, fools and Physicians, such as have free
egresse and regresse into men's houses without suspicion.


Lor. Out upon 'em, would she have me undergo the shame and hazard of one of
those abiects?


Ang. In Faith I told her so, a squire of that worship, one of the Senate, a
grave Iusticer, a man of wealth, a magnifico?


Lor. And yet by my troth, for the safeguard of her honor, I would do much; me
thinks a Friars weed were nothing.


Ang. Out vppon't, that disguise is worn thread bare upon every stage, and so
much villainy committed under that habit; that it is grown as supicious as the
vilest. If you will hearken to any, take such a transformance, as you may be
sure will keep you from discovery: for though it be the stale refuge of
miserable Poets, by change of a hat or a cloak, to alter the whole state of a
Comedy, so as the father must not know his own child forsooth, nor the wife
her husband, yet you must not think they do it earnest to carry it away so:
for say you were stuffed into a motley coat, crowded in the case of a base
Violl, or buttond up in a cloakbag, even to your chinne, yet if I see your
face, I am able to say this is signior Lorenzo, and therefore unless your
disguise be such that your face may bear as great a part in it as the rest,
the rest is nothing.


Lor. Good reason, in faith Angelo; and what, shall I then smurch my face like
a chimney sweeper, and wear the rest of his smokinesse?


Ang. I Will tell you sir, if you be so mad to condescend to the humor of a
foolish woman, by consideration that Jove for his love took on him the shape
of a Bull, which is far worse then a chimney sweeper, I can fit you rarely.


Lor. As how I pre thee?


Ang. There is one little snaile you know, an old chimney sweeper.


Lor. What, he that sings, Maids in your smocks, hold open your locks, fluds.


Ang. The very same sir, whose person (I borrowing his words) you will so
lively resemble, that himself in person cannot detect you.


Lor. But is that a fit resemblance to please a lover Angelo?


Ang. For that sir, she is provided: for you shall no sooner enter but off goes
your rustie skabberd, sweet water is ready to scour your filthy face, milk,
and a bath of fernebraks for your fustie body, a chamber perfumed, a wrought
shirt, night cap, and her husbands gown, a banquet of Oysters pyes, Potatoes,
Skirret roots, Eringes, and diverse other whetstones of venery.


Lor. O let me hug thee Angelo.


Ang. A bed as sost as her hair, sheets as delicate as her skin, and as
sweet as her breath, pillowes imitating her breasts, and her breasts to boot,
Hypocras in her cups, and Nectar in her lips, Ah, the gods have been beasts for
less felicity.


Lor. No more good Angelo, no more, how shall I requite the happiness thou will bring me too? haste any mind of marriage?


Ang. Not much sir, but an extraordinary wife might tempt me.


Lor. By my troth and she were not promised, thou should have my daughter:
but come lets to our disguise, in which I long to be singing.


Ang. I Will follow you presently. Exit. Signior Lodouico.


(Enter Lodouico and Giouenelle.) Lod. How now Angelo?


Ang. Why sir, I am providing means to lead your old uncle out ath'way, as
you willed me, by drawing him into the way of Quintilianoes wife, my sweet
heart, and so make room for him by Quintilianoes room: you that lead him any
way, must needs seek him out and employ him to some tavern.


Lod. He will be with me presently Angelo, and here is a freshman come from
Padua, whom I will powder with his acquaintance, and so make him an excellent
morsel to relish his carouses.


Ang. Go to Sir, by this light you will be complained on, there cannot be a
fool within twenty mile of your head, but you engrosse him for your own
mirth: Noble-mens tables cannot be served for you.


Lod. Stut, I Will complain of them man, they hunt me out and hang upon me, so
that I cannot be rid on'em, but they shall get some body else to laugh at, or
I Will turne'em over to our Poets, and make all the world laugh at'em.


Ang. Well Sir, here comes your man, make him sure from his wife, and I Will make
the the other sure with her. Exit.


Enter Quintiliano, Innocentio, Fannio, Tailor, Tailors son, he Reads a
bill. Lod. SEe Signior Gionanelle, here comes the famous Captain you would so
feign be acquainted withal; be acquainted with him at your peril: I Will defend
you from his swaggering humor, but take heed of his cheating.


Gio. I warrant you Sir, I have not been matriculated at the University, to be
meretriculated by him: salted there to be colted here.


Lod. Very well Sir, lets hear him.


Quin. I have examined the particulars of your bill Master Tailor, and I find
them true Orthographie, thy payment shall be correspondent: marry I will set no
day, because I am loath to break.


Tailor. Alas Sir, pray let this be the day: consider my charge. I have many
children, and this my poor child here whom I have brought up at school, must
loose all I have bestowed on him hitherto, if I pay not his Master presen^^y
the quartridge I owe him.


Quint. Fool do thou delight to hear thy son beg in Latin, pose him
Lieftenant.


Innoc. How make you this in Latin boy? My father is an honest Tailor.


Boy. That will hardly be done in true Latin Sir.


Innoc. No? why so Sir?


Boy. Because it is false English sir.


Quint. An excellent Boy.


Innoc. Why is it false English?


Boy. Marry sir, as bona Mulier is said to be false Latin, because though bona
be good, Mulier is naught; so to say my father is an honest Tailor, is false
English; for though my father be honest, yet the Tailor is a thief.


Quint. Believe it a rare shred, not of home-spunne cloth upon my life: Tailor,
go, send the schoolmasters to me at night and I Will pay him.


Tay. Thank you good Captain, and if you do not pay him, at night my wife
will come to you her self, that is certain, and you know what a tongue she
has.


Quint. Like the sting of a Scorpion, she nails mine ears to the pillory
with it, in the shame and torment she does me. Go I will void this Bill and
avoid her.


Tay. I thank you sir. Exit cum filio.


Quint. Lieftenant, is not this a brave gullery? The slave has a pretty wife,
and she will never have me pay him, because she may ever come to my chamber,
as she says, to rail at me, and then she goes home and tells her husband
she has tickled me in faith.


Innoc. By my life, a rare jest.


Quint. Thou may see this Boy is no shred of a Tailor, is he not right of my
look and spirit?


Innoc. Right as a line, in faith.


Lod. And will agree in the halter. -- Save you Captain Quintiliano.


Quint. And do thou live my noble Lodouico? Boy, take my cloak, when shals
have a rouse, ha? my Lieftenant and I were drunk last night, with drinking
health on our knees to thee.


Giou. Why, would not your legs bear you Sir?


Quint. How many miles to midsommer? S'blood, whose fool are you? are not you
the tassell of a Gander?


Giou. No indeed not I Sir: I am your poor friend Sir glad to see you in
health.


Quint. Health? S'fut, how mean you that? dee think I came lately out ath'
powdering Tubbe?


Giou. Gossaue me Sir 'twas the furthest part of my thought.


Quint. Why you are not angry, are you?


Lod. No, nor you shall not be.


Quint. S'blood, I hope I may and I will.


Lod. Be and you dare Sir.


Quint. Dare?


Lod. I, dare.


Quint. Plague on thee, thou art the made Lodouico in the world, s'fut do thou
stabbe me, and thou have a mind to it, or bid me stabbe my self, is this thy
friend? do thou love Lodouico?


Giou. With my heart I protest Sir.


Quint. S'heart, a lies in's throat that does not; and whence come thou
wagge, ha?


Giou. Even new arrived from Padua Sir to see fashio^s.


Quint. Give me thy hand, thou art welcome* and for thy fashions, thou shall
first drink and wench it: to which end we will carouse a little, some six or
seven miles hence, and every man carry his wench.


Innoc. But where shall we have them Captain?


Quint. Haue'em Lieftenant? if we haue'em not, my Valentine shall be one, and
she shall take a neighbor or two with her to see their nursed childs or so;
we will want for no wenches I warrant thee, (Enter Cuthbert Barber.)


Lod. But who comes here?


Quint. O it is my Barber.


Lod. S'blood how thy trades men haunt thee.


Quint. Alas they that live by men, must haunt'em,


Cut. God save you Sir.


Quint. How now Cutberd, what news out of Barbary?


Cut. Sir, I would borrow a word with you in private.


Quint. Be brief then Cutbeard, thou look lean me thinks, I think thou art
newly married.


Cut. I am indeed Sir.


Quint. I thought so, keep on thy hat man, twill be the less perceived, what,
is not my Tailor and you friends yet? I will have you friends that's certain,
I Will maintain you both else.


Cut. I know no enmity betwixt us Sir, you know Captain I come about another
matter.


Quint. Why but Cutbeard, are not you neighbors? your trades Cosen german, the
Tailor and the Barber? does not the Tailor sow? do not thou Barber reap?
and do they not both band themselves against the common enemy of mankind, the
louse? are you not both honest men alike? is not he an arrant knave? you next
door to a knave, because next door to him?


Cut. Alas Sir, all this is to no purpose, there are certain odd crowns
betwixt us you know.


Quint. True Cutbeard, will thou lend me as many more to make'em even Boy?


Cut. Faith Sir, they have hung long enough a conscience.


Quint. Cut'em down then Cutbeard, it belongs to thy profession if they hang
too long.


Cut. Well Sir if this be all, I Will come by'em as I can, and you had any honesty.


Giou. S'blood honesty you knave? do you tax any Gentleman in this company
for his honesty?


Cut. Blame me not sir, I am undone by him, and yet I am still of as good
credit in my Parish as he too.


Quint. S'blood Rascal, as good credit as I?


Lod. Nay pre thee Captain forbear.


Innoc. Good Captain be gone.


Quint. Let me alone; I Will not strike him by this hand, why hark ye Rogue:
put your credit in balance with mine? do thou keep this company? here is
Signior Lodouico, one of the Clarissimi, a man of worship: here is a Gentleman
of Padua, a man of rare parts, ^n excellent scholar, a fine Ciceronian.


Cut. Well sir.


Quint. And here is my Lieftenant, I hope thou know the Worshipful man his
father with the blew beard, and all these are my companions; and dare you a
barbarous slave, a squirting companion, compare with me? but here is the point;
now behold and see: Signior Giouenelle, lend me four or five pounds, let it be
five pounds, if you have so much about you.


Giou. Here Is my purse sir, I think there be just so much in it.


Quint. Very good, now Cutbeard, are you a slanderous cutthroat or no? will
thy credit do this now? without scrip or scrowle. But thou will think this is
done for a color now; do you not lend it me simply?


Giou. What a question's that?


Quint. For how long?


Giou. At your pleasure Captain.


Quint. Why so, here you poling Rascal, here is two crowns out of this money:
now I hope wilt believe it is mine, now the property is altered.


Cut. Why you might a done this before then.


Quint. No Cutbeard, I have been burnd in the hand for that, I Will pay n'ere a
knave an ye all money, but in the presence of such honest Gentleman that can
witness it; of my conscience I have paid it thee half a dozen times; go to
sir be gone.


Cut. Fare ye well sir.


Quint. Thank you Signior Giouenelle; though you are sure of this money again
at my hands, yet take heed how this same Lodouico get it from you, he is a
great sharker; but thou have no more money about thee have thou?


Giou. Not a doit, by this candle.


Quint. All the better, for he would cheat thee on it, if thou had ever so much,
therefore when thou come to Padua, ply thy book and take good courses, and
it is not this again shall serve thy turn at my hands, I swear to thee.


Giou. Thank you good Captain.


Quint. Signior Lodouico, adieu.


Lod. Not so sir, we will not part yet, a carouse or two me thinks is very
necessary betwixt us.


Quint. With all my heart Boy, into the Emperors head here.


Lod. Content.


Exeunt, Actus secundi Finis.
Actus Tertius.
Lodouico, Angelo. Ang. SAy Sir, have you played the man and housed the Captain?


Lod. I have housed and lodged him in the Emperors head Tavern, and there I
have left him glorified with his two guls, so that presume of what thou will at
his house, for he is out of the way by this time both ways.


Ang. It Is very well handled sir, and presume you and your friend my master
Aurelio of what may satisfy you at your uncles, for he is now going out of the
way, and out of himself also: I have so besmeard him with a chimney sweepers
resemblance, as never was poor Snaile, whose counterfaite he triumphs in,
never thinking I have daubd his face sufficient, but is at his glass as
curiously busied to beautify his face (for as of Moo'rs so of chimney
sweepers) the blackest is most beautiful as any Lady to paint her lips.


Lod. Thou art a notable villain.


Ang. I am the fitter for your employment Sir: stand close I beseech you, and
when I bring him into the streets, encounter and bayte him in stead of Snayle,
but in any case let none else know it.


Lod. Not for the world.


Ang. If you should tell it to one, so you charge him to say nothing, 'twere
nothing, and so if one by one to it play holy water frog with twenty, you know
any secret is kept sufficiently; and in this, we shall have the better sport at
a Bear baiting, fare ye well Sir.


Enter Honorio and Gasparo. Hon. SIgnior Lodonico good even to you.


Lod. The like to Signior Honorio, and hark you Sir, I must be bound with my
uncle Lorenzo, and tell you a pleasant secret of him, so in no sort you will
utter it.


Hon. In no sort as I am a Gentleman.


Lod. Why Sir he is to walk the streets presently in the likeness of Snayle
the chimney sweeper, and with his cry.


Hon. What is he Sir? to what end I beseech you Sir will he disfigure himself
so?


Lod. In Faith Sir I take it for some matter of policy, that concerns town
government.


Hon. Towne-bull government, do you not mean so Sir?


Lon. O no Sir, but for the general business of the City I take it.


Hon. Well sir well we will not examine it too far, but guess at it.


Lod. So sir when he comes forth do you take one corner to encounter him as I
will do another, and taking him for Snayle, imagine he went about stealing of
City venison, (though he do not,) and make what sport you think good with
him, always provided it be cleanly, and that he may still think he goes
invisible.


Hon. I warraut ye Signior Lodouico, and thank you heartily for this good
cause of our honest recreation.


Lod. Scarce honest neither sir, but much good do it you, as it is,


Hon. O that my son, your friend Aurelio, were here to help to candy this
jest a little.


Lod. Alas sir, his sick stomach can abide no sweet meats, he is all for
aye me, we will make the Jest relish well enough I warrant you: Lorenzo my
uncle an old Senator, one that has read Marcus Aurelius, Gesta Romanorum, the
Mirror of Magistrates, etc. to be led by the nose like a blind Bear that has
read nothing. Let my man read how he deserves to be bayted.


Hon. It Is a pretty wonder in faith Signior Lodouico.


Lod. Slife, 'twere a good deed, to get boys to pin cards at his back, hang
squibs at his tail, ring him through the town with basins, besnowball him
with rotten eggs, and make him asham'de of the Commission before he scale it.


Gasp. What says Signior Lodouico, I beseech you sir? me thinks his pleasant
disposition should intend some waggerie.


Hon. I will tell you Signior Gasparo, but in any case you must say nothing.


Gasp. In no case will I say any thing sir.


Hon. Then this is the case: Signior Lorenzo (your probable father in law) in
the case of Snayle the chimney sweeper, will straight tread the streets for his
pleasure.


G^sp. For his pleasure?


H^n. For his pleasure sir, say it be so, wonder not, but jest at it, consider
what pleasure the world says he is most given to, and help bait him
hereafter, but in any case cleanly, and say nothing.


Gasp. O monstrous, I conceive you, my father in law, will his daughter have
his tricks think you?


Hon. Faith for that you must even take fortune de la pace, kiss the Paxe, and
be patient like your other neighbors. So, here stand I, chose you another
place.


Gasp. O me, what if a man should call him to sweep a chimney in earnest, what
would he do? I Will put him to it a my credit, and here will I stand. (Enter
Lorenzo with his glass in his hand, and Angelo with a pot of painting.)


Ang. How now sir, are you well yet think you?


Lor. A little more here good Angelo.


Ang. Very well sir, you shall have enough.


Lor. It will be the most perfect disguise that ever was imitated.


Ang. I Will warrant you that in faith sir; ya're fitted beyond the forehead for a
right counterfaite; It is well now sir?


Lor. Yet a little more here Angelo, and then master Painter let Michael
Angelo himself amend thee.


Ang. For a perfect natural face, I care not if all the world explain it.


Lor. So now take this glass, and give me my furniture, and have at your
smoaky chimney.


Ang. Have at your smoakie chimney Mistress Frank: here (...) take up your
occupation, and down with Snayle for a chimney sweeper.


Lor. A^ay, see if the coast be clear.


Ang. I will sir.


Lor. Take good view, look about to the doors and windows.


Ang. Not a dog at a door, not a cat at a window. Appear in your likeness,
and not with your quality.


Lor. Chimney sweep; work for chimney sweep, wilt do sirrah?


Ang. Admirably.


Lor. Does my suit become me?


Ang. Become you sir? would to heaven mistress Frank could bring you to the
wearing of it always.


Lor. I Will forth in faith then; Maids in your smocks, set open your locks, Down,
down, down:
Let Chimney sweeper in:
And he will sweep your chimneys clean,
Hey derry, derry, down.
How do like my cry, ha?



Ang. Out of all cry, I forbid Snayle himself to creep beyond you.


Lor. As God help, I begin to be proud on it: Chimney sweep.


Ang. Gods pity, who comes yonder?


Lor. My nephew Lodowicke; Gods me, I Will start back again.


Ang. Nay there is no starting now, he will see you go into your house then; fall
into your note; stand to Snayles person and I warrant you. (Enter Lodouico.)
Exit Ang.


Lor. Chimney sweep.


Lod. How now Snayle, how do thou?


Lor. Thank your good worship.


Lod. Me thinks thy song is more hearty then 'twas wont to be, and thou
look much better.


Lor. Thank God and good friends sir; and a merry heart that prolongs life.
Chimney sweep.


Lod. Nay good Snayle, lets talk a little, you know Rose mine uncle Lorensoes
maid Snayle!


Lor. That I do well sir.


Lod. She complains of you Snayle, and says, you are the bawdiest old knave in
venery.


Lor. Alas sir, she wrongs me: I am not fed thereafter, let her look for
that commendation in her richer customers.


Lod. Who are they Snayle? I hope you do not mean mine uncle her Master;
he is mine uncle and I love him well, and I know the old lickspiggot will be
nibling a little when he can come to it: but I must needs say he will do no
hurt, he is as gentle as an Adder that has his teeth taken out.


Lor. You Are a merry Gentleman sir; and I have haslie labor in hand, I must
crave pardon. (Enter Honorio.) Chimney sweep.


Hono. What old Snayle? how do thou and thy chimneyes?


Lod. Marry sir I was asking him questions about one of them.


Hono. What Signior Lodouico? what one is that I pray?


Lod. Mine uncle Lorenzos maid Rose sir, and he will needs persuade me, her
old master keeps her for his own saddle.


Hono. Her old master? I dare swear they wrong him that say so; his very age
would make him ashamed to be overtaken with those goatish licenses.


Lod. True sir, and his great authority in the City, that should whippe such
unseasonable letchers about the walls of it.


Hono. Why, you are in the right sir, and now you talk of your uncle, I heard say
Captain Quintiliano cheated him yesterday of five pounds, as he did a young
Gentleman of Padua this morning of as much more.


Lod. Faith sir he drew such a kind of tooth from him indeed.


Hono. Is it possible he should be so wrought upon by him? Now certain I have
ever held him a most wise Gentleman.


Lod. An arrant Rooke by this light; a capable cheating stock; a man may carry
him up and down by the ears like a pipkin.


Hono. But do you think he will let the Captain pass so?


Lod. Why alas, what should he do to him sir? the pasture is so bare with him,
that a goose cannot graze upon it.


Hono. Marry sir then would I watch him a time when he were abroad, and take
out my penniworthes of his wife, if he drew a tooth from me, I would draw
another from her.


Lod. Well, God be with your worships: chimney sweeper, I thought I should
never have been rid of them, (Enter Gasparo) Chimney sweep.


Gasp. What old Snayle, do thou cry chimney sweep still? why they say thou
art turned mighty rich of late.


Lor. I would they said true sir?


Gasp. Yes by the mass, by the same token, that thos^ riches make thy old name
for venery increase upon thee.


Lor. Foolish tales sir, foo^ish tales.


Gasp. Yes by the mass, Snayle, but they be told for such certain tales, that
if thou have a daughter to marry with ten thousand crowns, I would see her
pithole, before I would deal with her, for fear she should trot through her
fathers trumperies.


Lor. Alas sir your worship knows, I have neither daughter nor riches, Idle
talk sir, Idle talk: chimney sweep.


Gasp. Nay stay Snayle, and come into my house, thou shall earne some money of
me, I have a chimney to sweep for thee.


Lor. I thank your worship, I will wait upon you next morning early sir: but
now I have promi'st to sweep another man's chimney in truth.


Gasp. But goodd Snayle take mine in the way.


Lod. What does he cry chimney sweep, and refuse to sweep 'em?


Lor. No master, alas you know I live by it, and now I cry as I go to work
that I have promi'st, that I may get more against other times: what would ye
have me do tr^e?


Hono. Alas poor S^ayle; farewell good Snayle, farewell.


Lor. Lord keep your good worship. -- And a very vengeance, I beseech the
black father of vengeance.


Lod. Poor uncle, he begins to be melancholy, has lost his song among's


Gasp. Was never such man touched with such oversight?


Hon: Bear with age, Signior Gasparo, bear with age, and let us all tender
his credit as we have vowed, and be silent; he little thought to have been
thus betrayed as he is; and where secrecy is assured, it bears with many bad
actions in the very best I can tell you, and so good Signior Lodouico adieu, and
I heartily thank you.


Lod. Adue good Signior Honorio.


Gasp. Adue to you likewise sir. Exeunt Gasparo and Honorio.


Lod. Likewise to you sir. Alas poor uncle, I have monstrously abused him; and
yet marvelous worthy, for he disparageth the whole blood of us; and I wish
all such old sheepebiters might always dippe their fingers in such sauce to
their mutton; but thus will he presently be safe; for by this he is near his
sweet hearts house, where he is like to be entertained with worse cheer then
we made him. Quintilliano is now carousing in the Emperors head, while his
own head buddes horns to carouse in; and in the mean time will my amorous
friend and I, make both their absences shooing horns to draw on the presence
of Aemilia. Exit.


Enter Lorenzo and Angelo. (Francisco above.) Ang. What says your worship
now? Do you not walk invisible, all your ancient acquaintance, your own
nephew to talk with you and never discover you?


Lor. But Angelo, a villainous fear shook me the whiles I swear, for still I
was afraid my tongue would have likt away the soote of my face, and bewrayed
me; but Snayle, hitherto thy rustie shell has protected me: persevere till I
have yonder house a my head, hold in thy horns, till they look out of
Quintillianoes forehead: for an old man to make a young man cuckold, is one of
Hercules labors.


Ang. That was the cleansing of other men's stables.


Lor. To make youth rampant in age, and age passant in youth, to take a man
down at his own weapon; to call back time in one, and thrust him headlong
upon another.


Ang. Now your worship is Oracle to your own miracles; how you shine in this
smoaky cloud? which you make the golden net to embrace Venus, you have past the
pikes in faith and all the Iayles of the loue-god swarm in yonder house, to
salute your recovery.


Lor. Well Angelo, I tell thee, now we are past the danger, I would not for 40
crowns but have heard, what I have heard.


Ang. True sir, now you know what the world thinks on you, it is not possible
for a great man, that shines always in his greatness, to know himself; but O
twice young Leander, see where your Hero stands with torch of her beauty to
direct you to her tower, advance your sweet note, and upon her.


Lor. Chimney sweep, work for chimney sweep.


Fran. Come in chimney sweeper.


Lor. O Angelo.


Ang. Why now sir thine Angelo is your good Angel; enter and prosper, and when
you are in the midst of your happiness, think of him that preferred you. Exit
Lorenzo.


Fran. Angelo, give him not too much time with me, for fear of the worst, but
go presently to the back gate, and use my husbands knock, then will I
presently thrust him into my cole-house: and there shall the old flesh-monger
fast for his iniquity. Exit.


Ang. Well said mine own Frank in faith, we shall trim him betwixt us, I for
the most slouenly case in the town; she, for the most sluttish place in the
house: Never was old horseman so notoriously ridden; well, I will presently
knock him into the cole-house, and then haste to Lodouico, to know when he
shall be releast. Exit.


Enter Lodouico with a ladder of ropes, Aurelio, (Aemilia above.) Lod. Here Is
thy ladder, and there is thy gallows, thy Mistress is thy hangman, and must take
thee down: This is the Tarrasse where thy sweet heart tarries; what would
thou call it in Rhyme?


Aur. Celestial sphere, wherein more beauty shines.


Lod. Room for a passion.


Aur. Then on Dardanian Ida, where the pride
Of heavens selected beauties strived for prize.

Lod. Nay you shall know, we have watered our houses in Helicon. I cannot abide
this talking and undoing Poetry, leave your me^^ifluous numbers: yonder is a
sight will stea^e all reason from your rhyme I can tell you; down of your knees
you sl^ue, adore. Now lets hear you invoke, O the saple hammes of a lover,
go to, do not, stand up close, for she must not see you yet, though she know
you are here.


Aem. Cozen Lodowicke?


Lod. Who calls Lodowicke?


Aem. What t^mpest has cast you on this sollitary shore? Is the party come?


Lod. The party? now a plague of your modesty, are your lips too nice to name
Aurelio?


Aem. Well, is he come then?


Lod. He, which he? s'fut name your man with a mischief to you, I understand
you not.


Aem. Was there ever such a wild-braine? Aurelio.


Lod. Aurelio? lord how loath you are to le^ any sound of him come out an you,
you hold him so dear within, I Will present her with a ^ight, will startle her
nicety a little better; hold you, fasten the end of this ladder I pray.


Aem. Now Jesus bless us, why cosen, are you mad?


Lod. Go to you spirit of a feather, be not so soft hearted, leave your
nicety, or by this hemp I Will so hamper thy affections in the halter of thy
lovers absence, making it up in a gordian knot of forgetfulness, that no
Alexander of thy allurements, with all the swords of thy sweet words, shall
ever cut in pieces.


Aem. Lord, how you roll in your rope-ripe terms.


Lod. Go to, tell me, will you fasten the ladder or no?


Aem. I know not what I should say to you: I will fasten it, so only your self
will come up.


Lod. Only my self will come up then.


Aem. Nay sweet Cuze, swear it.


Lod. If I should swear thou would curse me: take my word in a halters name,
and make the ladder as fast to the Tarrasse, as thou would be to Aurelio.


Aem. Nay see if he do not make me give over again?


Lod. Was there ever such a blew kitling? fasten it now^ or by heaven thou
do loose me for ever.


Aem. Well sir, remember your word; I will fasten it, but in faith Cuze, is not
the Gentleman, and his parting choler parted yet?


Lod. In Faith with much ado:


Aem. Nay, nay, choose him; I shall live, if they be not^ and if I live till
his choler kill me, I shall live till he leave loving me, and that will be a
good while first.


Lod. Lord, Lord, who has enform'd you of such amorous feruency in him: are you
so confident in his kindness?


Aem. Nay by my troth, it is but a careless confidency neither, which always
last longer then that which is timorous: well Cuze, here I have fastened it for
your pleasure; but alas, the fear of my fathers coming does so distract me
that I scarce know what I do or say.


Lod. Your father? do think we would venture all this prepa^^tion, and not
make him safe?


Aem. But are you sure he is safe?


Lod. Am I sure this is Aurelio? look upon him wench, is it not thy love? thy
life? come sir, mount.


Aem. O cosen Lodwicke, do you thus cosen and betray me?


Lod. Cuze, Cuze, thou have acted thy dissembling part long enough, in the most
modest judgment, and passing naturally: give over with thy credit then,
unmask thy love, let her appear in her native simplicity, strive to conceal
her no longer from thy love, for I must needs tell thee he knows all.


Aem. What does he know?


Lod. Why all that thou told'st me, that thou love him more then he can love
thee, that thou have set up thy resolution, in despite of friends or foes,
weals or woes, to let him possess thee wholly, and that thou did woo me to
bring him hither to thee: All this he knows; that it was thy device to prepare
this ladder, and in a word, all the speech that past betwixt thee and me he
knows, I told him every word truly and faithfully Gods my Judge.


Aem. Now was there ever such an immodest creature?


Lod. Via, with all vain modesty, leave this coloring, and strip thy love
stark naked, this time is too precious to spend vainly; mount I say.


Aur. Model of heavenly beauty.


Lod. Sownds, will thou melt into rhyme a the the other side? shall we have lines?
change thy style for a ladder, this will bring thee to Parnassus, up I say.


Aur. Unworthy I t'approach the furthest step to that felicity that shines in
her.


Lod. O spurblinde affection, I have seen a fellow, to a worse end ascend a
ladder with a better will, and yet this is in the way of marriage, and they
say, marriage and hanging have both one constellation. To approve the which old
saying, see if a new ladder make 'em not agree.


Aem. Peace, some body comes.


Lod. That you heard, was but a mouse, so boy I warrant thee.


Aur. O sacred goddess, what soever thou art
That in mere pity to preserve a soul
From undeserved destruction, have vouchsaf't
To take Aemiliaes shape.

Lod. What a poetical sheep is this? S'life, will you stand riming there upon
a stage, to be an eye-marke to all that pass? is there not a chamber by?
withdraw I say for shame, have you no shame in you? here will come some body
presently I lay my life on it.


Aur. Dear mistress, to avoid that likely danger,
Vouchsafe me only private conference,
And it is the fulness of my present hopes. Exeunt.

Lod. Aurelio, Occasion is bald, take her by the forelock; so, so. In Hymen's
name get you together, here will I stand Sentinel. This is the back gate to
Honorios house, which shall be Aurelios, if God give him grace to weep for his
fathers death in time. And in this garden, if I could see the chaste Lucresse,
or the affable mistress Temperance, I might (thus wrapped in my cloak) steal a
little courtship through the chinke of a pale. But indeed I think it safer to
sit closer, and so to cloud the sum of my visnomy, that no eye discern it.
(He sits down, and muffles himself in his cloak.) So be it, that's my
resolution. Now to my contemplation, this is no Pandarisme, is it? No, for
there is neither money nor credit proposed or expected, and besides there is no
unlawful act intended, no not this same lasciua actio animi: I think for his
part, much less hers: go to, let me do my kinswoman, and her sex right, sit at
rest with me then reputation, and conscience, fall asleep with the world, but
this same idle attendance is the spite of it, Idleness is accounted with other
men a sin, to me it is a penance, I was begot in a stirring season, for now
has my soul a thousand fancies in an instant, as what wench dreams on when
she lies on her back, when one hen lays an egg and another sits it, whether
that hen shall mother that chicken? If my bull leap your cow, is not the calfe
yours? yes no doubt, for Aedificium cedit solo says the Lawyer: and then to
close all comes in a sentence, Non omnia possumus omnes: for some are borne to
riches, others to verses, some to be bachelors, others to be cuckolds, some to
get crowns, and others to spend'm, some to get children, and others to
keepe'em: and all this is but idleness, would to God I had some scuruy poem
about me to laugh at, (Enter Temperance.) but mark, yonder is a motion to be
seen.


Temp. Yonder he sits in faith, well done true love, good Signior Leonoro, he
keeps promise the best, he does not see me yet.


Lod. It Is the stayed Madam Temperance, a pretty pinnace she has been in her
days, and in her nights too, for her burden, and reasonable good under sail,
and see she has discovered a sail, see, see, she hales him in, ha? it is this
way to the rewards, slight it is this way: I hope the baud knows not me, and
yet I know not, she may be a witch, for a whore she was before I knew her, a
baud I have known her any time this dozen years, the next step to honor then
is a witch, because of Nature, for where the whore ends, the baud begins, and
the corruption of a baud, is the generation of a witch. And Pythagoras holds
opinion, that a witch turns to a wild Cat, as an old Ostler turns to an
ambling nagge. Enter Leonoro muffled in his cloak with Lyonell.


Leo. This is the back gate, where Temperance should meet me at this hour.


Lion. I wonder she fayles, for I see her not.


Leo. Why sits that fellow there troe? come let us houer here abouts 'twill not
be long er'e we encounter. Exit.


Lod. So, now this riddle is expounded, this baud took me for this aduenturer
whom (twenty to one) she attended, to waft him into Lucretias chamber, what a
beast was I, not to apprehend this advantage, thus muffled as I am, she could
not have perceived me till I had been in, And I might safely have staid a
while without endangering my lovers: (Enter Temperance stealing along the
stage.) S'light she takes me still for her first man.


Tem. Come, come, gingerly for Gods sake, gingerly.


Exeunt. E^t^r Leonoro and Lyonell. L^o. SE^ Lyonell, yet she is not come, and
the privy atte^dant is gone.


Lyo. I wonder what it was.


Leo. I ^eare me some other clyent of hers, whom she pr^fe^res before me, come,
we must not linger here too long together, we will enter on this backside, to
the Emperors head, where we will stay a little, and then make the last trial
of this bauds honesty. (Enter Quintiliano, Giouenelli, and Fannio in their
doublet and hose.)


Quint. Come A^cient, lets leave our company a little, and air our selves in
this backside. -- Who goes there?


Leo. A friend.


Quint. The word.


Leo. God save you Captain Quintiliano.


Quint. Shote him Ancient, a spy, the word's the Emperors head, and thither
you shall go sir.


Leo. Pardon me good Captain.


Gio. Come, be not retrograde to our desires.


Leo. I attend a friend of mine.


Quint. Thou Have attended him already, I am witness to it, deni't and he dare,
whatsoever he be, and he shall attend thee another while, and he will: Thou Art
as good a man as he, and he be the Duke himself, for a Clarissimo; entertain
him Ancient, bid the Clarissimo, welcome, I Will call a drawer, and we will have
some wine in this Arbor. Exit.


Gio. You Are very welcome Signior Clarissimo, desire you more acquaintance sir.


Leo. My name is Leonoro sir, and indeed I scarce know you.


Gio. No sir, and you know me, you must know as much as I know, for Scientia
and Scientificus is all one; but that is all one, in truth sir, you shall not
spend a penny here, I had money, I thank God even now, and peradventure shall
have again e're we part, I have sent to a friend of mine.


(Enter Quintilliano and a drawer with a cup of wine and a towell.) Quint. Here
honorable Clarissimo, I drink to thee.


Leo. Thank you good Captain.


Quint. S'fut, winesucker, what have you filled us here, baldredash? taste
Leonoro.


Leo. Me thinks it is sack.


Geo. Let us taste sir, it is claret, but it has been fetched again with Aqua
vitae.


Quint. S'light me thinks t'as taken salt water, who drew this wine you rogue?


Draw. My fellow Sam drew it sir, the wine's a good neat wine, but you love a
pleasanter grape, I Will fit your palate sir. (He stands close.)


Quint. Is this thy boy Leonoro?


Leo. For fault of a better sir.


Quint. Before heaven it is a sweet faced child, me thinks he should show well
in woman's attire: and he took her by the lilly white hand, and he laid her
upon a bed. I Will help thee to three crowns a week for him, and she can act
well. Have ever practiced my pretty Ganimede?


Lyo. No, nor never mean sir.


Gio. Mean sir? No marry Captain, there will never be mean in his practice I
warrant him.


Quint. O finely taken; Sirrah, Clarissimo, this fellow was an arrant Asle this
fore-noone, before he came to be an Ancient.


Leo. But where is your Lieftenant Captain?


Quint. Sownds man, he is turned swaggerer.


Leo. Is It possible?


Quint. Swaggerer by this light he; and is in the next room writing a
challenge to this tall Gentleman my Ancient here.


Leo. What, mutinous in your own company?


Quint. S'fut man, who can bridle the asses valor?


Giou. S'blood and any man think to bridle me.


Leo. But what was the quarrel?


Quint. Why sir, because I entertaind this Gentleman for my Ancient, (being my
dear friend and an excellent scholar) he takes pepper in the nose and sneeses
it out upon my Ancient; now sir (he being of an vncol^-carrying spirit) falls
foul on him, calls him gull openly; and ever since I am feign to drink with
'em in two rooms, dare not let them come together for my life, but with pen and
inke-hornes, and so my Lieftenant is in the next chamber casting cold Ink upon
the (Enter Innocentio.) flame of his courage, to keep him from the blot of
cowardice, see where he comes with his challenge: good Clarissimo hold my
Ancient.


Leo. Good Ancient, forbear in a Tavern.


Quint. Revenge noble Lieftenant, have thou done it?


Innoc. S'light I think I have pepperd him, but it was his own seeking you know.


Quint. That's certain.


Giou. Sownds my seeking sir?


Quint. Hold him Leonoro; and if it be possible, persuade him to hear the
challenge from the enemies own mouth.


Leo. I Will undertake he shall Captain: Good Ancient let me entreat you.


Giou. Well sir, because you are a stranger to me, you shall do more with me.


Leo. Thank you good ancient.


Quint. Read fiery Lieftenant, read boy, legibly.


Innoc. Here it is sir: Signior Giouenelli, it is not ignorant unto you, that
even now you crossed me over the cocks-comb.


Giou. I did so sir: I will not deny it I warrant you.


Leo. Good Ancient peace.


Innoc. And that openly, or else it would never have grieved me.


Quint. That openly was all indeed.


Innoc. And moreover, very vnreuerendly to call me gull, and ass to my face:
And therefore, though I held it good discretion in me to wink at the blow, not
seeing to take notice of it.


Leo. Good discretion in deed.


Innoc. Yet know that I will have satisfaction from you.


Giou. Well sir, and you shall.


Quint. Nay good Ancient hear him.


Innoc. And desire you to send me word, whether you will maintain it or no,
hoping that you will not offer that discourtesie to do me wrong, and stand to
it when you have done.


Leo. That were foul indeed.


Innoc. And as for the words, in that you called me gull, and Ass to my face,
resolve me by letter (for I do not think fit we should meet) first whether
you spoke any such words or no: and secondly by whom you meant'em. And it by me
(as I think you durst not) confess you are sorry for'hem: and if I have
offended you, I heartily ask you forgiveness. And so farewell.


Quint. Before heaven Ancient, this would have tickled you, but good Leonoro,
and thou be a right Clarissimo, lets make'em friends, and drink to one
another: S'fut, we have no wine here me thinks, where is this Aperner?


Drawer. Here Sir.


Quint. Have you mended your hand sir.


Draw. I Captain, and if this please not your taste, either you or I cannot
taste a cup of wine.


Quint. Sounds you are very saucy sir, here Lieftenant, drink to thy Ancient, and
void mutinies with your officer, marshall law is dangerous.


Innoc. Is he content I should drink to him?


Leo. He is I warrant thee.


Innoc. Why then Ancient good luck to you.


Giou. Let come Lieftenant, I pledge you.


Quint. Why so, now my company is cur'de again, before 'twas wounded. Come
honorable Clarissimo, lets retire to our strength, taste a fresh carouse or
two, and then march home with Music. Tapster, call us in some Music.


Draw. I will sir.


Finis Actus Tertij.
Actus Quartus.
Enter Quintiliano, Leonoro, Innocentio, Lionello, Fannio, with Music. Quint.
STrike up Scrapers, honorable Clarissimo, and thy sweet Adonis, adieu, remember
our device at the show soon.


Leo. I will not fail Captain, farewell to you both: come Lionel, now let us
try the truth of Madam Temperance, and see if she attend us.


Innoc. I hope by this time she remembers her promise sir. Exeunt Leo. and Lio.


Quint. How now Lieftenant, where is my Ancient?


Innoc. Marry Captain you have left him casting the reckoning ith'chimney.


Quint. Why then his purse and his stomach will be empty together, and so I
cashier him; let the scholar report at Padua, that Venice has other manner of
learning belongs to it: what does his Continuum and Contiguum here? let them go
to the Ink pot and beware of the wine pot. Fill red cheek't Bacchus, let the
Burdeux grape
Skip like la voltos in their swelling veins.
Te dan, dan tidle, te dan de dan tidle didle, etc.



Innoc. O God Captain that I could dance so.


Quint. He took her by (strike up fiddlers) the lilly white hand and he laid
her upon the bed. Oh what a spirit have I now? I long to meet a Sergeant in
this humor, I would but have one whiffe at one of these same peuter buttoned
shoulder-clappers, to try whether this chopping knife or their pestels were
the better weapons. Here Is a blade Boy, it was the old Dukes first
predecessors; I Will tell thee what Lieftenant, this sword has dubd more Knights
then thy knife has opened Oysters.


Innoc. Is It possible Captain, and me thinks it stands a little.


Quint. No matter for that, your best mettald blades will stand soonest: so,
now we have attaind our Mansion house. At which I Will sing a verse shall break
the doors. O noble Hercules, let no S^ygian lake.
Te dan dan tidle, te dan de dan tidle didle, etc.
Farewell scrapers, your reward now shall be that I will not cut your strings
nor break your sidles, via, away.


Innoc. Come Captain, lets enter, I long to see my Mistress, I warrant she is a
heavy Gentlewoman for your absence.


Quint. S'fut she is an Ass, honor wooes me, preferment calls me, and I must
lie pampred in a wenches lap, because she dotes on me. Honor says no,
Lieftenant, Pugna pro patria, we must to it in faith and seek our portion
amongst the scratcht faces.


Lorenzo within. Mistress, Mistress, is he gone?


Quint. Whoe's that cais there?


Innoc. I heard no body.


Quint. No? there was one called Mistress: I say who called Mistress, s'blood I hope
I am not drunk.


Fann. In truth sir I heard no body.


Quint. I tell thee I smelt a voice here in my entry, s'fut I Will make it smell
worse and'cheare it again.


Innoc. O me, he will draw upon his own shadow in this humor, if it take the
wall of him. Follow him Fannio, look he do no harm for God sake.


Lor. Help, help, help.


Innoc. Name of God, what is there to do? (Enter Quintil. and Lorenzo.)


Lor. Good Captain do not hurt me.


Quint. Sounds is hell broke loose? why Snaile, though you can sing songs and
do things Snaile, I must not allow ye to creep into my wives cole-house,
what Snaile into my withdrawing chamber?


Lor. I beseech your Worship hear me speak.


Quint. O Snaile, this is a hard case; no room serve your turn, but my wives
cole-house, and her other house of office annexed to it? a privy place for her
self, and me sometimes, and will you use it being a stranger? s'light how
comes this about? up sirrah and call your Mistress.


Lor. A plague of all disguises. Exit Fannio.


Innoc. Alas poor Snaile, what did thou make here?


Lor. I protest sir for no harm, my Mistress called me in to sweep her chimney,
and because I did it not to her mind, she made me do penance in her
cole-house.


Innoc. Search him Captain and see, if he have stolen nothing.


Lor. Kill me, hang me, if I have.


Quint. Yes Snaile, and besides I hear complaints of you, you are an old
luxurious hummerer about wenches Snaile, does this become your gravity sir?
Lieftenant, fetch me a cole-sacke, I Will put him in it and hang him up for a
sign.


Lor. I beseech your Worship be good to me.


Innoc. Good Captain pardon him, since he has done nothing but swept your
chimney worse then my Mistress would have it swept, he will do it better
another time.


Quint. Well Snaile, at this Gentleman's request, (to whom I can deny nothing)
I release you for this once, but let me take you no more thus I advise you.


Lor. Not while I live good Captain.


Quint. Hence, trudge you d^udge, go away.


Lor. A plague of all disguises. Exit Lorenzo.


(Enter Fannio.) Fann. I have looked about all the house for my Mistress sir,
but I cannot find her.


Quint. Go then, look all about the town for her too; come in Lieftenant,
lets repose a little after our liquor.


Exeunt. Enter Aurelio and Aemilia, above. Aur. Dear life, be resolute, that
no respect
Heighted above the compass of your love,
Depresse the equal comforts it retains;
For since it finds a firm consent in both,
And both our births and years agree so well,
If both our aged parents should refuse,
For any common object of the world,
To give their hands to ours, let us resolve
To live together like our lives and souls.

Aem. I am resolved my love; and yet alas,
So much affection to my fathers will
Consorts the true desires I bear to you,
That I would have no spark of our love seen,
Till his consent be asked, and so your fathers.

Aur. So runs the mutual current of my wish,
And with such staid and circumspect respects,
We may so serve and govern our desires,
That till fit observation of our fathers,
Prefer the motion to them; we may love
Without their knowledge and the skill of any,
Save only of my true friend Lodowicke.

Aem. I wonder where he is.

Aur. Not far I know,
For in some place, he watches to prevent
The feared danger of your fathers presence.

Enter Lorenzo and Angelo running. Ang. SOunds stay for the love of your honor
sir.


Lor. A plague of all disguises Angelo.


Ang. What reason have you to curse them? has not one of them kept you safe
from the shame of the world, as much as a poor disguise might do; but when
your ridiculous fears will cast it off, even while it is on, so running
through the streets, that they rise all in an uproar after you* alas what is
the poor disguise to blame sir?


Lor. Well then fortune is to blame, or some thing; come as thou did help to
dawbe me, help to cleanse me, I prithee.


Ang. Let alone a while sir for Gods sake, I Will go see whether the Captain be
gone from home or no.


Lor. Out upon that course Angelo; I am frighted out of it, come enter my
house, enter.


Ang. What, will you enter your house sir before you know who is in it: keep
your self close, and let me first enter and discover.


Lor. I know there is no body.


Ang. You cannot know it sir, I heard even now that diverse of the Senate were
determined to come and sit in Counsel there.


Lor. A tale, a very tale Angelo, enter for the love of heaven, enter and
vnsmother me. Exit.


Ang. What shall I do? my poor Master is berai'd, O that same faithless
Lodowicke, that could drown the swaggering Captain no better in his
drunkenness; alas how should I salve this? Exit.


(Enter Lorenzo and after him Angelo.) Lor. How now? whom do I see? my
daughter and a yonker together? passion of death, hell and damnation, what
lecherous capricorn reigns this unhappy day? old and young in a predicament? O
fie of filthy sin and concupiscence, I will conceal my rage a while that it
may break forth in fury; I Will shift me presently Angelo, and go fetch the
Provost.


Ang. O unspeakable madness, will you for ever dishonor your daughter, and in
her your self sir?


Lor. Talk not to me, out upon this abominable concupiscence, the pride of
the flesh, this witchcraft of the Devil: talk not to me, justice cries out
an't in the streets, and I will see it punished, come good Angelo to help to
shift me.


Ang. I Will follow you Sir instantly; Master, Master.


Aur. Angelo? what news?


Ang. Miserable Master, cast down your ladder, and come down instantly.


Aem. Alas, why, Angelo is my father coming.


Ang. Let us not talk but come down I say.


Aur. Dear life, farewell, we will shortly meet again,
So parts the dying body from the soul;
As I depart from my Aemilia.

Aem. So enter frighted souls to the low world,
As my poor spirit upon this soddaine doubt,
What may succeed this danger.

Ang. Come away, you will be whipped anon for your amourosity, have for shame
have, etc.


Aem. Once more and ever, fare my dear life well.


Exit Aemil. Ang. Leave your amorous congeis and get you in Dame* sir you and I
will talk as 'twere betwixt the pales, now, get you and shift you of this suit
presently.


Aur. Shift me Angelo? why man?


Ang. Ask me no questions, but go home and shift you presently, and when I
have done a little business here within, I Will come and tell you my device:
there has more chanced then you are aware of, and then I can stand to tell
you; away therefore presently go home and shift you.


Aur. Very good sir, I will be ruld by you, and after lear^e the mysteries.
Exit Aurel.


Ang. Now will I let the little squire shift and cleanse himself without me,
that he may be longer about fetching the Provost, and in the mean time will I
take my Masters suit (of which the little squire took note) and put it on my
sweet heart Francischina, who shall presently come and supply my Masters place,
with his Mistress; for the little squire amazed with his late affrights and this
sudden offencefull spectacle of his daughter, took no certain note who it
was that accosted her; for if he had, he would have blamed me for my Master,
only the color of his garment sticks in his fancy, which when he shall still
see where he left it, he will still imagine the same person wears it, and thus
shall his daughters honor and my Masters be preserved with the finest sugar of
invention. And when the little squire discouers my sweet heart, she shall
swear, she so disguised her self, to follow him, for her love to him; ha, ha
ha, O the wit of man when it has the wind of a woman. Exit.


Enter Lodouico and Lucretia, with Rapiers fighting. Lod. HOld, hold, I pre
thee hold; I yield my rapier,
Let my submission, my presumption salve.

Lucr. Ignoble Lodwicke, should I take thy life,
It were amends too little for the wrong.

Lod. O the precious heavens:
How was I gul'd? haud, hide thy self for shame.
And henceforth have an eye before thy fingers.

Lucr. Well do not jest it out, for I protest
If this disguise, which my inhumane fate
Puts on my proper sex, be by thy means
Seen through, by any other then thy self,
The quarrel twixt us shall be more then mortal.
And thy dishonor to a friendlesse stranger
(Exild his native country, to remnine
Thrall to the mercy of such unknown miads
As fortune makes the rulers of my life)
Shall spread it self beyond my misery,

Lod. Nay, mix not cause of mirth with passion,
Do me the grace t'vnfold thy name and state,
And tell me what my whole estate may do,
To salve this wrong unwittingly I did thee?
And set the plantife thoughts of thy hard fate
In such peace, as my friendship may procure:
And if I fail thee, let Jove fail my soul,
When most this earth makes it need help of heaven.

Lucr. In the more then temper my late rage
And show your virtues perfectly derived
From the Venetian noblesse; for my name
It is Lucr^tio, which to fit this habit
I turned Lucretia: the rest that rests
To be related of my true estate,
I Will tell some other time: least now your presence
Might dumbly tell it (if it should be seen)
To all the world, or else make it suspect
My femall life of lightness: then with thanks
And vow of all true friendship, for th'amends
Your kindness makes me, take your sword again,
And with it while I live the power of mine
In any honored use shall command.
Then till we meet, and may laugh at this error,
I Will once more try the free peace of my chamber. Exit.

Lod. Do so sweet friend: a plague of Gingerly?
Where is that stale and fulsome Gingerly,
She brought me to a fury, I Will be sworn
Rather then man or woman: a flat beating:
I found her supposed mistress fast asleep,
Put her to the touchstone, and she prou' a man.
He wak't, and with a more then manly spirit
Flew in my face, and gave me such a dash
In steed of kissing, of these licorish lips
That still my teeth within them bled I swear He spits.
Gengerly, Gingerly, a plague a you. He spits again.
But now how does my lovers on the Tarrasse?

Enter Aurelio with Angelo, shifting his Apparel. Aur. HOld, take my dublet
too, my hat and all, and quickly hie thee to thy sweet.


Ang. S'ounds, see sir see, your proper Sentinel, that when you needed him,
gave you a slip.


Anr. Friend Lodouico, by my life, well welcome to this my fathers backeside.


Lod. Well sir, well, I would I had kissed almost your fathers backeside so I had
never known it.


Ang. A my life he faints extremely, he left you even now to purchase him the
amorous enteruiew of your fair cuze Lucretia that lies here.


Aur. Gods me, sweet friend, would thou use such a slight to any one that
lay within my walk? who was thy mean to her?


Ang. I lay my life, tame madam Temperance, the notorious Pandar.


Aur. S'^ut friend, wat a notorious oversight was that? and what a violent
injury unto thy friend?


Lod. A plague upon you both, you scuruy hind, have you no gull but me to whet
your wit upon?


Aur. My friend a privy lover? I Would have sworn
Love might spend all his shafts at butterflies
As well as at his bosom.

Ang. 'Twas your fault then,
For I have noted a most faithful league
Betwixt him and his barber now of late,
And all the world may see, he does not leave
One hair on his smooth chinn, as who should say,
His hapless love was gone against the hair.

Lod. S'bloud and these rogues knew how I was deceived,
They Would stout me into motley, by this light.

Ang. Well sir, I ever thought y'ad the best wit
Of any man in Venice next mine own,
But now I Will lay the bucklers at your feet,

Lod. A pox upon thee, tame your bald hewed tongue,
Or by the Lord of heaven I Will pull it out.

Aur. O my sweet friend, come I Will know more of this,
And tell thee all our fortune, hence good Angelo.

Ang. O, if this man had patience to his brain,
A man might load him till he smart again. Exit Ang.

Lod. Patience worthy friend, he knows you love him for his knauish wit.
Exeunt.


Enter Leonoro, Temperance and Lyonell. Leo. THou shall not stay sweet
Temperance, tell us the manner of our war and we will leave thee presently.


Temp. Why that perl's man Lodowicke, according to your appointment was iumpe
at three with me, just, ^eene full at your hour; Muffled as I wild you, ee'ne
your fashion and your very leg for all the earth, and followed me in so
gingerly, that by my troth I must needs say, he was worthy the pleasuring; but
in what a taking was I when I perceived his voice? and when I saw my mistress
and he together by the ears?


Leo. What did thy mistesse fight with him?


Temp. O king a heaven, she ran upon his naked weapon the most finely that
ever lived, and I ran away in a swoone for fear.


Leo. Has she a good courage?


Lio. It seems she is too honest for our companies, a little more good
Temperance.


Temp. And when he saw me, he called me punke, and pandor, and doxie, and the
vilest nicknames as if I had been an arrand naughty-packe.


Leo. It Is no matter Temperance, he is known and thou art known.


Temp. I thank heaven for it, and there is all indeed, I can stay no longer.
Exit.


Leo. Farewell honest Temperance: how was it possible, Lodouico should fit all
these circumstances without the confederacy and treachery of this beldam? well
Lodouico must satisfy this doubt when I see him.


Lio. That will be at the May night show at Signior Honorios.


Leo. I would not meet him there, I shall offend him, but there I must needs
be, and have thee disguised like a woman.


Lio. Me sir?


Leo. No remedy, the Captain Quintilliano and I have devised it to gull his
Lieutenant: for thou shall dance with him, we will thrust him upon thee, and
then for his courting and gifts, which we will tell him he must win thee
withal, I hope thou will have wit enough to receive the tone, and pay him
again with the the other, come Lionell let me see how naturally thou can play
the woman. Exit.


Lio. Better then you think for.


Enter Quintiliano and Innocentio. Quint. COme Lientenant, this nap has set a
nap of sobriety upon our brains, now lets sit here and consult, what course
were best for us to take in this dangerous mansion of man's life.


Inno. I am for you in faith Captain and you go to consult once.


Quint. I know it Lieutenant, say then what think thou? we talked of
employme^t, of action, of honor, of a company and so forth.


Inno. Did we so Captain?


Quint. Did we so Ass? S'fut, were thou drunk before thou went to the
tavern, that thou have now forgotten it?


Inno. Cry you mercy good Captain, I remember I am your Lieutenant.


Quint. Well sir, and so thou shall be called still, and I Captain, though we
never lead other company then a sort of quart pots.


Inno. Shall we Captain, bith mass then lets never have other company in deed.


Quint. Why now thou art wise, and have a mind transformed with maine right, and
to confirm thee, I will compare the noble service of a feast with the
honorable service of the field, and then put on thy hand to which thou will.


Inno. Thank you good Captain, but do you think that war is naught sir?


Quint. Exceeding naught.


Inno. Why then sir take heed what you say, for it is dangerous speaking
against any thing that is naught, I can tell you.


Quint. Thou say wisely Lieutenant, I will not then use the word naught, nor
speak ill of either, but compare them both, and choose the better.


Inno. Take heed then good Captain, there be some prickecar'd in elligencers
conuaid into some wall or other about us.


Quint. If there were I care not, for to say true, the first model of a
battle was taken from a banquet. And first touching the offices of both: for
the general of the field, there is the master of the feast, for the Lieutenant
General, the mistress, for the Sergeant Mayor, the Steward, for the Gentleman
usher, the Marshall, for master oth' Ordinance the Sewer, and all other
officers.


Inno. Yet you are reasonable well Captain.


Quint. Then for the preparation, as in a field is all kind of artillery, your
Cannon, your Demicannon, Culuerings, falkons, Sacres, minions, and such goodly
ornaments of a field, I speak no hurt of em thou see, I Will have nothing to do
do with 'am.


Inno. Hold you still there Captain.


Quint. Besides other munition of powder and shot, and so for the feast, you
have your Court, cubbords planted with flagons, cannes, cups, beakers, bowls,
goblets, basens and ewers: And more glorious show I wisse then the the other, and
yet I speak no hurt of the other.


Inno. No I Will be sworn Captain.


Quint. Besides your munition of manchet, napery plats, spoons, glasses and so
forth; Then for your kitchen artilieri^, there shall you see all your brass
pieces mounted in order, as your beefe-pots, your chaldrons, your kettles,
chafingdishes, ladies, spits, a more edifying spectacle then your Cannon and
Culuering, and yet I speak no hurt of them neither.


Inno. No Captain, thus far, I go we.


Quint. Then sir, as in the field the drum, so to the feast the dresser gives
the Alarm, Ran tan tara, tan tan tantara tan.


Inno. O how it stirs my stomach?


Quint. First then sets forward a wing of light horse, as sallads, brothes,
sauces, flew'd meats, and other kickshores* and they give a charge, then do the
battle join Captain Capon in white-brith, Lieutenant calves head.


Inno. That's my place.


Quint. Ancient Surloigne, a man of a goodly presence, and full of expectation,
as you ancient ought to be, then have you Sergeant Piemeat, Corporal Conny,
Lanceprizado Lark, Gentlemen, Panbakex, and all the species of a company.


Inno. Would we might fall to the fight once.


Quint. Why now grows the fight hot man, now shall you see many a tall piece
of beef, many a tough capon go down, and hee'rs the trial of a man's
stomach, all the while the Artillery plays on both hands, the Canons lay
about them, the flagons go off, thick and threefold, and many a tall man goes
halting off, some quite overthrown both horse and foot.


Inno. O my heart bleeds.


Quint. That is, thy teeth water. In conclusion, as the remnant of the feast,
(I mean such dishes as escaped the fury of the fight) if they be serviceable,
are reserved to furnish out another day if they be maimed or spoyld, they are
sent abroad to relieve prisons and hospitals. So the remainder of the fight, if
they be serviceable, they are reserved to supply a second field, for the
fragments of the fight, viz. the maimd soldiers, they are sent likewise to
furnish prisons and hospitals, how say thou now Lieutenant, shall we to the
feast, or to the fight?


Inn. No fighting good Captain, to the feast for Gods sake.


Quint. Tha'rt a my mind right, and so will we presently march on to the sack
of the Emperors head, then to the May-night feast, and show at Signior
Honorios, and there will be a wench there boy, a delicate young morsel, a
kinswoman of Signior Honorios, and her fathers only child, he a mighty rich
Clarissimo, and her shall thou court, win her and wear her, thou have wit at
will.


Inno. But shall that wench be her fathers son and heir Captain?


Quint. She shall be his heir, a mine honesty.


Innoc. But shall not my Mistress your wife be at that show?


Quint. She shall, and we could find her; Fannio has been abroad this hour
to seek her: the Ass is stepped into some corner or other mourning for my
absence. (Enter Angelo and Francischina in disguise.) See who comes here?


Ang. Come Cuze, march fair, me thinks thou becom'st a Page excellent
naturally, cheer up thy heart wench. Kiss her.


Franc. Fie for shame kiss in the streets?


Ang. Why not? truth seeks no corners, and 'twas a true loves kiss, and so is
this.


Quint. Ware riot, do thou mark Lieftenant?


Franc. Gods pity, my husband. Exeunt Franc. Ang.


Innoc. What were these Captain?


Quint. Upon my life the hindermost of them, is a wench in man's attire, did
thou not mark besides his slabbering about her, her big thighs and her sp^ay
feet.


Innoc. By the meskin me thought they were so indeed.


Quint. S'life, the hungry knave her squire, could not hold in the open streets.


Innoc. What should she be?


Quint. The Doxie was muffeld in her cloak, I had but a glimpse of her; but
s'light I will know her, she passes not so, come we will follow. I Will beat the
Rogue and take away's whore from him. Exeunt.


Enter Angelo and Francischina. Ang. COme courage Cuze, we have sailed the man
of War out of sight, and here we must put into harbor. Hist, hawe Amila?


Amil. O welcome good Angelo.


Ang. Here take in, go, get up lightly, away, take heed you slip not Cuze,
remember you are short heel'd.


F^anc. Hold fast for Gods sake.


Ang. Nay hold you fast, you'^l shame us all else; so Jove receive thy soule^ I
take away the ladder: Now till you have d^ceiued the Provost, farewell,
remember your l^s^on Cuze. Exit.


Franc. I warrant you. (Enter Quintil. and Innocentio)


Quint. How unhappily did we miss 'em? they slipped into some vaulting house, I
hold my life.


Innoc. Faith it is good we mist'em, she was some stale punke I warrant her.


Quint. Twenty to one she is some honest man's wife of the Parish that steals
abroad for a trimming, while he sits secure at home, little knowing, God
knows, what hangs over his head; the poor Cuckold esteeming her the most
virtuous wife in the world. And shoude one tell him, he had seen her dressed
like a Page following a knave thus, I Will lay my life he would not believe it.


Innoc. Why no Captain, wives take all the faith from their husbands. And that
makes 'em do so many good works as they do.


Quint. Mercy for that in faith Lieftenant, stand close. (Enter Fannio and
Giacono)


Fann. My Mistress in man's apparel say thou?


Giac. Thy Mistress in man's apparel I assure thee, and attended by Angelo.


Fann. Would to heaven I had seen her, can tell whither she went.


Giac. Full butt into Lorenzoes house, and if thou knewst him, thou know
wherefore, an ill-fauourd trimming is her errand.


Fann. It Is very well, she trims my Captain prettily, in the mean time his
head paies for all, and yet alas poor hornestocke, he thinks her to have no
fault, but her too much dotage upon him, well my conscience will not let me
keep her counsel, he shall know on it.


Giac. Why man if both of us should tell him her fault he will not believe us.


Fann. No, nor if he had seen it with his own own eyes I think, I shall
never forget how the profound Cockatrice hung on his sleeue to day, and he
shoude not from her sight, she would follow him into the wars, one day should
make an end of both their loves and lives, and then to see him the wittall, my
Captain began to stroote, and batle the pride of his merits that so heightened
her affection.


Giac. True, and how the foppasty his Lieftenant, stepped in to persuade with
her, to take it patiently, for friends must part, we came not all together, and
we must not go all together.


Fann. Well, 'twill not be for any man to follow him, if this were known once.


Giac. Lord how all the boys in the town would flock about him as he walks
the streets, as 'twere about a bagge-pipe, and hoote the poor Cuckold out of
his hornecase.


Fann. Well, and I were worthy to give him counsel, he should e'ne fair and
well hang himself.


Giac. No, no, keep it from him, and say thou found'st her at a woman's labor.


Fann. A plague of her labor, the Captains brows sweat while she labors.


Giac. If I were in thy case, I should laugh out right when I saw him.


Fann. That dare not I do, but as often as he turns his back to me, I shall
be here V with him that's certain: or when I follow him and his cheating stock
Innocentio, in the streets, I shall imagine still I am driving an Ox and an
Ass before me, and cry phtroh, ho^ ptrough.


Innoc. S'light Captain take this and take all.


Quint. Not a word for the world, for if we should take notice of his words the
slave would deny all, leave it to me to sif^ it in priua^e. Now sir, what
news with you? where is your Mistress, that you range thus at your pleasure?


Fann. In health sir I trust.


Quint. Come forward you rogue you: come forward, whither creep you behind
so? where is your Mistress sir?


Fann At a poor woman's labor sir.


Quint. Very well sir, come Lieftenant, go you before, and do you follow him
sir.


Fann. What before my Captain sir: you shall pardon me.


Qu^nt. Before you rogue, before. Exeunt


Finis Actus Quarti.
Actus Quintus.
Enter Honorio, Lorenzo, Gasparo and Angelo. Hon. SIgnior Lorenzo, and Gasparo,
you are very welcome, we shall have good company and sport to entertain you ere
long I hope, shall we not Angelo?


Ang. Yes sir, I have enuited all you commanded me.


Lor. This is the honest man indeed, that took the pains to come for me.


Gasp. And for me also.


Ang. No pains but pleasure sir, I was glad I had such good means to be
known to your Worship.


Lor. Nay, I have known you before, to be the servant of Signior Honorio here,
I take it.


Hon. Not my servant Signior Lorenzo, but my sons.


Lor. O, your son Aurelios servant? believe me you or your son (in mine
opinion, though I say it before him) made good choice of him: for he has a
good honest face, and to a man of judgment (I tell you) that is as good as a
good surety for him. I will be better acquainted with you sir, pray you give me
your hand.


Ang. Both my hand and heart sir, shall be ever at your service.


Lor. Thanks my good friend, I Will make thee laugh anon Angelo.


Ang. I thank your Worship, you have done so often.


Hon. A notable wagge Signior Gasparo.


Gasp. How curiously Lorenzo thinks he carries the matter?


Lor. How now Gentlemen, is it a merry secret, that you smile so?


Hon. No secret Signior Lorenzo, but a merry conceit we were thinking on, to
furnish our show anon, if it had been thought on in time.


Lor. What was that I pray?


Hon. Marry sir, we had good sport to day with Snayle the chimney-sweeper.


Lor. Had you so sir?


Gasp. That ever was.


Lor. Lord that I had been amongst you, but what more of him sir?


Hon. Marry sir, we were thinking how we might m^rrily deceive our company that
is to come, if we could have gotten him some M^gn^ficoes suit of the City,
whom for his little stature and ^^ane face he might resemble, that in that
habit he might have stolen some kind favors from the Ladies, to make him
amends and please him for the anger we put him in.


Lor. It would have made excellent merriment.


Ang. You are his best Master sir, and if it please you to send me for him by
some token, I Will go for him; otherwise he will not come to these Gentlemen.


Lor. Shall he come Gentlemen?


Amb. If you ^lease sir.


Lor. Why then heark^ thee Angelo; not for the world.


Ang. Think you me such an Ass sir?


Lor. Shall he have one of my little brothers suites, and come in amongst the
Dames for him?


Hon. If you could, it would fit him exceedingly.


Lor. Much; now laugh Angelo: what Gentleman was that I spied aloft with my
daughter think thou?


Ang. I know not sir; I beseech your Worship who was it?


Lor. Frank, in man's apparel Angelo.


Ang. O wonderful.


Lor. We cannot invent a token, for my love Angelo.


Ang. O excellent.


Lor. We will hit it anon Gentlemen.


Amb. At your leisure sir.


Lor. The swaggerer her husband, had note of it by his Page, and yet the same
Page has persuaded him, since that 'twas but a gullery.


Ang. It Is a notable crack; and his Master has such a pure belief in his
wife, that he is apt to believe any good of her.


Lor. True Angelo, enough for this time; thou shall make as if thou went for
Snaile, and return without him, saying thou can not find him.


Ang. Agreed sir.


Lor. Now Gentlemen, we have devised a wile to bring Snaile amongst us, and I
have given Angelo order for a suit for him, that is my little brothers, and him
he shall counterfeit; go Angelo seek him out.


Ang. I will sir. Exit Ang.


Hon. Thank you for this good Signior Lorenzo.


Gasp. It will quicken the company well. Enter Aemilia, Lionell, Francischina
and another woman.


Lor. For their sakes and yours, I have done it Gentlemen; and see the fair
flock come upon us.


Hon. Welcome fair Ladies, but especially you Lady, that are so mere a
stranger, Signior Lorenzo you know young Leonoro?


Lor. Very well sir, a gallant spark.


Gasp. And I think you know his father.


Lor. Know him? I faith sir there was a reueller, I shall never see man do his
lofty tricks like him while I live.


Hon. This Gentlewoman is his Neice sir.


Lor. His Neice? she shall do her self wrong not to be acquainted with her
dear uncles companion: Kiss her.


Gasp. You know not this Gentlewoman sir?


Lor. Not very well sir indeed, but entertainment must be given, mercy Frank
for thy man's apparel, a plague of all swaggering husbands. Nay I must forth
in faith, Signior Honorio* this is for your sake, am I not a kind help to your
enter^ainement?


Hon. An exceeding kind one sir, and I exceedingly thank you. (Enter
Messenger.)


M^ss. The maskers are come sir.


Hon. Do you and your fellows attend them in.


Mess. We will sir. Exit Mess.


Hon. Sit gentle Ladies till the maskers raise you to dance.


Enter Aurelio, Leonoro, Quintiliano, and Innocentio, in a mask dancing. Hon.
WElcome Gallants, O the roome's too scant, a hall Gentlemen.


Leo. See how womanly my Boy looks Quintiliano.


Quint. 'Twill be rare sport; Lieftenant, that sweet wench in the brancht gown
is the heir I told thee of.


Innoc. Gods me, I Will to her and kiss her.


Quint. O no, you must not unmask.


Innoc. No, no, I Will kiss her with my mask and all.


Leo. No Lieftenant, take her and court her first, and then kiss her.


Omnes. To her slave.


Aur. There Is thy wife too, Quintiliano*


Quint. True, little knows she I am so near her; I Will single her out, and
try what entertainment a stranger may find with her.


Aur. Do^ so, and we will take up the the other. (Enter Angelo.)


They dance. Ang. I can by no means find Snaile sir.


Hon. The worse luc^^, but what remedy?


Lor. Gramercy Angelo* but Signior Lorenzo, me thinks I miss one flower in
this femal^ garland.


Hon. Whose that?


Lor. Your Neice Lucretia*


Hon. By my soul it is true; what is the reason Angelo Lucretia is not here?


Ang. I know no reason but her own will sir.


Gasp. There Is somewhat in it certain. They dance again.


Inno. Did you see the play to day I pray?


Lio. No, but I see the fool in it here.


Inno. Do you so forsooth? where is he pray?


Lio. Not far from you sir, but we must not point at any body here.


Inno. That's true indeed, cry mercy forsooth, do you know me through my mask?


Lio. Not I sir* she must have better skill in baked meats then I, that can
discern a woodcocke through the crust.


Inno. That's true indeed, but yet I thought I Would try you. (Enter Lodo^ico.)
They dance.


Lor. What N^phew Lodwicke, I thought you had been one of the mask^rs.


Lod. I use no masking sir with my friends.


Hon. No signior Lodowick, but you are a very truant in your school of
frien^ship* that come so late to your friends.


Gasp. Somewhat has crossed him sure.


Leo. Somewhat shall cross him; Lodouico let me speak with you.


Lod. With me sir?


Leo. You are the man sir, I can scarce say the Gentleman, for you have done a
wrong the credit of a Gentleman cannot answer.


Lod. Would I might see his face, that durst say so much.


Lod. Observe him well, he shoes his face that will prove it when thou dare.


Aur. How now Leonoro, you forget your self too much, to grow outrageous in
this company.


Leo. Aurelio, do not wrong me, and your self, I undertake your quarrel,
this man has dishonord your Kinswoman Lucretia, whom (if I might) I intended
to marry.


Aur. Some error makes you mistake Leonor^, I assure my self.


Hon. What interruption of our sport is this gentlemen?


Lor. Are not my Nephew and Leonoro friends?


Lod. He charges me with dishonoring his mistress Lu^retia.


Hon. Birlady Lodouico, the charge touches you deeply, you must answer it.


Lod. I only desire I may sir, and then will refer me to your censures.


Lor. Well Nephew, well; will you never leave this your haunt of fornication?
I school him, and do all I can, but all is lost.


Lod. Good Uncle give me leave to answer my other accuser, and then I Will
descend, and speak of your fornication, as the last branch of my division.


Lor. Very well, be brief.


Lod. I will sir; The ground upon which this man builds his false imagination,
is his sight of me at Honorios back gate, since dinner, where muffled in my
cloak, kind Madam Temperance, the attendant of Lucretia, from the Tarrasse,
wa^ted me to her with her hand; taking me (as now I understand) for this honest
Gentleman, I not knowing what use she had to put me to, obaid the attraction
of her signal, as gingerly as she bad me. (A plague upon her gingerly) till
she locked me into Lucretias chamber, where Lucretia lying asleep on her bed,
I thought it rudeness to wake her; and (imagining when she wak't she had
something to say to me) attended her leisure at my ease, and lay down softly
by her; when (having chaster and simpler thoughts then Leonoro imagines)
because he measures my wast by his own) in the very coldness and dullness of
my spirit, I fell suddenly a-sleepe. In which my fancy presented me with the
strangest dream, that ever yet possessed me.


Lor. Pray God you did but dream Nephew.


Lod. You shall know that by knowing the event of it.


Hon. Go to, pray let us hear it.


Lod. Me thought Lucretia and I were at mawe, a game Uncle that you can well
skill of.


Lor. Well sir I can so.


Lod. You will the more muse at my fortune; or my ouersights. For my game
stood, me thought, upon my last two tricks, when I made sure of the set, and
yet lost it, having the varlet and the five finger to make two tricks.


Lor. How had that been possible?


Hon. That had been no misfortune sure but plain oversight.


Gasp. But what was the reason you thought you lost it sir?


Lod. You shall hear; she had in her hand the Ace of Hearts, me thought, and
a Coate-carde, she led the board with her coat, I played the varlet, and took
up her coat, and meaning to lay my five finger upon her Ace of hearts, up
start a quite contrary card; up she rises withal, takes me a dash a the
mouth, drew a rapier he had lay by him, and out of doors we went together by
the ears.


Hon. A tapier he had lay by him?


Lor. What a she turned to a he? do thou not dream all this while Nephew.


Lod. No nor that time neither, though I pretended it; let him be fetched, I
warrant you he will show as good cards as the best on you, to prove him an heir
Male, if he be the eldest child of his father.


Hon. This is exceeding strange: go Angelo, fetch her and her hand-maide.


Ang. I will sir, if her valor be not too hot for my fingers. Exit.


Hon. Could such a disguise be made good all this while without my knowledge?
to say truth, she was a stranger to me, her father being a Sicilian: fled
thence for a disausterous act, and coming hither grew kindly acquainted with
me, and called me brother. At his death committing his supposed daughter to my
care and protection, till she were restored to her estate in her native Country.


Lor. Was he in hope of it?


Hon. He was, and in near possibility of it himself, had he lived but little
longer. (Enter Angelo and Lucretia.)


Ang. Here Is the Gentlewoman you talked of sir, nay you must come forward too
grave Mistress Temperance.


Lod. How now sir? who wants gentility now I beseech you?


Leo. Who have we here?


Lucr. Stand not amazed, nor disparage him: you see sir, this habit truly does
suit my sex, howsoever my hard fortunes have made me a while reject it.


Hon. What hard fortunes?


Lucr. Those you know of my father sir: who feared my following of him in my
native likeness, to the haven, where he by stealth embarqu't us, and would
have discovered him, his offense being the slaughter of a Gentleman, that would
have slain him.


Hono. But did you not tell me you were betrothed before this misfortune
happened, to a young Gentleman of Sicily, called Theagines?


Lucr. I told you I was betrothed to one Theagine, not Theagines, who indeed
was a woman,


L^o. And yet whosoever had seen that Theagine since might have taken him for
a man.


Lucr. Do you know her Gentlewoman?


L^o. It seems you will not know her.


Leo. Hark how my boy pla^es the knave with her.


Quint. A noble rogue, S'fut Lieutenant, will thou suffer thy nose to be wipt
of this great heir^?


Inno. S'^ight sir you are no handkercher are you?


Lucr. Pre thee forbear, more happy then unlooked for (...) this dear
accident: adopted and noble father, this is the Gentlewoman to whom I told you
I was betrothed, the happy news she had to relate to me, made her a traveler,
the more search of her passage made her a Page, and her good fortune obtaind
her -- this honest Gentleman to her Master, who I thank him, being (as he
supposed me) ^ou'd me, accept us both for your children.


Hono. Most gladly and with no less care, then mine own protect you.


Quint. S'fut, how now Leonora? new fireworkes?


Lod. New sir, who wants gentility? this is a gentlemanly part of you to keep
a wench in a Pages furniture?


Leo. It was more then I knew Sir, but this shall be a warning to me while I
live, how I judge of the instrument by the case again.


Lucr. Nay it is you friend Lodouico that are most to blame, that holding the
whole feminine sex in such contempt, wou^d yet play the pickpurse, and steal
a poor maids maidenhead out of her pocket sleeping.


Leo. 'Twas but to cous^n me.


Aur. And to be before me in love.


Lor. And to laugh at me.


Lod. Nay, jest not at me sweet Gentles, I v'sd plain and mannerly dealing,
I neither v'sd the brokage of any* as you know who did Le^noro, nor the help of
a ladder to creep in at a wenches chamber window (as you know who did Aurelio.)
Nor did I case my self in buckrame, and cry chimney sweep (where are you
uncle?) but I was trained to it by this honest matron here.


Temp. Meddle not with me sir.


Lucr. I am beholding to her, she was loath to have me lead apes in hell.


Quint. Look that you keep promise with me Lady, when will thy husband be
from home?


Fran. Not so soon as I would wish him, but whenever you shall be welcome.


Quint. I very kindly thank you Lady.


Fr^n. Gods me, I took you for Sigmor Placenti^.


Quint. S'fut, thou lie in thy throat, thou knewst me as well as my self.


Hono. What, Signior Quintilian, and friend Innocentio? I looked not for you
here* and you are much the better welcome.


Quin. Thanks dad Honorio, and lives my little squire? when shall I see thee at
my house lad?


Lor. A plague a your house, I was there too lately.


Lod. See Lordings, here is two will not let go till they have your consents to
be made surer.


Lor. By my soul, and because old Gasparo here has been so cold in his love
suit, if she be better pleased with Aurelio, and his father with her, heaven
give abundance of good with him.


Hono. So you stand not too much upon goods, I say, Amen.


Lor. Faith use him as your son and heir, and I desire no more.


Hono. So will I of mine honor, are you agreed youths*


Ambo. And most humbly gratulate your high fa^^rs.


Gasp. Faith and Jove give 'em joy together for my part.


Lod. Yet is here another nail to be driven, here is a virtuous Matron, Madam
Temperance, that is able to do much good in a commonwealth, a woman of good
parts, sels complexionn helps maids to services, restores maidenheads, brings
women to bed, and men to their bedsides.


Temp. By my faith, but save votre grace sir.


Lod. Has drinks for love, and gives the diet.


Temp. Birladie, and that's not amiss for you sir.


Lod. For me, with a plague tee?


Temp. No nor for any man that's not sound I mean sir.


Lod. S'fut ma^ters these be good parts in the old wench, will thou have her
Lieutenant? she will be a good stay to the rest of thy living, the gallants will
all honor thee at thy house I warrant thee.


Inno. Fore God Captain I care not if I have.


Temp. Well young Gentleman, perhaps it should not be the worst for you.


Quint. Why law, thy virtues have own her at first sight, she shall not come
to thee empty, for I Will promise thee that I Will make her able to bid any
Gentleman welcome to a piece of mutton and rabbet at all times.


Lor. Birladie, a good Ordinary.


Quint. Thow't visit sometimes Dad.


Lor That I will in faith boy in authority wise.


Quint. Why then strike hands, and if the rest be pleased,
Let all hands strike as these have struck before,
And with round Echoes make the welken rore. Exeunt.

Finis Actus Quinti and vltimi.

