An answer to a seditious pamphlet lately cast abroad by a Jesuit, with a
discovery of that blasphemous sect.

By William Charke.

1. Reg. 20 11. Let not him that girdeth on his armor, boast, as he that
puts it of.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty. Anno 1580.

Decembris. 17.

To the Reader.
THe Lord has many ways to bring the enemies of the Gospel to the love
thereof. Especially he requires of us the defense of his truth, and earnest
prayer that such defense may reform the judgment and conscience of the
adversary. For though there were will and labor for the truth on both sides
(which is to be wished) yet it is not in him that wills, nor in him that
runs; but in God that shows mercy. This mercy we must pray at Gods hand,
that our planting and watering may receive of him daily and great increases.
Therefore, good reader, when this small, or any great defense of the truth
comes to thy hand, rejoice that the truth is defended, that error and vanity
is discovered: but join with that joy a care to have him brought into the
way of salvation, which either ignorantly or wilfully wandreth from the same.
Hate his errors, but in compassion pray for his reformation. Who knows whom
and when the Lord will call? Moreover when thou see the diligence and boldness
of the enemies so great in repayring the ruins of Babylon: pray also that we
marking what wisdom they have in their generation, may the rather be provoked
to greater diligence and might infinishing the walls of Jerusalem. Last of al
let us as many as profess the Gospel, bring forth fruits worthy of the
Gospel, least the Papists on the one side, and the godless family of
selfeloue on the otherside prevail more and more against the truth, for a
just punishment of our sins in contemning the Gospel, which by doctrine with
discipline, and by mercy with justice must be maintained, and bring forth
fruit to the glory of God, and the peace of his Church for ever. Amen.

An answer to a seditious Pamphlet lately cast abroad by a Jesuit.
ALbeit the questions of religion, which the Papists hold, have been by them
already from time to time maintained with all their judgment and learning in
their public wrytings, and are also in writing sufficiently answered, to make
all men see the truth, that do not wilfully shut their eyes against it: yet
notwithstanding, as Africa is said still to bring forth some new monsters,
so the schools of the Romish church are continually occupied in forging some
new misshapen arguments and instruments against the Gospel, esteeming it great
service to their general Provost, to be still in the challenge, though they
receive no honor in the field: still to cast out their darts, though they be
beaten back to the wounding of that head, they would most defend.

Hereupon it comes that one Edmond ^ampion, a principal champion belike of ye
^opish religion, flying far from the field some years past for want of
armor, is now^ returned with furniture out of Germany and Boeme, from Rome
and other places, and makes, he one alone, like another Golias, ye challenge,
wherein whole armies heretofore have had as great overthrows, as ever had the
Philistines by the arm of God fighting with Israel.

This Coronell does by a pamphlet most vnsittingly written as to her Majesty's
most honorable privy Counsel, and more vnsittingly scattered abroad, require
disputation before all, and with all: and having in deed small hope to
prevail, and in truth little will to come to the trial (for he can not but
see the heavy hand of God against him and his cause) yet he has a purpose to
disturb all by the very proclayming of this spiritual fight, and by giving
aim to them, that in the same league attempt otherwise more dangerous matters
against the state.

These letters coming to my hand, after I had read them, and considered his
insolent vaunts against ye truth, joined with words pretending great
humility, his protestation of zeal to save souls, delivered with matter that
draws them into damnable heresies, I expected a present issue by his
personal answer, before them to whom such causes apperteine. But not
understanding of any such issue, and finding the letters to be more and more
spread as Libels, abusing the name and holy authority of the Counsel, and that
they prepare inconstant minds to the mislike of religion, and desire of
Popery (which plainly appears to be the practice of the Champion in
scattering them) I thought it my duty to answer the same, in respect of the
public injury offered to religion, with all humility offering this answer,
or further proceeding with the said Libell, to their honors most wise
consideration.

But before I come to ye particular points of his letters, I am shortly to
touch ye chief and only matter therein pretended: which is a desire to have a
disputation granted, or solemn audience for some sermons to be made in the
mayntenance of the most worthily abandoned Popish religion.

This petition seems to all Papists needful, and I can not blame the^, for
it would do them good to obtain, if it were but a question for somewhat, who
have right to nothing. But I would wonder, if any which profess the Gospel
should now look for a disputation, to answer every vain challenge, and that
after so many and blessed years, wherein error has every way been confuted,
and the truth established. For our parts, we are so assured of the manifest
truth, that we make no doubt thereof. For their parts, if they sought
conference in a good conscience, and with a desire to learn, it were necessary
to regard their desires, and to relieve their conscience. But returning into
the land, with ungodly vows and obstinate minds to persist in their errors,
and having hope with their maskes to deceive many, it is meet to keep them as
far from doing harm by their lies, as they withholde themselves far from
receiving good by our truth. For to our profession they mind not to be
brought, they are votaries to the contrary. What then shall we gain by
disputing with them, when they will not be gained to the truth? To our selves
already through the great mercy and power of God and his word, we have by
disputations made great gain within the realm and abroad, and the same gain
increases to the saints of God, with increase of sorrow and lamentation to
all that yet have traffic with the whore of Babylon. Reave. 18. 11.
Moreover in this disputation to overthrow the chalengers by the word (as
often their masters have been, and they easily may be) what great victory can
it be over two or three of the last and least in ye quarrel? They make account
to gain nothing indeed, yet by false report of some that stand ready pressed,
to post away ye news of victory, before there be a stroke stricken, they may
win some piece of their desire. Also they think it some profit, only to
bark against ye truth. 2. Reg. 18. 36
But when Rabshakeh came from Babylon, and blasphemed at the gates of
Jerusalem, good Ezechias following the rule of Solomon commanded, Prou. 26. 4.
saying, Answer ye him not. And I pray you, who of us would in the things of
this life yield to an evil minded man, that he should enter an action for the
things, whereof we have the right and quiet possession? But here the pretensed
Catholics are wise in their generation. For when did they grant to a free
disputation, or to have any sermons made by them of the religion, but being
enforced thereunto? Yea, at this very time, howsoever this Champion and some
others challenge and call for disputation, yet their forerunners, and fathers
in Popery refuse the same. With what forehead then can these Jesuits demand
of us, that themselves will not grant? Or seeing it has been granted at
Auspurge, and at Poissy and else where, and they gained nothing by the grant,
why should they call the Ministers to an unorderly disputation, from their
ordinary charge: wherein beside other duties of their ministry, they
soundly confute by the plain word of God, as occasion is offered, even the
chiefest arguments that the enemy can allege? As for the trial these Jesuits
will make, it shall be with false weights, and measures, Prou. 20. 23.
which are an abomination to the Lord: while, after their custom, they dispute
with unlearned and peevish distinctions, false arguments, absurd
interpretatio^s, plausible notwithstanding to them that have a forestalled
judgment against the truth. But S. 2. Tim. 2. 23.
Paul warns us to avoid the^ that trouble the Church with such disputations
and contentions. Tit. 3. 9, 10.
For it is evident that the purpose of these Jesuits is but to cast in matter
of grief to the godly, when they see so bold enterprises of the enemy, not
at the walls of the city, but even in the market place: and, as by a blasing
star, to prognosticate some further matter to the Papist and time seruer: but
most of all to disturb the peace of the Church, and to make the people stagger
in religion, as many of them, as by diligent hearing of the word have not
attained to the certain love of the truth. Nevertheless, although I think
it inconvenient in a settled estate, to have the truth of God, and her
Majesty's most godly proceedings called into disputation by these men, who are
her alienated subjects, and in this manner against a singular peace: yet upon
other circumstances, as disputations have been heretofore granted, so they may
again. For not we, but the Papists refuse lawful disputation: not we, but
they feel and confess that they get nothing thereby. R. Maffeus in Iudam.
Watson and others at home.
The inconueniencie is that, which I note in the seditious practice of this
man, and his confederates. Otherwise the common wealth has more cause then ye
Church to dread their forces. We seek not to esche we any snare they can
lay: we fear not their evidence, or doubt of our own title. They have had
and may have the liberty of their pen: if these Jesuits have any thing that
their masters had not, or which our fathers in the Gospel have not answered,
let the^ lay it down in writing with true form of argument, (which is the most
certain trial, and of greatest judgment) and in writing, by the grace of
God, they shall be answered. For how little we fear them, and how much they
fear us, it appears by that they suffer not a scroule of religion, or
tending never so little that way, in any ma^s hand, but it is presently a matter
for the inquisition. Yea, they withhold the very word it self. Whereas we find
yt the very view of their outward Rome with her abominations, and the inward
seeing into yt heart of popish religion, with her absurdities, have made many,
as well gross Papists, as others indifferent between both religions, to stand
resolved in the truth, and to acquaint themselves with the clear and
comfortable doctrine of Jesus Christ, after the execrable superstitions of the
Pope once thoroughly known.

But now to come to his letters, I find (to speak generally) that they have
a preface to nine articles: the preface and articles being to the same purpose.
For all is in effect thus much: that he has taken a far and dangerous
journey, boldly and plainly to offer himself a procter to maintain against al
comers in disputation, at the commandment of the Pope, the Popish religion,
and to confute the doctrine of Christ Jesus. This is the challenge. The promise
is to persuade even Prince and people professing the truth, that they are in
error: as if both Prince and people had not sufficient assurance of their
faith: or the chiefest Papists did not from day to day receive great
overthrows both in disputation and writing. For (to the glory of God in the
ministry of the Gospel be it remembered, and to the heart grief of al Romish
Catholics) the Lord adds to the true Catholic Church of his elect, great
numbers continually: and to those that openly profess the religion, many
notable cities, which lately were first in the zeal of Popery, and are now
not the last of them that embrace the truth: notwithstanding so many arts and
insolences used to stop the course and increase of the Gospel. Therefore,
if the Lord do not punish our contempt of the word we profess, what hope may
our Chalenger have, that the Pope shall recover others, when he can not keep
his own, no not them that lately carried the canopie over his head?

In the preface, ye Jesuit reports his pilgrimage out of Germany and Boeme
into England his dear country, at the co^ma^deme^t of his superiors yt sent
him, where he gives a note of his danger and of his obedience. But touching
his obedience, it comes to be noted afterward. As for his dangers, I see them
not so great as he prete^deth. For I dout not but he was well contented that
this place fell to his lot: and that he waited a time to adventure himself,
when there was, in his opinion, less danger then heretofore, and more hope of
some golden day. But the man is come into this noble realm for the glory of
God and the benefit of souls. What glory of God ca^ come by a man sworn to
Antichrist against Gods glory: sworn to the Council of Trent against the
peace of this kingdom? What care of souls can he have, which would withdraw
their food, and in enraged, and therefore would enrage others with ye cup of
poison wherewith the whore of Babylon has heretofore poisoned the princes of ye
earth? Revel. 17. 2.
What benefit of souls can poor souls look for at his hand, that in place
of the most clear light of the Gospel, would bring in a greater plague of
darkness, then that of Egypt? This is the effect of the Jesuits love which he
would show to his dear country after so many years absence out of her sight.

Being now arrived, he keeps his person secret, that he may underhand and
safely sow matter of heresy and sedition: but by letters he makes his
purpose known with cunning speeches. Why he keeps himself secret so long as
he may, one reason is to avoid, that he would seem to make none account of:
namely a just punishment of his contempts against ye law. Another reason is (as
I said) to make way for the Pope privately, because he dares not effect his
message openly. That he delivers his mind in writing, not as a private
letter in one copy, but as a public matter in many copies all abroad, it is
to entertain sliding minds with vain hope: to cast some disgrace upon the
causes of religion, and all by a promise of that which all the Jesuits in the
world can not perform, though this Cha^pion alone does undertake it. Such
undertakers are like enough to overtake some simple ones, not yet cleansed from
the dregs of Properie: otherwise it will be hard to prevail with men of
understanding, who ever suspect them of bankrupting, that ask so much credit
of their own word without any sureties. Thus it appears that this Jesuits
promises, and craving credit to be believed in so great things, is but to
withdraw many of her Majesty's subjects from the love of the Gospel, whereby
they are taught to their own salvation: and consequently from regard of them
selves, and from obedience to her Majesty's most noble and godly proceedings.
Yet as if he did not mind this matter, he does insinuate his own danger for
weldoing: as if it were like, that, notwithstanding his close dealing, as much
to keep himself as he may, this busy world might find him out sooner or
later, and interrupt a busy fellow, and this watchful world would find him out
for all his watchfulnes. But I would this suspicious world would more suspect
them that come to us in sheeps clothing, being inwardly ravening wolves. It is
to small purpose that he lays down the confession of the matter without
presentment of the man. For if the man were found, there is matter enough
against him without his confession. Yet he would be accounted a good dealer,
and to save his examiners from some labor when he shall happily be found and
brought to examination. Nevertheless if in these letters al be not plainly
confessed, that may justly be employed, then he has not eased his examiners
from the practice of their wit in finding out more dangerous practices
concealed, then are those, which are here expressed to cloak the rest. It
follows to speak of his articles laid down directly, truly, resolutely to
open his purpose.

1 In the first he confesses his calling, That, albeit unworthy, he is a
priest of the Romish church, which he does falsely honor with the name of the
Catholic Church. Such as ye Church is, such is his priesthood also: the
Church Antichristian, and the priests thereof ministers of Antichrist, taking
upon them against the manifest word of God to offer up a sacrifice for the
quick and dead. An intolerable blasphemy against the all sufficient sacrifice
of the Lord Jesus, Heb. 9. 26. and 10. 12. and 18.
offering him self once for all and for ever. But, to judge an evil servant by
his own mouth, he that is unworthy of so foul a priesthood, what shall he be
worthy of? Not by the great mercy, but by the just judgment of God worthy of
that that is worse: worthy of a place among the new and detestable Jesuits.

In this place, because these scorpio^s, ye Jesuits are unknown among us in
England, I have occasion to speak of the^, yt ye godly may take heed of their
leaven, and that their lovers may justly be ashamed of such love. Jesuits.
The Jesuits are a kind of Regulars professing obedience to ye Pope and their
General, at whose se^ding they must forsooth of free cost preach, wheresoever
they be sent. They had an obscure co^ceptio^ about five and forty years past,
not long after ye restoring of the Gospel, one Layolas a Spaniard being the
father of the^. But they had not their full creation and commission, till within
these thirty years by Pope Paulus quartus. Before that time al Friars
professed the rule of some one Friar, as the Fra^ciscans the rule of Francis,
the Dominicans, ye rule of Dominic, or some one such like Patro^. Afterward
when evil colors bewrayed the^ selves at a good light, and the preaching of ye
Gospel brought popish orders into open judgment, then many papists were
ashamed, yt there was not an order after an honest name, whereupon some boldly
adue^tured to borow ye holy name of Jesus, and called themselves the society
of Jesus, or Jesuits. Now it was not so vile a thing before, to name
themselves by some base and beggarly friar, but it was afterward more hautie
pride, when they presumed to abuse ye name proper to Jesus, Philip. 2. 9.
at which name all the knees of all things in heaven and earth must bow down
themselves. This mighty and glorious name, these Jesuits bring in, to give
credit to their weak and shameful order, reckening ye Lord Jesus himself
among Friars, withal making him but a Patron of the youngest company of Friars,
and so to stand behind Francis and Dominick. These new Jesuits must be called
ye society of Jesus, as if they alone were in the society of Jesus, and all
other utterly excluded: whereas rather these Jesuits are excluded for their
heresies, and they only included in the fellowship and body of Jesus Christ,
which follow his doctrine, and have ye anointing of his Spirit, contenting them
selves with the name of Christians, made to them expressly lawful and honorable
by the word of God. Act. 11. 26.
Wherefore these that corruptly have called themselves Jesuits, may be called
Iebusites, without offense to the Lord Jesus, and most aptly in respect of
their dealings. As their name, so challenged to themselves, is absurd, serving
them only to make a show of holiness, and to deceive the poor people: so
their practices are yet more detestable. For they gather learning only, as the
spider gathers poison, that they may infect the heart and stomach of their
disciples. And as good Physicians prepare a countrepoyson to save life, so
these in a contrary course provide not a country venim, but venim it self
against the wholesome meat, even against the word of God, the food of our
souls, whereby they are nourished and preserved into life everlasting. These
Monkish Friars, or Frierly Monks (O heavy judgment of God) these Iebusites I
say, from whose contagio^ we have been free ever hitherto, they have lately
adue^tured into England, as skoutes to the Irish rebels, and prepare to
establish again popish superstitions. But let us yet further examine these
Jesuits, that plague all nations where they come, Exodus 8. 2.
as the Frogs and Caterpillars of Egypt did. Our bastard Papists in England,
that are neither true to us, nor faithful to their own side, would seem
ashamed of many gross points in Popery, saying, they verily hold Images,
Pardons, Praying to Saints, and service in an unknown tongue, as wicked
things. But let the^ and all true professors also know, that ye Papists hold
Steven Gardiners rule: Yield but in haly water (said he to Cardinal Poole that
blusshed at some enormities in popery) and yield in all. Thereupon Papists
yield in nothing, howsoever our home Papists think or dissemble the matter.
This is proved by the open dealing of the Jesuits: for there is nothing, be it
never so impious, never so absurd, yea though in their own conscience never
so contrary to truth and common sense, but they defend it in a book written
with public consent, and called, Censur. Colon.
ye Censure of Colen. Hitherto it has bin truly declared, yt ye Jesuits are
wicked Monkish Friars, yt they labor for learning to abolish learning, that
they ouerlay the nations where they come, that they defend all absurdities of
the popish Church. But for proof of their absurd and blasphemous doctrines,
Donati Gotuisi lib. de fide Jesus and Iesuitarum.
out of a treatise concerning this matter, I have enterlaced their own words,
as they are to be found in ye same book, and in other of their writings,
adioining to every article of their doctrine, ye clean contrary doctrine out
of ye word of God, as follows.

1 It is not sin whatsoever is against the Law of God. Censure of Colen,
leaf 44. Contrary to ye word of God. 1. Ioh. 3.4. The transgression of the Law
is sin.

2. Concupiscence remaining in the regenerate, although it be against the law
of God, yet it is not sin properly in it self, or of it own nature. Cens.
Col. 38. etc. in the ha^dling of Canisius Catechism, leaf. 184. A contrary
doctrine is taught by Christ, Mat. 5. 28. I say unto you, yt whosoever shall see
a woman to lust after her, he has already committed adultery with her in his
heart.

3 The first motions of lust are without hurt of sin. Cens. Col. Fol. 54. 89.
contrary to the tenth commandment, Thou shall not covet. Exodus 20. 17.

4 The holy Scripture is a doctrine imperfect, maimed, lame, not containing all
things necessary to faith and salvation. Cens. Col. fol. 220. contrary to
that place of Paul, 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17. Al ye Scripture is given by inspiration
of God, and is profitable to teach, to confute, to correct and to instruct in
justice, that the man of God may be perfect, and thoroughly instructed to every
good work.

5 The want of the holy Scriptures must be supplied by peecing it out with
traditions. Cens. Col. 220. Contrary to a Law in Moses. Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Thou shall
not add to the words which I speak to thee, neither shall thou take from
them.

6 The holy Scripture is a nose of wax. Cens. Col. 117. Contrary to the words
of David, The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul. Psalm. 19. 7.

7 The reading of the holy Scripture is not only not profitable, but many
ways very hurtful to the Church. Cens. Col. 21. Christ delivers a contrary
note, Mat. 22. 29. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor part of
Christendom, or heathenesse, upon like assignation, I doubt not (as I said
before) but that he was more ready and joyous to be sent into his own
country. But what authority has the Pope to send out swarms of Jesuits
into all the world? Are they not content falsely to make him Peter's successor
and head of the Church, but that they will also allow him to apoynt these new
Apostles, to go out into al ye world, namely these Jesuits, enemies to the
doctrine of the true Apostles: yea, and that in number not so few (I think)
as xii. hundred for xii. because he would have more to pull down, then Christ
sent abroad to build up withal?

3 His assigned charge is laid down in the third article, which is, of free
cost to preach the Gospel, and minister the sacraments. Cunning words to
cloak an evil matter. For he speaks in words fit for the Gospel, to avoid
the usual and proper speeches of his Popish priesthod and order, that are full
of derogation against the truth. For they preach not the Gospel, but against
the Gospel, in the traditions and ordinances of the Pope. Their ministry of
the Sacraments is the saying or singing Mass, and corrupt baptism, with
other actions which they call Sacraments, but are none by any warrant out of
the word of God. For in their definitions of these other five falsely named
Sacraments, they surcharge their margents with great show of proofs,
Catechis. Canisii.
but almost all are authorities of men: there are very few places of scripture
quoted, and those manifestly perverted. The words that follow in his charge,
To instruct the simple, reform sinners, confute errors, and in brief to cry
an alarm spiritual against foul, vice and proud ignorance, how great show
do they make in the monster. Cic. offic. 1.
Tullie notes those buyers and sellers that gain but little, except they lie
much. Apo. 18. 11.
Even so these merchants that bye and sell with the woman that sits upon
many waters, in whose forehead this name is branded, Apoc. 17. 5.
A mystery: Great Babylon, the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the
earth: they gain nothing but by their shameless lies. For that which they set
out to sale for instruction, is destruction touching the faith: their
reformation is a deformation: and in their kingdom it may seem waste labor,
seeing they have a shorter way to work, in blotting that out spel. He has
taken upon him a special kind of warfare under the banner of obedience. If it
be of obedience to God under Christ's banner, it is common to all Christians:
if it be of obedience to some new false Apostleship of the Popes creation, it
is as much disobedience to God, as it is obedience to those monkish ordinances.
What plain dealing then can this be? Under the title of the glorious banner of
obedience, the Jesuit recommendeth to the Lords of the Counsel his
disobedience to God, his disobedience to the truth, and obedience only to his
Fathers, chiefly ye Pope, 2. These. 2. 4.
the most blasphemous enemy of God, His bulls.
and most open enemy to her Majesty both in his consistory, His forces in
Ireland.
and in the field. Iere. 7. 22.
Obedience acceptable to God is according to his word, Mat. 15. 9.
not according to ye traditions and ordinances of man. As for ye Pope, he
holds up a ba^ner of rebellion always against ye kingdom of Jesus Christ:
and many times also against ye kingdom of Princes. Under this banner he has
lately placed these Jesuits with some armor, finding all other unlettered and
idle Monks and Friars, not so fit for ye camp, as for the cloister. If this
votarie has resigned great interest, or many possibilities of wealth, honor
and felicity, (as he prete^deth) the^ the judgment of God was ye heavier
against him, yt he should sell all he had, not to bye the precious pearl
reco^me^ded by Christ, Mat. 13. 46.
but to purchase the mark of the beast delivered by Antichrist. Revel. 13. 16.
For yt was not the way to make a friend of unrighteous Mammon, but so to
forsake ye blessings of this life, that thereby he forsook also ye blessings
of the life to come: except the serpent obtain mercy, and cast his skin.
Nevertheless this ungodly loss is alleged as a great gain to his evil
cause.

2 The second and third article are one in effect: for the second in substance
does only and out of order make mention of the place where he is to exercise
his charge, before the charge be expressed. To follow him and his order, in this
article he mentions his return into England, as for great good: but passes
by his departure thence with silence, as carrying a plain note of much evil. He
takes his voyage from Prage to Rome, and thence into England being commanded
by a warrant from heaven and an oracle of Christ. Great words emporting a
great embassage. But least any should take it, that he received his warrant in
a dream, or heard a voice in deed out of heaven, he expounds him self, yet
with words doubtful, as oracles among the Gentiles were wont to speak. For
whether he understand the general Provost of the Jesuits only, or whether
he understand the Pope him self, it is somewhat doubtful. If he meant not
the general Provost of the Jesuits, (which I rather think) then he avoided
the name of Pope, as justly odious every where for his abominable
superstitions, pride, and tyranny over men's lives and consciences: but in
England most of all, His most insolent and malicious Bull. 1569. answered by M.
Bullinger
for that he has again and again thrown out his thunderbolts of curse both
against the Prince, and against the people. Wherein, by the way, let us look to
the effect of those curses. Did not ye Lord turn them into blessings? Did it
not appear even to the Papists how vnderserued the curses were, and how
little the blasphemously supposed omnipotency of the Pope can do? Was not
Salomons Proverb justified in those Bulls? Prou. 26. 2.
As a bird wandreth, and a swallowe flies away, so does a curse that is
vnderserued.

But to return to ye doubtful speech, whether he meant the Pope, or the
Jesuits master, what blasphemy is it to attribute ye authority of a warrant
from heaven, and the voice of Christ, to a man whose breath is in his
nostrelles, and whose sins reach up to heaven, calling for vengeance? Do we
now persuade and preach men? Galat. 1. 10.
or rather, as the Apostle says, Ought not even the Apostles themselves to
preach Christ Jesus ye Lord, and them selves servants? 3. Cor. 4. 5.
Saint Paul would not preach otherwise then the Gospel, no not at the voice of
an Angel from heaven: Galat. 1. 8, 9.
and these come to preach Antichristianitie at the voice of the man of sin.
Therefore, how are all men, especially they whom the Lord has exalted to his
place of justice, how are they to take diligent heed of these men, and of the
matter they bring, much more dangerous the^ the former bulls? If the Popes word
be to them a warrant from heaven, and an oracle of Christ, then at his word
they must invade kingdoms, throw down estates, change gouernementes, root
out the Gospel, and plant ignorance, with all other their beggarly and wicked
superstitions that acco^panie the Popish doctrine. It follows that the Pope is
always resiant at Rome: but ye Jesuit must remember that he may remove his
chair to Sibyllas den, or any other place by the doctrine of the Jesuits.
As for his ready mind to have gone ioyously into any the power of God.

8 That the righteous man lives by says, he has it not in Christ, but by his
own works. Cens. Col. 118. A contrary place in Paul. Romans 11. 6. If
righteousness be of works, it is no more grace.

9 Men do surely hope that everlasting life shall be given them, but they do not
believe it: now hope often fails, otherwise it were no hope. Cens. Col. 108.
A contrary place. Heb. 6. 19. Hope is ye sure anchor of ye soul: and Ro^. 5.
5. Hope makes not ashamed.

10 The Scripture in deed never teaches the invocation of Saints, yet we must
believe, receive and hold it Fol. 230. Contrary to this is the place. Esai. 63.
16. Thou art our Father, and Abraham knew us not: and Israel was ignorant of
us.

11 Christ never said to the lay men, Do this, in the remembrance of me. Fol.
302. S. Paul does plainly confute this. 1. Cor. 11.

12 Traditions are of equal authority with the word of God: we must believe
them, though they be manifestly against the scripture. Fo. 230. Contrary to this
says Christ, In vain do me^ worship me, teaching doctrines that are but the
traditions of men. Mat. 15. 9.

13 We must worship the image of Christ with like honor that we do the holy
books of the Gospel. Fol. 66. Against this says S. Paul, 2. Cor. 6. 15. What
agreement is there between the Church of God and Idols?

These and many other blasphemies do the Jesuits maintain. There is not a
spider, nor a spiders web in any corner of the Popes breast, but these Doctors
will hold it no less holy, then that which comes out of Christ's breast. But
do not even the Papists that know these things, easily see, how the Jesuits
in these doctrines bewray the spirit of Antichrist, Apoc. 16. 14.
that went out into all the world to deceive and destroy? Surely none can see,
Acts. 16. 14.
except the holy Ghost open their heart: Genesis 19. 16.
none can depart out of Sodom, except the Lord do draw them. Although I have
been long in this matter, yet for a further discovery, and for plain warrant
that the sect of Jesuits is most wretched, at the end of my answer I have
added a translation of a book, Colloquium Iesuiticum.
wherein ye sect is notably discovered by a testimony out of their own heart.

Now to return to Campions words: He has been a Jesuit these viii. years.
A long time to see so many enormities, and in all ye space not to return from
them to the Go-spel, with a short pardon, which cannot be rooted out but by
much preaching. Their confutation of errors is in deed a confutation of the
truth, and a confirmation of lies, as appears now more then the light of
the Sun at noone. For as the Apostle speaks of them, 2. Tim. 3. 8.
They shall prevail no longer: their madness is made evident to all men, as
the enchantment of Iannes and Iambres. As these withstoode Moses: so the
Jesuits resist Jesus Christ, and the light of the Gospel, men full of ambition
in their corrupt minds, and enemies to the Cross of Christ. That he thinks
his poor countrymen abused with proud ignorance, I marvel what he means
to blame ignorance in any. For we that profess the Gospel, lament and cry
out against ignorance: our adversaries they always have made much of it, as
the mother of devotion: yea even the most famous order of the Franciscan
Friars, that extol Francis their Father, and their order above the heaven of
heavens, they have a rule that the unlettered among them should not care to
learn letters. But the Jesuits, they profess and teach knowledge. Let us
see, what knowledge, and for what cause. It is the very same knowledge which ye
serpent performed: Genesis 3. 1.
who promised the knowledge of evil, to take away the knowledge of good: who
promised life, and brought in death. Therein also the cause appears: for this
master promises to root out proud ignorance, minding in deed to root out
the fyncere knowledge of the Gospel, Romans 1. 16.
which is the power of God to salvation. Here the Jesuit most wickedly calls
the knowledge of the Gospel, ignorance: and the steadfast confession of our
faith and hope that wauereth not, Hebr. 10. 22, 23.
he terms pride. But Popery, which this rooter out of the Gospel would
plant in place thereof, is in deed proud ignorance, and a treading under
foot of ye blood of Christ. For it proudly refuses to hear, and rejoices to
be without understanding. Therefore Popery is that proud ignorance that must
not reenter, and the disease thereof remaining in many, is that which must be
more and more rooted out. For, though it promise all good things, what one good
thing can that religion bring, which joins the merittes of man with the
merittes of Christ, which matcheth, or ouermatcheth the word of God with
traditions, the commandment of God with the countermaund of the Pope, the
Temple of God with Idols? Which doctrines and many other are the doctrines of
men, as contrary to ye holy word of God, as is darkness to light, and
infidelity to faith in Christ Jesus. What, I say, can the Jesuits religion
bring, but some unblessed blessings of a man, which draw after them the
everlasting curses of God? The sun of righteousness, that shines into our
hearts, being thus taken away, this Jesuit would bring us to some knowledge
of the woman that is arrayed with purple and scarlet, Apoc. 17. 4.
and ouerlaid with gold, precious stones, and pearl. Which woman is set out unto
the carnal eye, and sense, by such allurements to recover ye kings of ye earth
her old lovers, that she may make the^ drunken again with her cup of
fornications. Therefore in the bowels of Jesus I beseech all my dear country
men not to be deceived by this Jesuit, who brings into England a worship
clean contrary to the worship of God. For Gods worship is in Spirit and
truth: Ion. 4. 23. 24
and popery is in gold and silver and pearl, and crucifixes, and Agnus deis,
all for the eye, and to snare the heart of a carnal man, bewitching it with so
great glistering of the painted harlot. It is also in all kind of music to
fill the ear with delight, and in all excellent perfumes to please the smell.
These and all the rest are carnal intisements, to quench the Spirit,
bewraying that Popery works in us, not a feeling or judgment of Gods
service in Spirit, but of fleshly pleasures, to carry us away to the
fornications of that strumpet of all the world. Now as Popery is not a
worship of God in Spirit, so is it not joined with any worship of God in
truth, but in ye canons and decrees of men, who, to raise up their own
kingdom, go about to throw down both the kingdom of men, and (which is their
chiefest practice) the kingdom of Jesus Christ. Therefore it was too broad to
charge the Gospel now preached, as an abusing of his poor countrymen:
whereas he himself sees wherewith they are many of them abused from Rome, and
by these close messengers from thence: namely with most foolish and beggarly
trashe, as Bulls, pardons, holy grains, copper pieces of Agnus dei, with
such other childish inventions, wherein (if a strong spirit of error did not
reign in some) I marvel that the beggerlinesse and folly of their religion
is not more espied and had in a perpetual detestation.

4 The fourth article does show as much truth in his words, as is in his
religion. For in words he does openly deny that which is most apparent in
his doings, and most necessary for his cause. He never had mind, and was
straightly forbidden by his father that sent him, to deal in any respect with
any matters of state, etc. Here he does earnestly affirm that which must not
be believed: here he does perswadingly crave that which must not at al be
given him. He would be thought no enemy of the state, no dealer with the
common wealth or policy: and renders a reason, (if you will believe him,) It
apperteineth not to his vocation: and from it he does gladly estrange, and
sequester his thoughts. But all these words are as if a man would manifestly
wound his neighbor to the heart, and yet in the deed doing cry out, saying,
I do not so much as think him any harm. For he that smites our religion,
wounds our common wealth: because our blessed estate of policy stands in
defense of religion, and our most blessed religion labors in the mayntenance
of the common wealth. Religion and policy in England are, through Gods
singular blessings, preserved together in life, as with one spirit: he that
does take away the life of the one, does procure the death of the other.
Neither can any Jesuit from Prage or Rome, come over to confute and alter
religion, but he must attempt the change of the state, to the lamentable
destruction of the land. He can not again bring in the Pope, but he must
take away from her royal Majesty, her just supreme soueraintie, and deprive
her at one clappe of the authority she has over all persons and ordinances.
She must have nothing to do with the body or goods of the Clergy (as they
speak:) she must seek a reconciliation from the Popes curse: her chief
laws must be no laws: the present government, that I may not say the
present gouerner, must be changed, a new established, and made subject to the
check of the Priest of Rome. Notwithstanding this man that would overthrow
all, would make us believe his purpose is to touch nothing. Because he
caryeth no sword, he would he thought to carry no weapon. But is not one
trumpet worse then many swords? What manifest dissimulation is then in the
champions words? what plain contrariety? But it is no new thing: for his
whole pamphlet is full of such monsterous contrariety, while he delivers
humility in show, but pride in deed: again, while he utters the words of
swelling pride, having no matter but vile and base. But Antichrist and his
ministers must needs learn of their father his chiefest lesson, which is to
lie, that the saying of Christ may appear, John. 8. 44.
Satan is a liar, and the father of lies. As for his reason, that things of
policy appertain not to his vocation: although it be true in deed, yet it
is so said only to cover his purpose, which is to the contrary. For
appertains it to Saunders in Irelande by the same oracle, and does it not
appertain to Campion in England? Surely it does apperteyne as much but the
open attempt is not so safe. Therefore it comes here to be considered, that
the oracle has a double heart and a double tongue, set at large to deny or
break even an oath made to one, not of his sect, and evermore to say and
vnsaye, to promise, and break promise, as may make most for his deuilish
practices.

5. Now follows ye execution of his message, wherein he asks with show of
great humility, the thing that bewrays his singular pride. For he aloue
professes with a challenge in all knowledge, touching his causes, to encounter
with all sorts of learning, and learned men: and against them, notwithstanding
their strength, and the strength of their cause, to prove the most weak and
languishing title of Popish religion. And before whom? Not before some few in
a corner, but in the light and presence of this renowned estate, so enriched
with singular gifts of learning, experience and judgment: namely in the
presence of her honorable Counsel, before the Doctors, Masters, and choice
men of both the Universities: and thirdly before the lawyers spiritual (as he
speaks) and temporal. But let us further examine what he utters. In this
place the Jesuit a man professing so great knowledge knows not himself, he
remembers not in this article, what he solemnly protested in the former. For
there he affirmed that he minded not, that he might not in any respect deal
with matters of state: but now as having his will altered and a secret
dispensatio^ against the charge of his fathers, he will discourse of religion so
far as it touches the commonwealth and their nobilities. But out of the
abundance of the heart, Mat. 12. 34.
does the mouth speaks, and the pen writes. It follows, whereof he makes
most account, to try the matter out with the doctors, and masters of each
university. What he brings from a new forge, I may more easily guess, then
determine. But if it be no more, then his masters of these and all other
universities have brought already into their books and disputations, it is
nothing yt long ago has not been confuted. It may be, not having better
reasons, he presumes of him self that he has fayrer colors then they had,
and a stronger spirit of illusion to deceive and carry away ye preiudicate and
inconstant hearer against reason. The manifold ways he promises to convince
by, are profes invincible, scriptures, etc. If he can prove his cause by
invincible scriptures, it is sufficient: there need no further proofs. But if
he allege ye scriptures for his cause, Mat. 4 6.
as satan did, and as heretics do, using some of the words, and leaving the
fulness of the sentence, or perverting ye words to another sense then the holy
Ghost delivers, then shall he prevail as Satan did, and his reward shall be
among the false prophets. Councils. Fathers. Stories.
As for Councils, Fathers, and stories, they are rather witness one to another
of some contrariety, and all witnesses of ye time, how corruptions crept into
the Church, then authentical judges in causes of religion. Nevertheless we
have (if we would use the^) in their true allegation, matter sufficient to
confute yt which the Jesuit hops to confirm by false allegation. Touching
places in the fathers to the contrary, some of the^ are already condemned of
bastardie, being places manifestly forged: other not gyltie of forgery, how
great so ever the authors of the^ were, yet it is evident they were but men:
and that the word of God alone has credit of and for it self: 2. Tim. 3. 16.
Psalm. 119. 130.
that ye word of God alone is ye touchstone, and fining pot yt shows ye least
corruption, the least co^mixture of corruption: much more the palpable errors
of ye new Jesuits. Moreover for the latter Councils, because ye Pope reigned
over the^, he, being now arraigned, is no lawful witness in his own case.
And because these Councils make war against the authority of Gods word,
Esai. 11. 4. 2. These. 2. 8.
ye Spirit of ye Lords mouth, which is his word, shall proceed more and more to
consume them. Afterward the Jesuit, not so careful to perform, as to move
great expectation by promise, draws me^ to look for profes of his religion,
where profes are no more to be found, then a sure foundation upon the sand,
or a place of light in the kingdom of darkness. So impossible are the things
that now he undertakes. For among other proofs, he undertakes to auow ye
faith of the Catholic Church, by natural and moral reason, which are two
great enemies of true religion, and two great nourses of Atheism and heresy.
The Apostle teaches this, that the natural man can not discern the things
of God, 1. Cor. 2. 14.
they seem foolishnes to him. David finding the rebellion and ignorance of a
natural heart, Psalm. 51. 10.
craved a clean heart to be created within him, and a new spirit: new, not
only in affections, but in understanding, that he might learn the
judgments of God. For want of this heart, 1. Kin. 11. 5. 1. Kin. 3. 12.
Solomon was a stranger from God a long time, notwithstanding he had a natural
and moral wisdom above any that ever reigned in Jerusalem. Mat. 16. 16.
Peter could not receive the revelation of faith from flesh and blood: but
this Jesuit can deliver it from thence. Therefore the religion which Jesuits
would plant again in England, is not according to ye holy Scriptures given by
inspiration of God, 2. Tim. 3. 16.
but according to the carnal sense of untaught men, which must have gods to
go before them Exodus 32. 1.
that is, they must have a religion allowing gods, and images, and worshippings
in ye feeling and wisdom of a natural man, that can not look with the eyes
of faith up into heaven: nor with spiritual judgment into ye great mystery
of godliness contained in the holy scriptures. 1. Tim. 3. 16.
Last of all this chalenger, as one brought up in ye Innes of court, and at
Padua in the midst of spiritual lawyers, undertakes to justify his said
faith by common wisdom of law, standing yet in force and practiced. Wherein
again he promises to pay out that, which he never received in. But if he
has borrowed somewhat out of the laws to save his credit, let us examine how
far it may go for payment. Among other laws he relieth most upon the Canon
law, Canon law.
and some such fragments thereof as yet he thinks to stand in some force. To
speak therefore of the Canon law, many matters therein are so gross, that even
many Papists, which otherwise have a harlots forehead, ca^ not read them
without blushing. Nevertheless, out of a sea of such absurdities, there is a
book extant, Sententiae Halleri ex decretis canon. collectae
yt has gathered many notable places to prove above thirty points of our
religion. This was the just judgment of God against the Popes, that they
setting down wicked canons, should not remember to take away ye good. Now
for so much of that law as is in practice, if it be not pure, let not the
world marvel, if in purging the Church from so many abominations wherewith
the adversaries had in all places and so long time together defiled it, some
small matter remained not swept away and carried out with the rest. Common law.
As for the positive laws of the land, wherein also the Jesuit would seem
to have knowledge and matter for maintenance of his popish superstitions, they
make wonderfully against him. I speak not this only in respect of the most
godly laws made of late under King Henry the eight, her Majesty's father of
noble fame, or since under the Josias of these ages King Edward the sixth, and
in the most blessed and prosperous reign of her Majesty: but laws made in
the time of Edward the first, Richard the third, and some others before and
after. A treatise of the supremacy. Also sermons and books by Tunstall,
Gardener, Bonner, and other papists against the Pope.
For even these have made ancient laws (as appears by a book written only
of this argument above forty years since) to abandon the Popes authority:
which head of the Popish Church being taken away, the body can not remain but
as a dead carkeis, that must have present burial: or remain as one of ye
antique images of Rome, that having lost the head, yet is highly esteemed only
for antiquity.

6 In the sixth article first he shows how little power he has over his
tongue, or over his pen. For being loath to speak any thing that might but
sound of an insolent brag or challenge, yet he does most insolently brag
more then any, and challenge more then all. For what one man has made such a
brag, or such a challenge, as out of al sciences against al men to mainteyne
that that for want of maintenance is fallen, as ye Angel prophesied of ye fall,
Revel. 14. 8. and 18. 2.
saying, Great Babylon is fallen, and the inhabitants and friends thereof see
her daily fall, and there is neither violence nor subtlety that can lift her
up again. But the Jesuit moves pity, and rendereth a reason why he may not
boast. He is a dead man to this world. Friars and such like entering into their
order, are said to die and may make their will, which is proved and stands
in force, as if they were dead.
In what sense he is dead, I know not. In deed as yet he can neither be found
alive, nor dead, nor the place of his burial. Whatsoever other may think, he
thinks not himself spiritually dead: but dead by resignation of a worldly
life, or danger of death that may come by justice of law. Whatsoever it is, he
would be pitied, before he comes near any danger. As he moves pity, so he
beggeth love for the wonderful love and ready mind he would seem to bear
toward every man. He offreth hayle master, as Judas did, and a kiss down to
the ground. But we must not believe words of love from an enemy yt shows
malice in deed. Yet there is some thing in his professed love. For to tread
afterward proudly upon our heads, and to make us kiss ye Popes feet, he will
in the Popes service first lay his head under our feet, and kiss the ground
we tread upon. O false show of gracious lowlines! O servile words of
flattery, joined with intolerable pride of a deceitful heart! For to whom is
not ye notorious pride, and hideous cruelty of Antichrist known? It follows
to see how soon and suddenly a double minded man shows him self inconstant
in all his ways. Iam. 1. 8.
He that in one line abaseth him self to the dust, in the next exalts him
self against heaven. He now pretending the defense of the majesty of Christ,
and yet intending to defend ye tyranny of Antichrist, does display his
courage, his affiance, his assurance, his evidence, so impregnable, that no man
may encountre with him. As before he promised to cry a false Alarm again
sin, so now in presumption of himself he sounds the victory, and
proclaims a triumph, and that before he has showed his face in the field. If
those words did no more tickle the Papists that believe all and receive al
from Rome, then they do us, who examine spirits by the word, he might have
reserved them for a fitter time, and a better place. In a good cause, it is
good always to be bold, to have singular affiance in the gracious favor of
Jesus Christ. On the other side in an evil cause to trust to a broken reed of
Egypt, is a double folly, and brings a double mischief: first an overthrow
in the attempt, and afterward the shame of an evil matter. Moreover, for an
enemy of the kingdom of Christ to call Christ his King, and to borowe his
name to justify a foul enterprise, it is nothing else, but to sin the sin
of them that swear, Iere. 5. 2.
The Lord lives, and yet deceive. For therein the offender makes the Lord of
hosts a witness, Josh. 7. 10.
and a revenger of his impiety. In the words following (if his heart varyed
not from his pen) he makes account to have very favorable readers, that will
believe so great matters in so slender a man. Papinianus. Ael. Spartianus in
vita Caracalli.
For, as one said of another matter, It is easier to commit murder then to
defend it, so is it easier to fall into the error of Popery, then to mainteyne
it. Nevertheless this chalenger does so undertake the maintenance, as if
nothing could be replied against him. And not contenting himself to say, The
Protestants cannot answer, he does in spiteful words of disgrace ease his
stomach of much gall against the preachers and against their pulpits: against
the hearers, and their unlearned ears. His impressions of malice are so
strong, and the opinion conceived of his own sufficiency so great, Horatius:
Quid dignu^ tanto feret hic promissor hiatu.
that he vaunteth, saying, I know perfectly that no one Protestant, nor all the
Protestants living can maintain their doctrine. They have maintained it by the
word of might and truth against all the adversaries in writing and solemn
disputation, as has bin noted. And can they not now maintain it against one
man, but of eight or nine years standing in his profession, as little in deed,
as he is great in his own conceit? Yes, ye meanest of many by ye grace of God
can mainteyne it, and shall prevail. And if our adversaries will look into
our defenses already published, they shall see the defense of our religion so
great, and the cause so manifest, that I may truly use these words against
the chalenger on the otherside, No one Jesuit, nor all the Jesuits living
shall be able to answer that that is written, or to root out that which is
planted. We face not men down in our pulpits (which is his foul reproach
against our holy exercise of preaching) but we labor by the powerful word
of God to bring all men to the knowledge and obedience of the truth. As for
our kingdom of Grammarians, again I understand not his taunt. We praise God
for the knowledge of many tongues by many Grammers: and for the knowledge of
Grammar, that leads into further understanding: and these gifts we use to
the glory of God, and the confutation of your religion. If his taunt was to
note, that we want other good arts, and have only some swaye in Grammar,
herein also he is gyltie of a false and spiteful accusation. For we can make
proof that the Lord has given us of the spoils of Egypt, of Arabia, of
Iewry, and of Rome. But it may be he notes it, that many now rule in the
Church, that in times past have ruled only in Grammar schools. I grant that
some few such are amongst us: but such profitable and sufficient teachers of
men, that it were pity, they should any more teach children. Now let us
pass from his scoffs, and come again to his vaunts. The Campmaster having
with Rabshaketh denied the arm of our God to be able to deliver us, 2. King.
18. 30.
and condemning our cause before it be indicted, does notwithstanding crave
the combat with all and every one of us, offering the best welcome to him that
comes best furnished. I answer, These are words. The proverb makes it a
vain fight to fight with a shadow: but we have not so much as his shadow
for a measure of the Champion, or for an argument that he is at hand. But as
already he has vaunted of the universality of his knowledge, so now he
sets out the universality of his powers, making him self a monster that
has infinite persons to stand it out, infinite ears to hear, and infinite
tongues to answer all and every Protestant. Can he speak wisely in a sudde^
disputation, that utters folly in a premeditate and weighty letter? will he
look to win, that knows not how to make his match? The last point of ye
article is his protestation of joy to meet with no unarmed enemy: but the
better we come furnished, the better welcome. We have now heard more then
enough of his self liking: more the^ needed of his challenge, wherein hitherto
we find nothing hard, but yt which he does not brag of: namely where to find
him. For some will bear me witness, it is harder to find him, then to
answer him when he is found. But these words are delivered to draw credit
to himself and his cause: also to cast discredit upon us, and our religion:
Wherein he does still affirm the conclusion that should be proved. It is
not enough for a Jesuit, or for the oracle of the Jesuits to affirm, except
proofs appear. But we must tarry till the Champion come to the listes.

7 In the seventh article he speaks good words and true, touching the
singular graces of God, wherewith he has enriched her Majesty in noble gifts
of nature, learning and princely education. It is very well if you think thus
duetifully in your hearts, and speak so reverently of her Majesty abroad, and
in your secret prayers. But why do you pass over the grace of graces in her,
which deserve perpetual honor: namely her godly zeal and knowledge, in
professing and publishing ye glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, and in abandoning
your popish superstitions? Why moreover did you not yield to her highness al
thanks from the heart, for her exceeding clemency, by the which many of you
live, and yet show your selves unworthy of so great mercy? If the gifts of
enemies be giftlesse gifts (as the proverb notes) what are the bare words of
them that are more disloyal in deed, then they can show themselves loyal in
words? But be it known to you, that her Majesty by her rare gifts which you
acknowledge, would easily see your flattering hypocrisy, and your gross
presumption of her readiness to incline, or rather to decline to you: and
moreover readily judge of your sandy foundation, and untempered mortar, if
either your letters were worthy the least reading, or your self meet for any
place in her most honorable presence: Your fair light would be dim in the
brightness of her wisdom, your good method would appear to have a great
maime at her learned consideration, and your plain dealing would show it self
plain dallying with Gods causes, if in the singular dexterity of her
judgment, she were present at your disputation or sermons to give sentence.
Therefore let me here once challenge and charge ye chalenger, that he did so
far break out into seditious and disloyal speech, as to offer that wrong to
her Majesty and wisdom, in suggesting to her subjects, that she can be removed
with a shaken reed, who was not moved in the cause, at the earnest suits, and
threats of mighty Princes. Wherein as her Majesty has received a notable
prerogative of Gods favor, and has singular cause to rejoice before him in
the peace of conscience, that passes al understanding: so she has made proof
to the world, that she is resolved for the happy continuance of that, which
has had so happy and manifold blessings, and promises more and more, till we
come to the fullness thereof for ever.

As for her Majesty's love to her people, and their most dutiful love and joy
to her again, it requires no Popish Doctor or doctrine to alter it: being
already established in the knowledge of the Gospel, which works the
effectual bond of peace and perfection in Prince and people. Ephesians. 4. 3.
Col. 3. 14.
Therefore the second point of this article is as presu^ptuous as the first.
The first in drawing her Majesty's excellent judgment and zeal of Gods house
into doubt of alteration upon a disputation or a few sermons: the second in
calling her best proceedings into accusation as hurtful to the Realm. But it
is not the Gospel that hurts the realm: it is you, ye Papists, and your
religion that hurt it, and would bring it to miserable desolation, to set up
again your abomination. Yea many years since you had done it, but that the
Lord, of mercy and judgment, strives whether he may show greater tokens of
his gracious favor to her Majesty and the land, or indignation to you, and
your most wicked attemptes, in discovering from time to time so many of your
secret conspiracies and deep practices: and in meeting so happily with your
open rebellions and invasions. In the words following, the chalenger does
trippe himself, for having presently before praised her Majesty, now
correcting himself, he does utter his grief against her, that he and his
confederates are oppressed, and find not equity at her hand. O unjust
complaynt, that I say no more. Her mighty arm and sword has not been so
heavy, as the little finger of those that persecute the Church. Therefore, if
mine advise may be taken in good part, I would wish you that are so great
oppressers, except ye were oppressed, and namely you Jesuits (who
notwithstanding the salvation signified by the name of Jesus, which you take,
yet you are the bellows to kindle and increase the fire of persecution more
then any, in all places where you can prevail) not to complain of oppression,
least it be redoubled upon you, and yet without breach of equity.

8 From presuming of her Majesty's pliablenesse to their side, he returns to
her honorable Counsel in the same manner and meaning. For attributing to them
the praise of nobility and much wisdom, and drift in cases most important, he
notwithstanding promises himself without doubt (as having ye disposition of
their hearts in his hand) that they also will at last for their own souls,
and for many thousand souls that depend upon their government, discou^tena^ce
the religion, and hearken unto Papistry. He would not beforehand make this
promise, and (which is his chief purpose) draw the multitude to expect
backsliding in their honors, if he did not highly esteem his own baseness,
and basely judge of their excellency. But how does this inconstant Jesuit
still give in one line, and take away in another? Have her Majesty's most
honorable Counsel wisdom in cases most importa^t? and are they without
wisdom in the most importa^t cause of religion, which more the^ al other
causes, imports them for their own souls and many thousand souls beside?
1. Cor. 2. 6, 8. Rom 8. 5, 6, 7
Without this wisdom of God in the Gospel, there is no wisdom in the wisest
men of the world. Then the Jesuit withdrawing from their honors this wisdom,
he attributes to them a wisdom which is no wisdom, and so his praises are
no praises. But he finds, and in their wise government feels their wisdom
to be according to knowledge, and their knowledge joined with zeal, according
to ye revealed truth, which they under her Majesty maintain to Gods glory,
and ye cutting off of Popish enterprises to the contrary. Wherefore ye ages
that shall come after, shall witness for her Majesty and for them, that in
singular wisdom, they have restored and maintained the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ, and blessedly withstoode the flatteries of Jesuits, and the
violence of the unholy fathers army, that would in England set up the beast,
Reave. 1^8. and 18. 21.
that must be thrown down into the nethermost hell, and never rise again:
whose fearful fall will draw with it the fall of as many as depend upon her,
and yield their service to her, notwithstanding her intolerable pride and
bloody fornications. Moreover this Jesuit writes to their honor without
regard of their honors. For as if they had no eyes to see, nor hearts to
consider what may be, and what has been said for Popish religion, he will now
open the questions of religion so faithfully, that their honors shall see the
substantial grounds whereon the Popish faith is builded. Have all other
Jesuits wanted learning? Have even this Champions masters wanted strength in
the field, and dexterity in their enterprises? To heal the wounds of the
beast, Job. 13. 4.
are all other Physicians, Physicians of no value?

Thus we see how this Jesuit charge the Lords, as not having their eyes yet
open to see what religion is, and also notes the wantes of his masters, that
have not done, that himself will undertake. But to perform all these
promises, he must not allege the authority of his oracle: for the oracle
himself may sooner with Atlas bear the weight of the world upon his
shoulders, then maintain so great a quarrel, as is the defense of the Romish
Church against the Gospel of God: as is the maynteining of the worldly kingdom
of the Pope, against the spiritual and mighty kingdom of Jesus Christ. After
these things he returns to his slanders against the preachers of the word,
charging them, that they huddle up, and confound questions of religion. But
whatsoever the Jesuit thus casts out in malicious and false terms, God bath
blessed the preachers of the Gospel with worthy gifts, and a pure form of
preaching, agreeable to the purity of the Gospel which they profess. So that
if our adversaries, and their gifts come to a right examination, it shall
appear to al men, that if Papists have learning, so we also: if they have
order and method, so we also: if they have gifts to persuade, we much more,
upon more excellent grounds. And (which is more then all) whereas they preach
men, we preach God, whereas they preach error, we preach the truth, not
according to men, but according to the foundation of the holy Prophets and
Apostles, Ephe. 2. 20
Christ Jesus being the head corner stone. As for Antiquity, Fathers,
Cou^cils, we allow them as far as the word of God does not disalowe them.
But if any oracle from heaven, or consent of all the world, teach, or
persuade any thing, otherwise then we have received in the word, we subscribe
to the sentence already pronounced by Saint Paul, Gal. 1. 8, ^.
and registered in his holy Epistle to the Galathians. What kind of new
preaching these new Jesuits bring, I know not: but if they follow the vein
of their forefathers the ancient Friars, then I know that they will draw byase,
whether they huddle or no. The world is yet full of volumes, wherein their
sermons are penned down, but with matter so ridiculous, and Latin so
barbarous, that all books written to make sport, must give place to them. From
charging the preachers, he proceeds to charge ye sway of the time, for
preuayling against him and his. The time is neither shorter, nor longer,
better, nor worse in it self: therefore in this figurative speech, he covertly
charge the gouerners of the time. Wherein he again utters his murmuring,
and repineth that his golden times so often calculated, can yet take no place.
But blessed be the Lord, that has stretched out his arm, the swaye and stroke
whereof preuayleth against all enemies of the kingdom of Jesus Christ: and let
not their praises die for ever, whom the Lord has raised up to be his
instruments in so glorious a work. As for the best blood in your bodies which
you would spend for their honors, which of them require any such sacrifice at
your hand? who stand in need of it? In so evil a cause, as the persuading of
error, what can it avail? If I may again advise you, keep it to preserve
life: it may be the Lord has appointed a day for your true repentance, that
renouncing your former works of merit and supererogation, you may receive ye
love of the truth, and build your faith upon the merits of Christ alone,
Phil. 3. 7. etc.
which shall be your own salvation. And leave to profess love, where you
practice treason: cease to promise the sheading of your blood willingly, as in
a good cause, whereas experience has lately showed that you and your
confederates lost blood in a notorious evil cause. In Ireland 29. Nouemb.
But that was the mercy of God that watches over us still, to take the wicked
in their wickedness, which mercy shall watch over us continually, if we avoid
the contempt of yt Gospel we profess, and show our selves thankful to his
majesty for so great mercies. Again the Jesuit flaunteth in words, and
vaunteth of his innocent hands lifted up to heaven every day and every hour,
as for the good of their honors. To make your hands no fowler then they are,
yet those innocent hands have written no innocent books: they have cast
abroad no innocent libels: they held out no innocent banner of Popish
obedience in their actual rebellions heretofore in England, and presently in
Ireland. But if those hands may be innocent that have done these things, and
moreover crucify the son of God again every day in their most blasphemous
sacrifice of the Mass: yet when you hold up those hands in prayer, I doubt
not, but it is with desire to have Popish religion restored, to have the Lords
of the Counsel removed: to have way made for you to return from your beggarly
estate to the dignities and regencie of the land. And why then do you, that
are known to make this prayer, and to follow your prayers with practices,
notwithstanding make mention of them as a dutiful and holy service toward the
Counsel. If the things ye seek by prayer and otherwise, were good, then the
prayer and enterprise also may be good: but if ye ask the things that are
evil, the prayer is turned into sin: and you find, how true the words of
James are, concerning such prayers and such purposes, you ask, Iam. 4. 3.
and receive not. But howsoever you pray or purpose, we in all truth and love,
hold up both our hands and hearts unto God for you, that are in darkness and
in the shadow of death, praying him in his dear son Jesus Christ, to cast
upon you the light of his countenance, that you may see and find that
righteousness which S. Phil. 37. etc.
Paul desired, with the loss of all the other helps and preeminences: namely,
not the righteousness, which was his own, which is of the law, but the
righteousness which is of God through faith. This is unfeignedly our public and
private prayer for you, with continual supplication, that God would make us
all sheep of the same fold, whereof Jesus Christ alone is the great Pastor.
John. 10. 11. heb. 13. 20.
To come again to that which follows in the letter: he adds the praise of
English students beyond Sea, saying, Their posterity shall not die. No more
shall the posterity of Antichrist, til they and their abominations be brought
into judgment. As for the virtue and sufficient knowledge which they gather, I
would know whether it be virtue or knowledge that cause them in some places to
carry letters, and to enter into sedicious matters privily: in other places to
carry arms against her Majesty openly. Other fruit of their abandoning the
land, and great studies beyond sea I hear of none, a few motives excepted.
In the next words you profess better virtue, and more knowledge, if the evil
cause were not still the same. For in deed it is ye heavenly gift of God in our
calling to despise the death of the body, Phil. 2. 17, 30
for the life of their souls, whom otherwise we cannot in our ministry bring
to salvation. But your cause tends not to the salvation, but to the
condemnation of those whom you carry away with your carnal worshippings and
false doctrine. Moreover it may be, these are but words of a vain brag, as
hitherto appears. For albeit you would seem determined, upon your league
never to give over the Lords of the Counsel, but either to win them to heaven
(as if now they were lost to hell) or to die upon their pikes: yet you that
have tarried so long, from so great a work, tarry yet longer, making no haste
to come to so good a match. These valiant and resolute soldiers under ye Popes
banner of obedience appear not: even this Campmaster appears not. But it may
be, he has withdrawn himself, to write his letters consolatorie into
Ireland, and back again to Rome: and among other his large offers, he minds
to afforde us this, that we shall have some time to prepare for so dangerous a
combat. To let this pass, that which follows, does show his spirit. For out
it must with full mouth and great sound, he can no longer keep his own counsel.
It would be marked, and taken heed of, not for fear of the matter, but to
see the rebellion of the men. The society of Jesuits proclaim by their
trumpet Master Campio^, and make it known, that they have all made a league
not to leave a man of themselves alive, free from the honor of Stories Tiburne,
or consumption in prison, til they have ouerreached all the practices of
England. Fearful words threatening paper shot. But the weakness of their
force, takes nothing from the greatness of their malicious and traiterous
purpose. For if their power were as their purpose, see, I pray you, what an
alteration they would soon work in this land! Nevertheless these Jesuits
that mind to leave no way, that they think may establish the beast, whom they
worship, yet they utter this traitorous branch of the unholy league, as if it
were no other thing, the^ by preaching to win men to salvation. But I have
largely showed, that it is destruction that they call salvation. Therefore to
conclude these matters, his purpose is with his confederates by all means to
subdue men to the Popes bondage: and in this piece of service to prevail, or
to die upon any dangers. A great offer for so small gain: a great danger for
so wretched a purpose. But if the Jesuit report the conclusion of ye league
truly, when it is put in execution (which notwithstanding they will flee more
then we ca^ fear) it will not go so ill with the Church of God in England, as
it will go well with all other Churches. For if all the Jesuits in the world
bend their forces toward England, and come to carry the cross, that here
shall be laid upon them, we shall be ouerlayed with those swarms of grasshoppers,
except the Lord provide a mighty west wind to cast them violently into the Sea:
but all other Churches shall be free from that plague. But if answereably to our
profession we remain ye Israel of God, though Egypt be plagued, yet there
shall be no complaining in the tents of Jacob. After these bragges in words only,
how ready they are in the planting of Popish religion to die at Tiburne or in
any other torments, he shows us that the expense is reckoned, the enterprise
is begun. To gather these matters, First he publishes a general co^spiracie of
all the Jesuits in the world (and they were not alone in the decree) to die
upon our pikes, or to draw us from religion. Seco^darily he forewarneth
definitiuely, that this their league, succession and multitude, must ouerreach
all the practices of England: Thirdly that the account is made, and the
enterprise begun. In respect of any thing these Jesuits, or their adhere^ts
can do, we have no cause to fear at all, for their rage shall turn to ye
praise of God, who will confound the^ for his truth, and to get glory to his
name. But in respect of our sins, in not bringing forth fruits worthy of
the Gospel, we may fear least some of these noisome beasts in their swarms
cast some shadow upon the tree of life. Touching those last words so plainly
laying down their multitude, confederacy, threats and beginnings, I leave any
further to examine them: they are for an other examination, as drawing near
the heart of the common wealth, for the purpose and execution thereof. The last
words of this article are in sound very plausible (as the rest of his
speeches) pretending nothing but truth in his false cause, and nothing but
love in his seditious pamphlet. Therefore let them be examined. Speaking of
Popish religion, he says it is of God. A bare affirmation without any proof.
So in all his letter he only affirms, referring us to his credit: whereas
men would rather be carried with reason. But his reasons are to be looked for,
when he comes to answer his challenge. Yet to answer him with a reason,
Popery is not of God, for then it could not have received so great
overthrows, only by the word of God. Neither was ye Popish religion planted in
blood, neither is it like (whatsoever is laid down in bragges) that in blood
these Jesuits or any other will restore it. Otherwise the words may have this
true construction: Popish religion was planted in strength, by sheading the
blood, and abolishing the doctrine of the Martyrs: and in like sort they hope
to restore it again. By persecutions it prevailed at the first, and by
persecutions they look to prevail at the last. But blessed be God that has
showed ye vanity of this hope, by showing in our days that the blood of his
Martyrs, whose godly cause justify their godly death, is the seed of the
Church. France, Flanders, and our own country are wonderful arguments of
this, if any man will descend into ye deep consideration of the particulars.
If the Lord has heretofore made Nebuchadnezzar his servant to punish Israel,
Iere. 25. 9. and 27. 6.
it was not the power of Babel that did it, but the sins of Jerusalem. Ier.
24. 7, 8, 9
All such chastisements of the Church redound to the good of the Church, and
leave wrath against those that rise up against his people, Psalm. 116. 15.
and the blood of his saints that is so precious in his eyes.

9 In the last place he aggreueth the fault of her Majesty's most honorable
privy Counsel, if they will not receive that which he does not offer. For,
although his letters be full of promises and verbal offers, yet in truth and
deed, he offreth nothing, no not so much as these letters. They were scattered
abroad before any copy came to their hands: so it appears, that as he
meant not to stand to the answer of his challenge, so he meant not so much as
to send the letters of challenge, whyther he would have them thought to be
directed. Now after all storms, and other outrageous acts in this tragedy
and imaginary challenge, the Jesuit having charged ye Lords for their part, if
they reject his offer, and reward his endeavors and pilgrimage of many
thousand miles with rigor: he for his part falls to a calm conclusion.
Therein he promises ( having no more to say) to reco^mende our case and his
own to Almighty God the searcher of hearts, and prays that in heaven we may
be made friends. This prayer if he will make from the heart, we also will pray
that through their conversion God may grant it in Christ Jesus. If he will pray
it in love and truth, to that prayer he shall have our Amen. But let every man
that speaks well, mean accordingly, least the searcher of hearts find out
and punish their hypocrisy. His last words somewhat touch the former sore,
and therefore must not be passed over with silence. In being our remembrancer,
that in heaven all injuries shall be forgotten, he covertly complains again of
injuries. The injuries he susteineth, he alone is guilty of. For what greater
injury can be done to another, the^ he has done unto himself? He has
departed from the faith, left his country, and refused ye protection of a
gracious Prince, with many other honors and felicities, as he declared in ye
first article. In him therefore, ye complaint of injuries is unjust: but against
him, ye complaint, not of injuries alone, but of seditions, of heresy, and of
impiety is very just: so yt he is to take heed hereafter unto his steps,
least, though al injuries be forgotten in heaven, yet for want of repentance,
such iniquities receive punishment in an other place.

Therefore, briefly to see into all this matter and to conclude, these letters
of Ed. Campion ye Jesuit, which were cast abroad without a direction, to comfort
the Papists, and sweetly to feed them with hope of a great conquest against the
religion, are found upon examination to sound a false Alarm, having nothing
for ye Papists to feed upon, but vain hope, or venim to satisfy a heart
nourished with reproaches: nothing to trust unto, but a broken reed, and that not
yet in hand. Touching the Protestants the same libel has nothing, that can
either strike the least fear into them, or cast the least discredit upon
them, or their religion. Notwithstanding against ye Papists, and for the
Protestants, especially those in place further to consider it, the pamphlet
has (beside the vanity) many points discovering as well great mischief
intended against her Majesty's peaceable and godly government, as against the
heavenly and most fruitful preaching of ye Gospel. Which mischief
notwithstanding the Lord our God has from time to time, and lately wonderfully
disappoynted, that the Papists which will not hear what is taught out of the
word, may see and consider what the Lord preaches to them in those his
notable judgments: and that we, both Prince and people so blessed of God,
would with new songs praise the Lord, who is evermore good to Israel: the
Lord, I say, whose mercy and truth endures and prevails for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

