CHARITY ENLARGED: OR THE ABRIDGEMENT of the Moral Law. Delivered by way of
Sermon, and preached for the maine substance thereof in a public assembly, on
a Lecture day, Dec. 4. Ao. Dom. 1634. and now published according to the
Authors review, with some new additions, for the farther instruction of the
ignorant, satisfaction of the ingenuous, conviction of the uncharitable, and
benefit of all sorts of people.

By a serious welwisher to the peace of Jerusalem.

I am small and despised yet have I not forgotten thy Law. Psalm. 119.141.

Damnatus alijs, ipse neminem damno. H. Gr.

Damus Dei credendo fundatur, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur. Aug.
Sermon. 20. de verb. Apost.

London printed by T. C. for T. A. and are to be sold at the Greene-Dragon in
Paul's Churchyard.

Perlegi tractatum hunc, cui titulus Charity enlarged, etc. in quo nihil
reperio sanae fidei, aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Tho. Weeks R.P. Epi. Land. Cap. Domest.

CHARITY ENLARGED.
ROMANS 13. ver. 10. The latter part of the verse. Therefore love is the
fulfilling of the Law.


COncerning which words, I shall deceive your expectation, if you look for any
artificial connection, or division, or deduction to be proposed unto you. For
the first, know, that love it self is Copulative, and unites all good duties.
In this Chapter it is well conjoined to obedience unto Magistrates, whether
Ecclesiastical or civil: For they may well give fear to whom fear is
necessary, but they will never give true honor to whom honor is due, who give
not love to whom love belongs Hierom. Epist. ad Dominio.
Horum enim potentiae non parcunt sed cedunt, For they do not spare, Jude 8.
to speak evil of dignities, at least in the dialect of their thoughts, in the
conventicle of their hearts, where their rebellious imaginations assemble
together against the Lord and his anointed, saying, Let us (Psalm. 2.3.) break
their bands, etc. of fear, as we have broken those of love: it is only the
consciousnesse of their own weakness to resist authority, They spare not so
much others as themselves. As Apollinaris replied to his Emperor desiring to be
spared in a Satyr which he wa^ composing. Quod ab illici it is te^pero mihi
parco: but Solomon inhibits even disloyal thoughts Eccle. 10. ver. 20.
which makes them not for conscience, but necessities sake to yield subjection.
Metus and terror infirma vincula charitatis sunt quae ubi removeris quitimere
desierent odisse incipient. Tacit. in vita Iulij Agricolae.
Hence as their fear ebbs, their malice flows, as the one is abated the other
is increased; even as when one bucket comes up another goes down. Again, love
admits of no division from the Law, nor the Law of any separation from Love.
Amor est affectus umonis Scal. Exc. 301.
Love hates partition, it is the grace which makes brethren live together,
Psalm. 133.1.
in uno, in one, or in unitate, in unity it self in the abstract, and if it
separate their habitation, (as in the case of Abraham and Lot) yet it unites
their hearts more and more, so that when they are farthest asunder, then they
are nearest together; So the Epigrammatist says of his ill neighbor, l. 1.
Epig. 87. Nemo tam prope tam proculve nobis.
whereas malicious cohabitants, though enclosed within the same walls are most
distant the one from the other. Lastly, the text it self is a Doctrinall
conclusion, and implies no other propositions but its own premises, in which
are vertually contained all the doctrines of practical piety. This is the
abrogation of the Ceremonial, and the abridgement of the Moral Law. For Love
is that Verbum abbreviatum quod faciet Dominus super terram, in Saint Hieromes
In Isa. c 10.
Exposition sc. the tedious ceremonies of the Law, being gathered into the
precept of love, as into a short sum with righteousness. And the Romans 9.28.
whole Moral Law too, as the Apostle phraseth it in the verse before my text,
(...), is recapitulated or briefly comprehended in love, and fulfilled by love
in the text: so that if you be of the same mind concerning this precept of
which Socrat. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 18.
Pambo was in respect of David's resolve, Psalm. 39. sc. not to take any new
lesson of instruction out of Gods Word, until you have learned this perfectly,
not only at your tongues ends to talk of it, but at your fingers ends to
practice it, Quid enim ^erba audio fa^a cum uideam ^ug. sc. con^aria verbis?
^oo many are ^ke the soul^iers, in Ta^t. l. ^. hist. pa. 19. Lingua ^roris
ignavi, their charity ^ke a limon, is ^ot in the rine, ^n the outside, ^ut cold
with^n or at the ^eart.
you shall not only with him spend nineteen years, but your whole lives to
the longest day in the study of this one word Love. There is a useful story,
and not improbable in the In Galat. c. 6.
Coment ascribed unto Saint Hierome; in which it is related, that when Saint
John by reason of old age, was not able to make any long discourse unto his
disciples, he would often repeat that precept of love, which is in effect the
sum of his three Epistles, My little children love one another: and when some
of his Scholars desirous of new matter, demanded a reason why he so often
inculcated the same thing into their minds, he answered, Quia preceptum Domini
est, and si solum fiat sufficit: because it is Christ's Commandment, and if it
alone be performed, it is enough. So Saint Paul also witnesses, saying, (...).
Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

In the prosecution of which words I shall be conducted by this method, 1. You
shall hear the explication of the terms severally, that you may learn what
is understood, by Love, or Law, or the fulfilling of the Law. 2. I shall
confirm or illustrate the conclusion, with a few testimonies out of the
Scriptures and Fathers. 3. I shall distinctly declare unto you the several
ways, and respects, according to which love, fulfils the Law. 4. And lastly, I
shall apply to practice what I have considered in speculation. 1. What love is,
learn from Saint Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 3. c. 10. Charitatem voco motum
animi ad fruendum Deo propter ipsum, and se atque proximo, propter deum. I call
charity a motion or moving of the mind, What love is.
to enjoy God for his own sake, a man's self, and his neighbor for Gods sake;
and so consequently to procure all good to God and man; as to God, the
manifestation of his glory, to man, the participation of divine goodness. And
thus (...) here comprehends both the love of God and of man. And semblably this
term (...), compriseth both the tables of the moral law, D. Pareus An.
Willet. Guill^stius.
although in the 8. verse, and else where it implies only the second Table. So
that by the judgment of learned Expositors; Saint Paul's logic runs thus. If
the love of our neighbor (as I have proved, verse the 8. and 9.) fulfill the
Law in respect of those duties which concern our neighbor, then love in its
full extension as it tends to its universal object i. e. both God and all good
men, does fulfill the whole Law. Charitas nunquam otiosa est semper in alterum
se porrigit, vel in proximum vel in Deum. Natura enim chaeritatis est and amare
velle, and velle amari. Cassiodo. tract. de ami. Well then does S. Aug. call
charity a motion, because it never is at a stand: She stretches forth her
arms continually to embrace God, or her neighbor, and puts forth her hands to
do what good she can to both. Her restless desires are, to love and to be
loved.
For love is a like disposed to fulfill the precepts of both Tables, as of
either. Fides non eligit objectum, secundum Theologos sed omnibus revelatis
sine exceptione crediti ^ta charitas non eligit praeceptii quodexequatur, ad
omnia and singula parata est* Cum la lio apud Lucan. l, clamat (se Domino and
imperatori suo alacriler devovens.) Iussa sequi tam vella mihi quam posse
necesse est.
Yea Saint John shows that we cannot keep the one Table, and break the
other, we cannot love our God, and hate our brethren, which are made after the
Image of God. He who loves the father loves the children (though full of
imperfections) for the fathers sake, as David showed favor to lame
Mephibosheth for the memory of his Jonathan; muchlesse can we truly love our
brethren, and hate our God. Does any man delight to behold the picture of his
mortal enemy. If any man, (then) says he, love God, and hate his brother, he
is a liar, 1 Ioh. 4.20. Lo what a liar is he that protests he loves his
brother, and yet hates God. For the love of man is included in the love of God,
as the effect in the cause; Luke 10.27. Toto cord i. e. vere, tota anime i. e.
affect. bu^ cunctis, totis viribus i. e effective, tota mente i. e.
inteligenter.
so that love is the fulfilling of the first Table directly and immediately, of
the second mediatly, and consequently as shall in its place be evidenced unto
you.

In the mean time if any one having some competent knowledge of God desires
more fully to understand how he is to be loved, let him meditate upon Deutero.
6.5. Then if he ask who is his neighbor, Who is our neighbor.
and how he is to be loved, he needs not go far for instruction. Him
whom our Apostle calls (...), proximum, one that is near unto thee, thy
neighbor in my Text, and in the precedent verse: he calls (...), verse 8.
another, any other besides thy self, whether near to thee, or a far off,
whether friend or adversary, whether familiar or stranger, whether of thy
kindred, or alliance, or neither, whether believer or unbeleever: In a word,
any one whosoever, that in any respect whatsoever, stands in need of thy
charitable deeds or prayers, or that shows any kind of charity unto thee,
God only excepted as Is est proximus cui vel exhibendum est officium
misericordiae si indigit, vel exhibendum soret si indigeret: ex quo iam
consequens, ut etiam ille aquo nobis hoc vissim exhibendum est (quod ad Angelos
etiam pertinet) proximus sit noster. Proximus enim est nomen ad^, aliquid nec
quisquam esse proximus, nisi proximo potest Aug. de doct. Christ. l 1. c. 30
and ex eo Lomb. l. 3. sent. did. 28.
Saint August. and Lombard observe.

So our Savior plainly informs us by the Parable of the wounded traveller,
Luke 10. August, de doct. Christ. l. 1. ^a^ 20.
which may also be gathered by an evident argumentation from the precepts which
appertain to the love of our neighbor, some of which our Apostle reckons up,
verse 9. Manifestum est omnem hominem esse proximum deputandum quia erga
neminem operandum est malum. Dilectio. enim proximi malum non operatur.
If there were any man that were not our neighbor in the sense of the Law, he
should not offend against the law of charity, comprehended in the second Table,
who should rob such a man of his goods or good name, yea, or spoil him of
his very life, Romans 13.10.
and so there might be done, as much and more by Law, as Israel did to the
Egyptians by divine dispensation. Charity toward sinners.
A point which some men's uncharitableness may perhaps admit; accounting any
gain of wealth or esteem from all those whom they judge as Heathens and
Publicans, to be no less godliness to them, than usury was to the Jew from a
Cananite. But the conscience of charity is not so large, her extention is in
good affection toward all. A man of right charity will draw near in love and
affection to those who are a far off from him in kindred or habitation;
although those who are near to him by consanguinity or place are a far off
from him in their hearts. Yea, he is near unto them in his private devotions,
and in his good wishes, who are a far off from him in Religion, or goodness,
which is the very object of love: But charity can suppose an object when she
wants one, and supply that by desires which is not in reality, and affect that
in possibility which is not in act existent. 1. She can hide the lesser errors
or sins of our brethren. 2. She can excuse them with Peter, Act. 3.17.3. When
they are so gross that no excuse can extenuate them Yea supposing we may know
that one has committed the sin against the holy Ghost. Charity can be sorry
for such a man. Si non propter hominem tamen propter humanitatem; although she
be not permitted to pray for him, 1. Ioh. 5.16. She is sorry he committed such
an offense which may not be prayed for. Even as we cut not of rotten members
whilst there is any h^ of recovery, and when they must be cut off, we part from
them with grief of heart, and wish we might have kept them. So Samuel also
mourned for Saul forsaken of God, 1 Samuel 15 ult.
she will not cease to pray or hope for amendment, saying with Samuel, 1 Samuel
12.23. As for me, God forbid that I should sin against the Lord in ceasing
to pray for you. And charity as she desires, so she hops all things, 1.
Cor. 13.7. So far is she from wishing or cursing any into the bottomless
pit, that she can say with S. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.7. in the case of any good she
enjoys, I would that all men were even as I my self. She laments or pitties
the furious malice of the Papists, damning all Protestants with one mouth, and
the parallel rashness of some sort of Protestants damning all Papists, and
speaking evil of those of their own Religion also, which will not run with
them into the same excess of zeal, but prefer even the error of charity
before the peremptory censure of those that err. Away with these damning (I
had almost thence learned the phrase of damned, but I say) and justly condemned
censurers: For if these stand (...), Who then shall be saved, as the Apostles
ask Christ, Mat. 19.25. Let it be the glory of our Church to follow, Zach.
8.19. truth and peace in her opinions, discretion and charity in her censures.
In her controversies (which must needs be that truth may be made manifest, as
by the collision of flints sparks of fire are forced out) let her imitate
Michael the Archangel disputing even with the devil, about the body of Moses,
not daring to bring any railing accusation against him, but saying, only, the
Lord rebuke thee, Jude 9. Or with David: Smite the faces of thine adversaries
(the enemies of thy truth) with shame, that they may seek thy Name, O God.
Whilst some of her children with Martha are troubled with many things, with
vain suspicions and fears, with uncertain and doubtful disputations, and
oppositions of science falsely so called, with supposed scandals and errors,
with envy, hatred, and all uncharitableness: she with Mary has chosen the
better part, the part of charity tempering knowledge, that it puff not up
nature into any proud opinion of her own self or censure of others. In the
one she follows Saint Augustines advice, which he calls the safest Tutiores
vivimus si totum Deo demus citig.
Totum (sc. quod bonum est) deo dando, attributing all that is good to God,
without whom man has In nullo gloriandum quando nihil est nostru^ Cypr. in
Oration. ^omin.
no ability to think, much less to do good. And in the other, to wit,
judgeing what is unpardonably evil in others, totum deo relinquendo, leaving
it wholly to God, and hoping the best that may be: For though the conclusion of
Logic and malice follow deteriorem partem; Divinity and charity embrace that
part which is apparently best, and leave uncertainties to Gods supreme
determination. Exodus 12.8, 9.10.
The Jews were commanded to eat the flesh of the Paschall Lamb, and to burn
the bones with fire. By faith, we eat the flesh of Christ, the antitype of
that Sacrament, and digest him into action by love, through which faith
works, but hard and unprofitable questions are to be committed to the fire,
that is, (says Citatus ab Eccles. Lugd. in lib. Resp. ad 3. Epist.
Saint Gregory) are to be left to the judgment of the Spirit of God, which
like fire manifests all things. In the interim charity goes a sure and a
lawful way, teaching us to love, not only our friends, but even our
adversaries, either in Religion or affection, or both: yea, this is a way not
only of safety but of Verum sit majoris perfectionis amicos an inimicos
diligere?
comparative perfection also, according to the opinion of diverse Chrysostom.
Ambros. Aug. Bern. Alensis, Durand. Bona. Argentin. and Lomb. in 3. did. 30.
huc trahitur a quibusdam.
Fathers and Schoolmen cited by Fr. de Mendoca, lib. 4. virid. Probl. 4. who
suppose the love of our enemies to be a more perfect act than the love of our
friends: Which opinion they confirm by probable reasons: Vt in naturalibus ea
propria passio est nobilior, quae est nobilioris speciei: sic in moralibus,
actus perfectionis legis est perfectior: I am lex nova, quae vivisicat, and
levat, est nobilior quam vetus quae mortificat, and gravat: Ergo. Mendoca loc.
cit. sic argumentatur.
as because it is an act correspondent to a more perfect law, sc. of the new
Testament: (For say they) the old Law gave way to outward malice to Civilis
ine^micus eiusdem Reipub. alumnus, and ejusdem Religionis cultor, quem ex animo
odisse non licebat, Levit. 19 v. 17 externa tamen odii signa permittebantur, ut
lege talionis agere, Levit. 2. v. 19. consa^^guinei morte^ ulci sci etc. ut Id.
ib. urget.
civil enemies, and to both outward and inward hatred toward the Legalis
inimi^us erat a Repub. Iudaica alienus, and divinaelegis xors, one that was a
stranger from the common wealth of Israel (as Saint Paul styles him) and an
alien from Gods Covenant of grace, with that people, as all other nations in
the world were before Christ's coming, toward whom not only external, but
also (say some) internal hatred was permitted to be exercised, by usury,
oppression, utter extirpation, Deuteronomy. 7, 23, 24. and chapter 25.17, 18.19, Psalm.
139, 21, 22.
legal enemies of the Jews, such as the Cananites were, whom they might
persecute and destroy.

Again, that love is more perfect which makes us more like unto God, and such
is the act of love toward our enemies. In the love of our friends, and such as
are near unto us, Mat. 5.47, What do you more than others? etc,
(...), what excellent thing is there, whereby we surpass the heathen, the
wicked worldling, yea, the very beasts which naturally love those of the same
kind? But says our Savior, Matthew. 5.44, 45. Luke 6.35. Whence note that Gods
children must immitate Gods perfection; pro suo modulo, Matthew. 5.48. And so
consequently they must excel others, Pro. 12.26. Matthew. 5.20. Lastly this
their excellency consists in Charity, 1 Cor. 12.31. and 14.12.
Love your enemies, that you may be like your Father which is in heaven. Who
is like unto thee O Lord, says the Prophet. S. Augustine answers, Qui been
vult inimico suo, He who bears good will to his enemy, may confidently and
yet not proudly say that he is like unto thee O Lord. And therefore David 2 Samuel ^.1.3. Enquires whether there be any of the house of Saul left, not that
he may execute upon the posterity of his enemy any remnant of hostile revenge,
but (says he) that I may show unto him the kindness of God. i.e. that I may
be kind, to him as God is merciful to his foes, causing the Sun of his
favor to shine, and the rain of his beneficence to descend not only upon the
just, but upon the unjust also. And therefore the Exodus 7.2.
Lord says that he has made Moses a God to Pharaoh, because he rendered good
for evil, prayers for threats and oppression: whereas Genesis 45.^.
Joseph is called only a Father to the other Pharaoh who was a friend unto
him, and a Benefactour. But for the maine point, all this notwithstanding the
Jesuitical Doctor following the current of modern Schoolmen, Aquin. 2. a. q.
27. art. 7. Greg. valent d. 3. q 5. p. 3. Caiet in loc. Aq. Lom. in 3. sent.
did. 30. huc potius inclinat. A^t enim quod amor amici est ferventior et ideo
non incongrue putatur melior 1. Cum enim Deus sit mensura totius perfectionis,
ille actus qui nos deo similiores red lit, reddit etiam perfectiores, ac
proinde ipse est perfectior; cum nobilior actus formalis, non nisi a forma
nobiliori oriatur doct. citat. ib. Ad hu^c modum disputant. 2. It Is the natural
kindness of man, to love his friend: but it is the heavenly kindness of God to
love our enemies. At the most virtus coram hominibus est, adversarios tolerare,
sed virtus coram deo est diligere. Ideo Paulus cum dixisset Charitas patiens
est (1 Cor. 13.4.) continue adiunxit, benigna est. Ne fi patientiam dilectio
non sequatur, in deteriorem culpam odij virtus ostensa vertatur. Greg. M. Cur.
past. part. 3. cap. 1. admonit. 10.
is of a contrary opinion, etc. That the love of our friends, that is, such as
have a natural or moral relation unto us, is the more perfect Act. 1. Because
such are the more perfect object, as being nearer united unto God by goodness
(amongst the wicked there is no amity but Psalm. 83.3.4.5.
conspiracy) and to us by good turns, namely by actual conjunction; whereas
our enemies Psalm. 139.21.
(which must be none but Gods foes) are only in possibility to be conjoined
unto either, Inimicos dei perfecto odio odisse (ut odit eos David. Ps. 139.22.)
est quod facti sunt diligere, and quod faciune increpare Gre. Cur. pasto. part.
3. cap. 1. admonitione 23. and vid. Aqui. 2.2. quest. 25. art. 6. and q. 76.
art. 1 who teaches that no personal hatred is lawful, unless of those who by
revelation are known to be the incorrigible enemies of God, and his Church, and
so as well S. Paul in the New Testament, 2 Timothy 4 14. as David in the Old
Testament, Psalm. 139.22. hates and curses such.
and so to be loved of either. Again the hatred of those, whom nature, or
virtue has conjoined to us, is a greater fault, than the hatred of our
enemies; therefore the love of them, is the greater virtue. 2. Lastly, if the
love of our enemies surpass the love of our friends, why does it not also
exceed the love of our selves, which is the fountain of that other love? And
for the reasons of the first opinion, they are more specious than solid, and
therefore perhaps the Doctor balkes them without any decision. For first, by
our Saviors Doctrine, the moral law forbids all private external revenge,
against civil enemies, or legal, and all inward hatred, even of those whom
they were permitted to kill, only what was abstruse in the Law, or obscured by
the Doctor of the Law, was in this case cleared, and expounded by our Savior
in the Gospel. Secondly, the love of our enemies is the imitation of the divine
goodness; and it is in a matter most difficult, but yet since Difficultas non
efficat actum in entita^e prastantiorem cum ipso non sit bonum sed potius malum
morale impedicas, sc. actiones virtutis, licet ex accidente promeveat
adjuvetque.
difficulty infuseth no moral goodness into an act, it is not in a matter most
worthy to be imitated. For doubtless in God according to our understanding
(although in God as he is in himself all things be the chiefest) his love of
himself and his love of his children, is to be preferred before his love of
his enemies, in our choice and method of imitation, instructing us, first here
below to love our selves, then our Quo praestantius obiectum de caeteris
paribus perfectior actio; sed praestantius est obiectum amicus quam inimicus,
ergo. Mend 2. Odium enim amici ideo est peccatum in suo genere gravius quia
private subiectum meliori virtute sen actu. id. ib. 3. E. g. luc. 9.54, 55. For
this cause our Savior seriously rebuked the Disciples (so the word (...)
signifies) for calling for fire from heaven upon the Samaritans, saying, ye
know not of what spirit year, intimating that such furious malice becomes not
the Ministers of the Gospel, but rather the spirit of meekness and
gentleness, which he taught by his own example, Luke 19.42. and cap. 22.51.
and cap. 23.24. the which ^. Paul commends, 2 Cor. 13.10 2 Timothy 2.25 what Elias
did (whose example 2 Kings 1.9. they pretended) was by extraordinary instinct
and not of private revenge, but in zeal to Gods glory. In the New Testiment we
read only of two so destroyed, Act. 5.
friends, then our enemies. Divine love begins at home, and then it walks
near home, but it stays not there. Her line like the Suns, Psalm. 19.3. goes
out through all the earth, and her words (and works also) unto the end of the
world. And as the Sun she shines on bad and good. The good, whether near or
a far of, in blood or Religion, she loves in a subordinate respect unto the
supreme good, for that either spiritual or moral goodness sake which is in
them, for so our Savior Mark 10.21, 22.
loved the young man, which yet departed from him. The wicked and morally evil
men, she can love for the relics of that natural or created good which are
in them, to wit Genesis 1.26, 27.
the Image of God which is not quite obliterated in the bodies, or in the
souls even of wicked men, which are still the same creatures they were, for
essence, and natural properties and characters: yea charity could it find no
good in men, can make some, whilst she supposes and desires God to effect it;
she loves them, as those that may be good by Gods grace, as they be possible
members of Jesus Christ, though now appearing members of Satan. The breadth of
Charity.
See then I beseech you par latitudo Charitatis and mundi, charitas omnia
complectitur, amicum colligit in deum, and inimicum propter deum, unam
Reimpublicam terram facit. Charity is of equal extent with the whole world,
she embraces the universe in the arms of her affection, (imitating our
Saviors stretching out his arms upon the cross to embrace both Jew and
Gentile) she gathers together her friends unto God, and her enemies for Gods
sake. She makes S. Augustine Aug in 1. Epist. Ioh tract. 10. Beatus es^
domine, qui te amat, and amicum in te, etc. i^imicu^ propter te. August.
his blessed man, who loves God, and his friend in God, and his foe for Gods
sake. She (according to that Fathers judgment) makes that exceeding broad
commandment, of whose perfection there is no such end, as of other precepts. I
have seen an end of all perfection: Psalm. 119.96. But thy commandment is
exceeding broad, quia ubi est charitas, ibi non est Angustia, for where for
where there is Charity there is no straitness. S. Paul a man of transcendent
Charity tells his Corinthians, that his 2 Cor. 6.11, 12.
mouth was open toward them, and his heart enlarged. Ye are not (says he)
straightned in us (whose love is abundant to do you good) but ye are
straightened in your own bowels: you want affection to receive, or acknowledge
such good August. ibid.
vis non Angustari? In lato habita, i. e. in Charitate. Wilt not thou then be
straightened on what side soever, either in communicating good where it is due, or
suffering evil which thou have not deserved, Dilatamini and vos, sc. haritate
ib. ^13.
dwell at large, that is, in Charity. Psalm. 101.2
In the midst of this house thou shall be sure to walk with David with a
perfect heart, without Charity no perfection, for it fulfills the law. August.
in Psalm. 100. Lat. Translat.
Arcta omnis malitia est, sola innocentia lata est. Malice and all wickedness
straitens and shackells the soul, only innocence, which is the immediate
fruit of charity is of a diffusive Out of the abundance of the Charity of the
heart, the mouth speaks the words of Charity that tend to edification. And
always the heart is larger than the mouth, that affects more than this can
utter. Sincere Charity speaks more than she talks, yea she cries to God for
others, with Moses, Exodus 14.15. when her tongue is silent. But on the other
side, the tongue may speak many things for necessity, for vain glory, for
advantag sake, and yet all that is said, may be nothing without charity 1 Cor.
13 1. Go first get a charitable heart, then loquere ut te videam, speak that
I may see thy charity.
and enlarging nature. It widens the narrow heart of man, into a receptacle for
him who is incomprehensible, into a pleasant walk, or holy Temple, for him
whom the heaven of heavens cannot contain. For God has promised to those that
keep his statutes (which love fulfills) to walk amongst them, Levit. 26.3.12.
i. e. to dwell in them, and to walk in them as in a Temple, 2 Cor. 6.16. But
froward thoughts separate from God: and into a malicious soul wisdom wilt not
enter, says the Author of the book of Wisdom, Chap. 1.3.4. But to conclude
this point, note, that though Charity reach unto all in the latitude of her
extension, yet she affects not all men in the same degree of intension. But as
heat diffused through a large room from the same fire, is more intense to
those that stand near unto that fire, more remiss to those that are farther
of, but yet it warmes all more or less: so Charity is extended to every one in
the whole circuit of the world, but not equaliter equally: the heat of her
affection is greatest to the nearest; she teaches us as well to love one as
another. For our neighbor is (...), any other besides our selves: but she
binds us not, to love one as well as another, ordinavit in me Charitatem,
says the Spouse, Vul. Trans.
Canticles 1.4.10. He has ordered my charity. Casian col. 6. cap. 14. The
degrees of Charity.
Haec est charitas ordinata, odio habens neminem, quosdam meritoru^ jure plus
diligens. This is ordered charity, which hates none, but loves some more than
others, for their deserts sake. Love must be without dissimulation to all, not
without several degrees to diverse objects. Incomparabiliter plus charitatis
deo debemus quam nobis. Nam Deum propter sc, nos vero, and proximos, propter
deum diligere debemus. August. Lib. 8. de trim, cap. 8.
The extremity or utmost of our love, is due to God: nothing is to be loved
above him, nothing in competition with him, all things in subordination to him.
Ille just and sancte vivit, qui rerum integer aestimator est. Ipse est autem
qui ordinatam dilectionem habet, ne aut diligat quod non est diligendum, aut
non diligat quod est diligendum, aut amplius diligat quod minus est diligendum,
aut aeque diligat, quod vel minus vel amplius est diligendum, aut minus vel
amplius diligat, quod aeque est di^igindum Aug Lib 1. de doct. Christ. cap. 27.
Id. Aug ib. cap. 23. in enumeratione obiectorum quae sunt diligenda ordinem
dilectionis insinuat. 1. quod supra nos 2. quod nos 3. quod iuxta nos 4. quod
infra nos ut not ex eo Lomb. 3. sent. did. 29. Lit. A.
Next to him and under him, the Church challenges the height of love: First, as
she is Catholic, then as she is National, lastly as she is I mean
limited to a particular dioces, or parish wherein we live.
local. This love men owe as Christians. Now as the lives, of men are subject
to the government of one kind or other, in respect not only of religion but
external policy and order, they owe (as I suppose) love, So Lucan says of
Cato, Lib. 2. p. 42. that he was Iustitiae cultor, rigidi servator honesti,
that his opinion was, Non sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo, and therefore
he himself was, In commune bonus urbi pater est, urbique maritus.
first to mankind, to the good of the universe, then to that Et Clcero ait, non
nobis solum nasci mur, etc. neque sane nobis primo nascimur, sed patriae.
state and commonwealth under which they live. Lastly, to that incorporation or
place wherein they dwell. For still ( caeteris paribus, all things being alike)
bonum, quo communius eo melius. Good is so much the more amiable, by how much
it is the more general. This love moves inanimate creatures, to leave their
particular nature, to serve the universal, as the air to descend to avoid
vacuity, which nature abhorres. This love moved Codrus, and the Decij, to
devote themselves to death for their countries sake. Is this a small matter, to
save a body politic by the temporal destruction, or abscision of one of the
members? See the (...) of humane Charity, Exodus 32.31.
in Moses and Romans 9 1.
Paul, offering up their souls (in Hom. 16. upon the Romans.
Saint Chrysostomes judgment) and bodies to eternal death, to procure mercy
and salvation unto Israel, and so more ample glory to God: Coment in Lo.
Calvin supposes those wishes to have proceeded out of rashness and confusion
of mind, as if (says he) they had bin in a ecstacy, and besides themselves,
desiring that which was impossible, who may both return that answer for
themselves, which S. Paul himself gives concerning his boasting adversaries,
to the Corinthians in the second Epistle, 5. Chap. 13, 14. If we be besides
our selves, it is to God (to his glory,) or if we be sober, it is for your
cause (who are the Church of God) for the love of Christ constrains us: The
love of Christ, who so loved the Church that he laid down his life for her,
compells us, to desire (if it may stand with Gods good will) to promote Gods
honor, which is to show plenteous redemption, by his rejecting of us and
receiving of an whole nation into our place of favor. Though I may say of the
matter and effect of this wish, as Vincentias Fill. Mor. (...) To. 2. Tract.
27. 2 Qu. 2.
Fillincius speaks of the alteration of the Lords day to some other. Hoc
practice est impossible, absolute vero possibile. This is a thing in its own
nature possible, abstracted from all circumstances, and reasons in the
particular instance, which hinder the event, that one man should perish in the
room of many. Melius est ut pereat unus quam unitas Bernard. Epi. 102.
Vnum pro multis dabitur caput. But because we suppose in this case, God to
have decreed the contrary to their separation from him, and we know them, being
mere men, to have bin no sitting mediators for the eternal ransom of
others, we determine the case it self to be practically impossible. But did
not Christ himself, conditionally desire of God, Matthew. 26.39.
a thing which was made by his Fathers determinate counsel impossible? So
might Moses and Paul conuin^ally desire, what could not be granted. Opertet
privatis utilitalibus publicas, mortalibus aeternas antefer^e Caius Plin Lib.
7. Epist 18. Vnde Claudianus de suo Imperatore ait Nunquam publica privatis
cesserunt commoda causis, And Lucan. loc. cit. says that Cato's Heroical
disposition, was Naturamque sequi, patriaque impendere vitam. But as Pla^ius
says of one, Hic homo versus facit, and tota sibi fami^a est. So some men
studying only their own ends, are as it were, a whole common wealth unto
themselves; contrary unto Cato, of whom the Poet adds further, Nullosque
Catonis inactus sub^e sit, partemque tulit sibi nata voluptas.
But to follow the steps of Charity, by which she descends, as it were by
Jacobs Ladder, from heaven unto the earth, The degrees of private charity
and from God to man. You have seen her affection to community: Amongst
private objects, she makes every man to himself the first, the next is the
wife, then the parents, which are to be preferred in honor before the other,
not in love, in this respect they are left behind, that she may be cherished,
Ephe. 5.25.
which is flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone: now we must love all others
as our selves, none before our selves. Then follows in the order of nature,
our Children and Family, which are our selves divided and multiplied, our very
domestique state, and petty Common wealth: (...) not to govern, and nourish,
argues more notorious defect of Charity, then is usually found amongst 1 Timothy
5.8.
Infidells: Next to our domestique family, De modo beno vivendi sermon. 5. cit.
A Lombard. 3. sc^ t^d. 29. l^s. apud quem ^ide plura de ordine diligendi.
S. Bernard puts the household of faith, quia sanctior est cordium copula, quam
corporum. Because spiritual kindred is nearer than natural. But immediately
after succeed those, whom cansanguinity, or near alliance add unto us: Then
come those whom morality unites to our affections; our loving friends, those
that dwell near unto us, our ordinary acquaintance, our country men,
strangers, whom common humanity respects. In the last rank, to our Christian
charity are commended, even our enemies; Matthew. 5.44.
whom not only moral Philosophers, but the very Scribes and Pharisees
permitted men to hate, Ib. 43. and 47.
and prosecute with revenge. This is the order (in my opinion submitted to
better judgments) which we must follow in the distribution of our charity,
with the premised caution caeteris paribus, and in single relations. Else
plurality or increase of the fore mentioned respects alters this rule. e.g. we
must prefer one of our kindred natural and spiritual both before one of the
household of faith, which is not of our Tribe: again we may prefer godly
strangers, before wicked kinsmen, or a loving kinsman before a rebellious
incorrigible son. So S. Bernard, Loc. cit.
plus debemus diligere extraneos, qui nobis conjuncti sunt vinculo charitatis
Christi, quam propinquos qui deum non diligunt. Hinc. Lomb. 3. s. d. 29. lit.
F. observat. quod jubemur diligere deum ex tota virtute. i. e. maxim: proximum
solum sicut nos ipsos, non sicut deum: Inimicos simpliciter, sine addito. Quia
si eos diligamus, et si minus quam alios proximos, sufficit, and S. Ambros.
(cit. a Lomb 3. s. d. 29. Lit. c.) super illud Cant ordinavit in me charitatem
ait. 1. deus diligendus 2. parents, inde filij, post domestici: qui si boni
fuerint malis filijs praeponendi sunt.
But all other things being alike, this is, (...), the naturalnesse and
sincerity of love, as the Apostle phraseth it, 2 Cor. 8.8. For so S. Paul's
doctrine runs, Let them learn, first to show kindness or pity, at home 1 Timothy 5.4.
sc. to themselves, and their families. Then, as we have opportunity let us
do good unto all men, especially to them of the household of faith, Galath.
6.10. do good to all, note here, that all mankind is the adaequate object of
Charity to our neighbors. For with S. Paul all men are our neighbors. But the
especial object of this Charity, is the household of faith, that is, not any
particular sect, which challenge the monopoly of the profession of faith, but
Domesticos sidei, i. e. Christianos Aug. comment. in Loc.
all Christians in general, which are indeed, as well as title: For
otherwise, Salvian de Gub. dei l. 2.
Reatus impij, pium nomen, this name is their guilt, not their privilege. And
so consequently, the more faithful and holy Christians men are, the more
degrees of Love are due unto them. For we love our neighbor because he bears
the Image and superscription of the King of heaven. Therefore we must chiefly
love those, who chiefly participate of that Image, such are those which
endeavor Levit. 11.44, 45. 1 Pet. 1.15.16.
to be holy as God is holy. These are of the household of faith, here of God,
Ephesians. 2.19. that is, by faith gathered into the unity of the Church which is
the house of God. Now it is but equity that we should prefer Gods domestiques
before Forrayners and strangers, as they are Ephesians. 2. ib. sci. 19.
called before Aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, v. 12. Estius in loc.
Galat. 6.10.
Praecipitur ordo charitatis, secundum quem (caeteris paribus) fideles
infidelibus sunt praeferendi, Additantem, etc. Otherwise an Infidel, or wicked
man, in extreme necessity as to be relieved by our Charity, before one of the
household of faith, in ordinary want.
This is S. Paul's order in Charity (in cases alike) to prefer the faithful,
especially the Ministers, which are the Instruments to beget faith, by the word
(toward whom he excites the Galatians Charity, v. 6.) before those that are
not of Christian faith or life. To all S. Peter also allows some degrees of
charity, which he calls love to the faithful; a great measure of affection, 2
Pat. 1.7.
which he calls brotherly kindness: and our Savior so far prefers this
spiritual brotherhood or kindness before the natural, that he seems not to
acknowledge this with the other, Matthew. 12.49.
least it should but seem to stand in competition with it: No parity of love
in imparity of objects.
but even in this household of faith, also Christ's own example confutes a parity
in Love; of which I may say (as I think of the Presbyterian parity what Epist. 5.
lib 9. Discrimina ordinum, dignitatumque custodias, quae si permista sint,
nihil est, etc.
Pliny in a case not unlik, once wrote. Nihil est hac aequalitate in aequalius.
Nothing is more unequal than such equality: Affection may put difference, for
ought I know to the contrary, without any injustice: and diversity of merit,
does give just cause of diversity of degrees in Charity. Christ himself had
one Disciple beloved Ioh. 13.23. c. 18.15. c. 20.22. c. 21.20.
(...), and that was S. John who names not himself, Nomen suum celavit
Johannes, ne inanis gloriae causa diligi se a Christo dicere videretur. Cyril.
Alex. in Ioh. l. 9. cap. 15. S. Chrysostom. also observes upon Ioh. 18.15. and 20.3.
that the Evangelist, not only conceales his name in both places, but also puts
Peter's name before the periphrasis of himself, because he relates in each
place the matter of his own praise, in following of our Savior with Peter to
the judgment Hell, when all others had forsaken him, and in seeking his Master
in the grave, and not finding him, there the Text says, he believed, v. 8. He
first had faith in the resurrection of Christ, even before Peter himself. Now
Solomon would not have a man commend himself, Prove. 27.2. And Pliny says
excellently Lib. 8. Epist. 8. Quod magnifi^um referente alio fuisset, ipso qui
gesserat recensente vanescit. This serves well for our instruction against
vain glory, yet sometimes for the illustration of Gods glory, the ^en men of
the Holy Ghost (as Moses, Paul, etc.) have commended themselves without
arrogance.
least he should seem out of vain glory to boast of his Masters affection to
him, or of his affection to his Master. Much less can there be any equality
in our Love to all men distributively taken. We Love our selves, and every
part of our selves; but we Love not every part, superior and inferior, noble
and servile alike, but 1 Cor, 12.25.
our more abundant honor, shows our more abundant love to one before the
other. And we must love our neighbors only as our selves, not otherwise, not
more: yea as much as our selves. This sicut as, is a note of similitude, not of
equality. It Is like as, as truly, as sincerely; not altogether as, i. e. in the
same ardency of affection. Similitude arises from quality, not from quantity;
the same disposition of mind is required, not the same measure of love: our
love to our neighbor, must be copied out of our Love to our selves, as its
original; but it must be written in a smaller print, though it contain the
same matter, which consists in these following rules! Our love to our selves,
is true and unfaigned, for it is natural, and all hypocrisy is artificial; let
love to our neighbor also be without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. Go not in with
dissemblers, Psalm. 26.4.
as it were to visit thy neighbor in Love, saying with Ioab to Amasa, art thou
in health my brother, Ita qua tegitur nocet. Professa perdunt odia vindictae
locum Sen. in Traged. Medeae. Hence was learned that hellish policy of the
Italian in Guiccardine, who devised how to kill his enemies body and soul with
one stabbe.
to betray him with thy malicious heart, according to that of Solomon, Prove.
26.24. Imitate not the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive, Ephe. 4.14. But (...) speaking, or following the
truth, Ioh. 3.18.
or being sincere in Love; let us grow up in all things (which follow true
Charity) into him, which is the head even Christ. 2. We love our selves with
inflamed and vehement affections. Let us also above all things, have fervent
Charity amongst our selves, 1 Pet. 4.8. Cold Charity is as great a solaecisme
in morality, as cold fire in nature. 3. Our Love to our selves is a diligent
and careful Love, which causes every man to nourish and cherish his own
flesh, Ephe. 5.29. thinking it not enough to abstain from doing any injury or
violence unto it. And when any inevitable mischief falls out, he labors for
remedy with tears of sorrow, and if he obtain it he rejoices. Go then and
do likewise to thy neighbor, even as thou desire thy neighbor should do
unto thee, Matthew. 7.12. Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of
another, Love as brethren, be pitiful, be courteous, 1 Pet. 3.8. Consider
one another to provok unto Heb. 10.24.
love (mutual) and to good works, (the effect of true Charity) and her
strongest testimony. Greg. M. in Ezech. lib. 2 Hom. 17.
Amorem nostrum erga proximum, plus bona operatio loquitur quam lingua, our
Charity is better understood by the language of our hands than tongues. If she
be speechless in deeds, we may toll the bell for her; she is dying, and
faith is departing with her; for faith without works is dead, Iam. 2.26. And
faith works by love, Gal. 5.6. such works you may find in the next Chapter,
verse. 2. they are of mutual compassion and assistance, so love fulfills the
royal Law, the Law of Christ. See a Catalogue of Charities good works, 1 Cor.
13. It Is the least virtue she has to think no hurt, 1 Cor. 13.5. and to work
no ill, Romans 13.10. or it is a figurative commendation, intimating that she
endeavors in all things to procure her neighbors welfare, and if any
unexcepted ill be happened unto him, her heart wishes, her tongue prays, her
hand labors for help; for the want whereof she can mourn in secret, for the
good succes, with her in the Luke 15.9.
Gospel, she calls her neighbors together, and rejoices without the bounds
of a private breast. 4. Our Love to our selves is free, not mercenary, it is
only for our own sakes, not for any collateral respect whatsoever. So love
thy neighbor for his own sake, for his benefit, not thine: Such sordid
affection is but like bird-lime, cleaving to thy neighbor, to ensnare him to
thy own will, or like Ivy which by twyning about the Tree draws out the
vital moisture. This is to love thy self in thy neighbor, not to love thy
neighbor as thy self. This is the usual Charity of the world, but it is enmity
to God. 5. Our Love to our selves, which is the pattern of our love to our
neighbor, is a pure, natural, lawful love, not that Talis sui dilectio
melius odium vocatur August. de doct. Christ. l. 1. cap. 22.23. v. Lomb. 3. ^.
d. 28 lit. A.
self-love issuing from original corruption, which is a vicious affection,
whereby a man loves in himself, either that which is evil, or that which is
good in an arrogant manner, which is indeed selfe-hatred. Vulg ^tans.
For he that sins hates his own soul, Psalm. 10.5. So we must love our
neighbors, not with a corrupt inclination, because he is to thee as Levi was
to Simeon, a brother in iniquity, with whom thou have enjoyed, and do still
follow pleasures, or profits of sin. How can this be good will, which works
evil to our neighbor? but love him recta me^^e, with a right affection, for
some goodness that is already in him, or which thou may be a means, by
Gods help to work in him. 6. Self-love is very tender of our credits, a very
favorable judge of our own errors or faults. Solet facunda esse laetitia,
and Angustias clausi pectoris aspernata gestire Aur. Symmach lib. 1. Epist. 13.
Cedant gaudia divisa coniunctis. Latius gaudet, qui and alterius bonis pascitur
Id. lib. 3. Epist. 24. Gaudia quibus pauci fruuntur augusta sunt Id lib. 9.
Spist. 85.
If we truly love our neighbor as our selves, we will not be prodigal of
his good Prove. 22.1.
name, which is precious to him, nor The courtesies that proceed from this
love are viscata et hamata beneficia, not favors but snares, not gifts, but
baits, whereby a little is laid out, to make a gain of it, as men power down
some water to pumpe up more. De his vide Martialem lib. 4. Ep 56. lib 5. Ep 18.
lib. 6. Ep. 63. lib 7. Ep. 85. Plin. lib 9. Ep. 30.
rig^decensurers of his actions, nor Improbum est in alieno libro ingeniosum
esse. Mart. in praefat lib. 1. Engram. Nemo (ait ^lid:) Epigrammata mea
scribat. Et nemo dicta mea loquatur, ne male loquendo sua facias. Non male quod
recitas incipit esse tuum. ut Id. Hidentiao ait.
perverse interpreters of his words. Tacit. lib. 1. Hist.
Facilius de odio creditur. Hatred does willingly not know the best, and easily
believes the worst, quia irati ita volunt. Iam. 3.17.
The wisdom that is from above (to regulate our Charity) is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits (...),
that is, without partiallity, sc. to our selves, or without wrangling, sc.
about others errors, or whatsoever affairs: or lastly without judging, as it is
in the Geneva Bible: And in the margent of our own Bible.
And so consequently without hypocrisy. So runs the note there (which they I
am afraid, have slipped over, who observe others too much) without examining of
things with extreme rigor, as hypocrites, who only justify themselves, and
condemn all others, when in censuring and condemning others, they are li^e the
ancient Moralists, eloquent against their own vices, and Pompeius occultior non
melior. sc. Mario Syl. etc. Tacit. Hist. lib. 1 page 473.
punish those faults more severely, which themselves follow somewhat more
closely, nothing less eagerly, as if their anger were rather out of envy then
zeal, C Plin. lib. 8. Epist. 20.
Vir bonus vero ita alijs ignoscit, tanquam ipse quotidie peccet, ita ipse a
peccatis abstinet, tanquam nemini ignoscat, A good man is so ready to pardon
others faults, as if he were an habitual sinner: He so abstaines from sin,
as if he would spare no offender whatsoever, but would be like Lib. Ancab. page
14.
Rufus in Tacitus, co immitior, quia toleraverat, sci. disciplinam virtutis. i.
e. as strict to others as to himself. 7. Lastly our love to our selves is
constant and perpetual, as being natural. For Natura non dilassatur opere.
Nature herself is not weary with action, only the instruments she uses fail
at length. But Love it self is an inward affection, to show the external
effects whereof only the body is required. No marvel then, that Love never
fails, 1 Cor. 13. ult.
even then when it cannot appear without, sed Greg. in Ezech. lib. 2. Hom. 17.
deo occulta amoris nostri suff^ciunt Greg. But our hidden Love is manifest to
the searcher of the hearts, cum tantum non possumus, quantum volumus operari
Ib. Augustus cum esset luxuriae serviens, erat tamen eiusdem vitij severissimus
ultor Aurelius vict. in vita Augusti. Acerrimus fidei exactor est perfidus,
mendacia persequitur periurus, aliena vitia in oculis habemus, nostra in tergo.
Senec. de ira lib. 2. cap. 28. Faciet nos moderatiores respectus nostri si
consuluerimus and nos, nanquid sic peccavimus. Id. ibid Aut ann^n postea sort
peccaturi simus humana fragilitate? sic Apostolus moret Galat. 6, 7 and vide
Tit 3.2, 3.
Let our love to our neighbor also be constant and never degenerate into
hatred. No man ever yet hated his own flesh, Ephesians. 5.29. Cassiodorus tract. de
amec^tia.
Sicut ignis, non potest non ardere, sic Charitas non potest non amarc. As fire
never ceases to burn, so Charity never ceases to Love: Augustinus ad Iulianum
comitem.
Charitas quae deseri potest nunquam vera fuit. sc. sed ficta, seu fictilis.
Charity which can cease, was never true, Sc. veritate permanentiae, si forte
vera fuit veritate essentiae,
but counterfeit, or brittle. As a glass which shines and makes a fair show
for a while, sed dum sp endet, frangitur, but is bone broken, when it glisters
most.
Abide in my Love says Christ, Ioh. 15.9. And as it is there in the vulgar
Latin, Manete in Charitate, Abide in Charity, let brotherly love continue:
Gal. 6.9.
And let us not be weary in well doing (which is the fruit of Charity) for in
due season we shall reap if we faint not. What it is to fulfill the Law and
how Love fulfills the Law.
You see what it is to love our neighbors as our selves. Now to fulfill the
Law, that is, to perform all the precepts of the Law, in that manner which,
the Law requires. As he is said to fulfill a man's will, who executes all the
contents thereof. But ^her's the difference, man's will may be performed to the
utmost by man, but Gods Law is fulfilled only quoad (...) i. e. according to
his gracious acceptance of imperfect obedience, if sincere: not quoad (...) in
the rigor of justice, so that men may live without all sin (as the
Pelagianor^ dogma suit (...) ut docet Hier. in dial cont. Pel. Script.
Pelagians conceited) and come to the height, or ^on ultra of Charity, as
afterward Haeresis fuit Begardorum et Beguinarum, in concilio Viennensi Anno
Dom. 1311. (cum novem alijs little nefarijs dogmatibus) damnata, posse homines
in hac vita, ad tantum perfectionem Charitatis pervenire, ut reddantur penitus
inpeccabiles, and amplius ((...) Anto. hist. part. 2. Tit. 2. cap. 3. 2) In
gratia Charitatis prosicere non valiant.
others imagined. There is a double perfection; one of parts, which we call
integrity, another of degrees, which we call absolute perfection. The Law of
the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.17. sc. not only essentially, but in all
respects. And so is love absolutely perfect in it self, and relatively to us,
as it points out to us the way of perfection, the Law of God. But we in this
life are not perfect in love, but only in perfection of parts: in degrees, our
love must still increase and abound, Phil 1.9. Ephesians. 4.15. till we all come
into a perfect man, ib. v. 13. which is, when this mortallity has put on
immortality, then we shall fulfill the Law of Love (as the Saints now do)
without any defect at all, when we shall know as we are known. Ex part
diligimus quia ex part cognoscimus Lomb. 3. sent. d. 27. l. F.
Here we know but in part, and therefore can love but in part. With David Psalm.
119.6.
we may and must have respect to all Gods Commandments but with him, in the
last verse of that Psalm, we have our faylings: For Psalm. 19.12. Iam. 3.11.
who can understand his errors! Non dicimus hominem posse omnis peccati
expertem esse: non timemus tamen asserere, posse hominem per gratiam legem
implere, e^ ea impletione vitam aeternam promereri Bellarm.
Bellarmine himself dares not aver, that any man can live without all manner
of sin, but only without mortal sin; yet he fears not to maintain, (out
of this Text and the like) that a man assisted by the grace of God ( Nondum
enim inter doctos constat (iudice Vossio lib. 6. hist. Pelag.) an Pelagius
agnoverit aliqua^ gratiam internam, qua excitemur and adiuvemur ad opera
pietatis, utcunque, in hoc differunt quod generalem gratiam agnoscant Papistae,
quam nec docuit, nec novit unquam Pelagius.
wherein they seem to differ from the Pelagians) may fulfill the Law of God:
So that by such fulfilling of the Law, they may merit eternal life. But since
that sin indefinitely taken, is the transgression of the Law, 1 Ioh. 3.4.
and they that transgress the Law, cannot fulfill it exactly, secundum totum
perfectionale, but integrale, according to intensive, or graduall, but only
extensive, and integrall perfection; Since, if love fulfill the Law by grace,
Romans 11.6.
there can be no reward of merit: yea, since we can perform no love, but only
what we owe (as our Apostle speaks) Romans 13.8.
we cannot hire it out for the interest of salvation. Alas we have not
wherewithal to pay our debts, we shall still owe love when we have paid
abundance of love, and do we think with the Instar viduae 2. King ^^ 4. erat
Synagoga (Iudaica) sine sponso Christo, cui libellum repudij dederat prior
maritus Isa. 50.1. paupererat, quia lex gratiam confer non valebat (ideo eius
rudimenta infirma vocat Paulus and egena Galat. 4.9.) nec poterat Adami debitum
persolvere, Nec sibi suaque animae providere. Habebat autem vasa commodata,
quia legem usque ad Christum common latam habebat, venit autem Christus, and ex
lechytho corporis sui oleum sanguinis effudit, and adimple vit vasa vacua sc.
legem Matthew 5.17. Ex eo o^eo and satisfacere pro originali and actuali peccato
possumus, and vivere de reliquo deo grati and accepti. Sebast. Gomesius in
Psalm. 50.16. We may indeed live acceptable unto God, and pray with David in
faith Psalm 19. verse the last. But we cannot live a meritorious life to our
God.
Widow, 2 Kings 4. by a miracle of grace, to obtain such a plenty, that we
shall have enough to pay, what dues we owe to God and man, and then to live
upon the rest and purchase also with it? Let us rather take our Saviors
advice, Luke 17.10. when ye shall have done all those things that are
commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do; we are but servants, therefore our obedience is our duty. We
are unprofitable servants: our obedience is but of small value in it self, and
to our master no way beneficial, Psalm. 16.2. Therefore our obedience is
neither Quare ergo datur praeceptum si impleri nequit? Resp. Quia non recte
curritur, si quo currendum est, nesciatur, Lomb. 3. s. d. 27. lit. G.
perfect nor meritorious, our Omnis nostra perfectio est imperfecta Bernard.
Charitas in quibusdam est perfecta, in quibusdam imperfecta, perfectissima vero
in hac vita haberi non potest ut Aug. ad Hieron. loquitur.
perfection is actually imperfect, complete only in desire and preparation of
mind, and in sincere endeavor, by which we labor to be Matthew. 5.48.
perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect. The best are but like the Image of
Daniel, Dan. 2.32, 33.
their feet are of clay, made of frail earth, which causes them often to
walk on weakly, sometimes to fall dangerously, although their heads be of
gold, i. e. though their first intentions and resolutions, be pure and
sincere, toward all the ways of God; which yet God calls and in favor
accounts the Ezekiel. 36.27.
fulfilling of the Law. But to conclude this point, our Apostle means that
love fulfills the Law, only thus, according to the sincere desirs of the
heart; aut quoad praeparationem animi; or else according to perfection of
parts, and uprightness of mind; and that in sensu diviso, not conjuncto as we
have several occasions of doing good, not all at once, as if every act of Love
were the sum of the Law. As it is evident by his enumeration of parts, namely
of some of the particular Commandments: Romans 13.9.
yet out of the order after which Moses set them down Saint Paul there quite
omits the first Commandment, and puts the seventh before the sixth, which
perhaps may afford matter for some idle Critic to work upon, but for us it is
enough to know that our Apostles scope was not to rep^are the Commandments,
but only to give the abridgement of them.
(perhaps to intimate that they are all alike to love, which knows no first
nor last, amongst them) with a form concerning the parts not named, not
dubitative, but inclusive, and if there be any other Commandment; signifying
that love is as Militum non est interpretari iussa sed exequi Tac. N^is
obsequij gloria sufficit. Id.
ready to obey, as God to command, leaving all authority to God, sibi obsequij
gloriam relinquens, leaving only to it self the praise of obedience. Lastly,
this conclusive sentence is also exclusive (love so fulfills the Law, Without
love no fulfilling of the Law.
that without love the Law cannot be fulfilled) for he that offends in one,
that is, in this one precept of Charity, offends in all, Iam. 2.10. quia violat
vinculu^ Charitatis, as breaking the band of the whole Law, says S. Aug. lib.
de vera and falsa penitentia cap. 14. (si forte is liber sit Augustini.) For
the conclusion it self, though the rigor of Logic suffer me not to prove
it, yet I shall produce one or two parallel places of Scripture for the
illustration thereof, and a sentence or two of the Fathers agreeable thereunto.
The first and chiefest, Matthew. 22.40.
testimony is from the best expounder and fulfiller of the Law that ever was,
Christ Jesus, who informs us that on these two Commandments ( sc. of the love
of God, and our neighbor) hangs all the Law and the Prophets. Galat. 3.14.
Then let S. Paul here witness to himself (and no doubt but his witness shall be
true. All the Law (says he) is fulfilled in one word that verbum abbreviatum
in S. Hieroms opinion) thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, which
precept Moses gives, Levit. 19.18. This love explicitly fulfills the second
Table, implicitly also the first. For thou can not love thy neighbor as thy
self, unless thou love thy self first. Thou can not love thy self unless
thou love him that is thy summum bonum thy chiefest good, and intimius tibi
quam tu tibi ipsi (as Plato says of him) more intimate with thee than thou art
with thine own soul, in whom thou live, and moovest, and have thy being.
The love of God then absolutely fulfills the whole Law, Ioh. 14.15.21.23. 1
Epi. Ioh. 3.17.
and is often put for the whole service of God: and the love of our neighbor
fulfills half the Law, with reference to the love of God, owe nothing to any
man but love, sc. which pays all duties: but Saint Paul here, as also Gal. 5.
(with our Savior Mat. 7.12.) names only the duties of the second Table, Cum
duo praecepta sint amor Dei, and proximi pro utroque saepe u^^m ponitur, Lom.
3. s d. 27. lit. h.
because these are the most palpable and manifest fruits of love, appearing to
the example of men and glory of God; whereas in the seeming zealous observation
of the first Table, in hearing and preaching of the Word and the like duties,
men sometimes deceive not only others Charity, but their own souls also, by
the art of seeming. Again for that in case of urgent necessity, when the
actual performance of both kinds of duties to God and man (which are always
best united) cannot be done together, the first table yields to the second.
God will then have mercy and not sacrifice, And Chap. 12.7. and out of Hos. 6.6.
Matthew. 9.13. And hence we may collect also, why love is magnified, 1 Cor. 13.
verse the last, even above faith that Mat. 13.46.
precious Jewel of the Gospel, for the purchase whereof a man ought to sell
all that he has, as of himself. So that even in the Gospel, the love of God
is called the greatest Commandment and the first, and the^ love of our
neighbor is accounted, the second like unto it Matthew. 22.38, 39. 1 Because
faith in its own nature abstracted from the fruits and effects thereof, has
reference only to God, and so pertaines to the first Table, but love has
relation both to God and man. 2 Because faith in that abstractive considerat^on
lies hidden in the heart, and so is known only to God: but love is like fire
in the bosom, which will break out, and cannot be concealed from man. 3
Lastly, for that love in its own nature is a more noble and heroical virtue
than faith, and of infinitely longer duration, fulfilling the Law of God unto
the end, and 1 Cor. 13.12.
being without all end, shining Charitas in patria serventior est quam in via.
Aeternum enim ardentius diligitur, adeptum, quam desideratum, u^ docet Sanctus
Aug. lib. 1. doct. Christ. cap. 38. vid. etc. 39. Est Ciui^tas in hac vita,
in^ipiens, profi^iens, perfecta (sc. suo modo) perfectissma vero est in coelo
Vt asserit. Lomb l. 3. sent. in s^^e did. 29.
most bright in heaven as the Sun without a Cloud: and whilst that faith
continues with it it is as it were Iam 2.26.
(...) i. e. if not the life, yet the breath of it. For faith without works is
dead, and faith works by love. Only in a relative consideration, as faith is
the instrument of our justification, and so the chief means of our salvation,
faith is of more excellency than love, which is only an evidence and testimony
of faith.

For the Fathers, if you please to recollect in your minds what I have already
noted out of S. Hierome, and S. Augustine, I shall have no need to be tedious
in heaping up new testimonies, only hear S. Hierome again describing the
virtue of divine love, putting forth the utmost of its ability in the service
of God, not only doing every thing that he commands, but not daring to do
any thing which he does not require. Hier. Epist. ad Caelant.
Grandem vim obtinet vera dilectio, and totam sibi amantis vendicat voluntatem.
Nihil est imperiosius charitate. Si vere Christum diligimus, nihil magis velle,
nihil omnino debemus agere, quam quod illum velle cognoscimus. And Saint
Gregory Hom. 27. super Evang.
says, omne mandatum de sola dilectione est and omnia vnum praeceptum sunt,
quia quicquid praecipitur, in sola Charitate solidatur, All the precepts are
contained in one: for Charity is the foundation of them all. Charitas est
multiplex lex. dei, Vulgar.
Job. 11.6. Id. Greg. More 10 cap. 4. vid and ib. c 6 7.8. Et si placet. vid
Aug. l. 1. de doct. Chris. c. 35. vbi docet quod Amor dei est summa Scripturae.
quae a duobus praeceptis incipit, and mentem ad innumera pietatis opera (de
queis Apostolus, 1 Cor. 13.) multiformiter accendit; Charity is the manifold
Law of God, which begins from two precepts, to wit, the Love of God, and the
Love of man) and diversely excites the mind to immumerable works of
godliness, which the Apostle sums up (1 Cor. 13.) in sundry particulars. The
general ways according to which love fulfills the Law, are three, of which in
the next place.

Love fulfills the Law three ways, as Vossius Ger. Voss. hist. Pelag. l. 3.
pa^. 3. c. 3. these. 3 page 360.
excellently distinguishes, and out of him, word for word almost our Weemse?
Weemse of the 3 Laws 1. tom page 45.
and I shall inform you out of both, adding diverse illustrations and proofs
for your farther instruction. The terms of the distinctions are 1. Effective,
i. e. effectively. 2. Reductive, i. e. reductively. 3. Formaliter, i. e.
formally, that is, briefly as the principal, as the end, as the form of every
lawful operation.

First, Love fulfills the Moses) Thou shall love the Lord thy God: Then it
follows, and keep his charge and his statutes, etc. Deuteronomy. 11.1. And ye that
love the Lord (says David) hate evil, Psalm. 97.10. For himself he resolves
thus, I will delight my self in thy Commandments which I have loved, Psalm.
119.47. In the next verse he adds, Vid. ib. v. 167
my hands also will I lift up unto thy Commandments which I have loved: See
loves virtue, issuing from the heart to the hand, from affection to operation.
And therefore perhaps the Law is said to have gone forth out of Gods hands,
Deuteronomy. 33.2. Coment. in loc.
that it might come into our hands. Oleaster supposes the precepts of God to
be called the works of God, Esa. 5.12.
quia ideo praecipiuntur, ut eaoperemur: Because they are therefore commanded,
that we may not only intentionally and verbally but actually fulfill them,
which is done by love. Quodlibet agens propter amorem agit, quodcunque agit
Aquin. Aquin. 1. 2. qu. 28. art. 6.
Every agent works for some good, and so consequently the love of that good
causes it ^^^m to work. The worldlings castaway carnal love upon seeming
good. Godly men place spiritual love, upon spiritual good: The love of Christ
constrains us says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.14. Amor meus, pondus meum, illo feror
quocunque feror, says S. Augustine, Aug. Confess. lib. 3.
my love is the weight which poyses me in the ways of God, so that I be not
carried away as it were with the wind of every Novell doctrine, or with every
worldly vanity. Common reason informs us in this, that men do not obey, or
serve those whom they hate, I mean, that their minds are not willing servants
to such though their bodies perhaps may be their enforced slaves. Serve ye
one another by love says our Apostle, Galat. 5.13. But Non exterquebis amari,
Love is not extorted by violence, but invited first by love it self. Love is
the Whetstone of love: So God himself invites our love to him, by commending
his love first to us, by his 1 Ioh. 4.9, 10.
Son, Romans 5.8. that our faith in the Son Galat. 5.6.
may work by love, toward God again. Charitas radix est, ex qua omnes
pullulant virtutes August. lib de gratia Christi cap. 18. vid. and cap. 20. ib.
Hence the whole office of Christianity also is comprised in this one word,
Love, Ephesians. 6. v. ult. So love fulfills not only the moral Law, but with all
the Law of faith, as the Apostle phraseth it, Romans 3.27. So that sine Amore,
fides esse potest, prodesse non potest says S. Augustine, Aug de Trin. lib.
25. cap. 18. Similiter loquitur lib. 5. de Bapt. cap. 8. and ib. lib. 15. cap.
29.
without love faith may be, but it cannot profit. But by love faith works,
Charitas, Matter est omnium custosque virtutum Greg. Curio past. part 3. cap.
10. admonit. 10.
and keeps all manner of Christian virtues, which follow Love, as the lesser
wheels are moved by the greater. Hence it is that S. Paul calls the piety of
the Thessalonians, the work of Faith, and the labor of love, 1 These. 1.3. And
our Savior, Matthew. 22.40. says, that the whole Law, hangs upon the two
Commandments of Love, intimating perhaps, that love is as it were the hinges
of the Law, upon which it is turned too and fro, to embrace good, and avoid
evil. Christ teaches us also, that there is no true Love without keeping Gods
Commandments, Ioh. 14.15.21.23. and no true keeping of the Commandments
without love, verse the 24. ib. The beloved Disciple repeates the same
doctrine, 1 Ioh. 5.3. and Chapter 3.17. 2 Ioh. 3.6. verses.

every lawful operation is reduced to Love, as to its end, for which it was
performed; and in this sense it is an external cause, and moves morally, as
comprehended sub notione boni, as good: whereas, as an efficient cause, it
moves phisically, as it is a natural quality and virtue. That love is the end
of the Law, 1 Timothy 1.5.
S. Paul teaches us, The end of the Commandment is Charity, etc. i. e. the end
why God gave his Law to us, is, that we should love him, and our neighbor. So
love unites all the precepts into one Commandment, in S. Paul's Doctrine. Finis
praecepti, dilectio gemina, Dei and proximi, praecurrat dilectio dei, caetera
in illum confluant, ut dilectio tui, and proximi Aug. Aug. de doct. Christ. l.
1. cap. 26.
The end of the precept is a double love, of God, and of our neighbor: Let the
love of God have the praecedency, and all other love follow after, as of our
Qui se propter se diligit, non se vesert ad deum, sed ad seipsum conversus, non
ad incommutabile aliquid (cui toto affectu inharendum) convertitur Aug. de
doct. Christ. l. 1. cap. 22.
selves and others: we ought to love God for his own sake, our neighbor, and
all Gods creatures, for Gods sake; Amor fruendi quibuscunque creaturis, sine
amore creatoris non est a D^o: per amorem creatoris, been quisque utitur etiam
creaturis Aug. lib. 4. cont. Julian. cap. 3. Si teipsum propter teipsum, non
debes diligere, non succenseat alius homo, si etiam ipsum propter deum diligis
Aug. loc. cit. de doct. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 22.
and to perform our several duties to God and man, not of constraint, or for
filthy lucre, but only for loves sake. Love is like the Indian Fig Tree, of
which Scaliger writes Exerci. 166.
that she having shoot up her branches a convenient height, reflects them
down again, to take new rooting in the earth, and so makes a kind of
natural arbor. Gods love is the first seed which causes our love to take
root, and to fructify: (For Charity grows not like the fruit of the earth in
the golden age, without any seed sown, I mean without the seed of Gods
grace sown in the heart, as the Pelagians Conterraneus noster, ^en: Beda in
libro quem scripsit contra Iulianum Episcopum Eclane^sem (qui hodieque
praefationis loco, commentarijs eius super Cantica praefigitur) testatur
Pelagianos existimasse charitatem esse primogenitum bonum, and prorsus nativam
qualitatem, quamque gratia nunquam gignit, sed quandoque nutrit, and auget.
Charitas (secundum eos) velut flax est, quae sua sponte ardet, sed spiritu,
quasi vento agitata, vehementius inflammatur. Sed absolute secundum Apostolum.
Fructus spiritus Charitas Gal. 5.22.
imagined. Then Charity by the assistance of Gods grace, shootes up her
branches a good height, even to God himself in the highest heavens, and from
him she reflects them down again unto the ground, (to wit) to the men of the
earth, and takes new rooting there. So Greg. Mag. lib. 7. Mora. cap. 10. Per
amorem Dei amor proximi gignitur: Per amore^ proximi, amor Dei g^g^itur. Nam
qui amare Deum negligit, profecto diligere proximum nescit. It Is the Apostles
phrase, to show Loves firmness, and fruitfulness, Ephesians. 3.17. (...), ye
being rooted and grounded in Charity. This fruitful root strengthens the
whole body of Religion, and sends forth the manifold branches of piety, bearing
constantly the fruits of good works, and not only the fair leaves of good
words. Our Savior you know cursed the Fig Tree, which made a fair show at a
distance, and yielded no fruit, when he came near unto it, although the time
of fruit were not come. To teach us to be always fruitful in the good deeds
of Charity, because God allows no season of spiritual barrenness, no not in
the winter of old age, Psalm. 92.14.

Thirdly, Charity fulfills the Law formally, quia finis in moralibus, habet
rationem formae, i. e. because in morallity, the end has the Nature of a form
also. Charity is as it were the stamp, in the which every lawful action is to
be coined, and without which how resplendent soever, it is but counterfeit.
(...), says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 16.14. Let all your things be done, in, or
with Charity. All things done without Charity are as it were nothing, 1 Cor.
13.2. Hence Charity is called, (...), i. e. the band of perfection, Coloss.
3.14. because it unites and couples all good duties together, which faith
works by love, and so may be called in this respect sides formata: A faith
that has her right form; but faith not working by love is a dead faith, and
so sides informis, a formeles faith, as some of our Divines do justly
acknowledge. See Bishop Downham in his book of the Covenant of Grace, page
229, 230. who will not yield to Bellarmine that love is the inward constitutive
form, and soul as it were of faith, yet denies not that it is the moral or
consequtive form thereof. Then know that although you perform the
Commandments of God materially, or according to the substance, as Iehu
fulfilled the will of God, in destroying the house of Ahab: yet if you do them
not formally in Charity: i. e. principally in love to God, secondarily to your
neighbor, especially to the Church of God, you may pull on your heads
vengeance, as Iehu did ( Hos. 1.4.) in stead of a blessing. God preferres
adverbs before substantives, he does not so much regard what is done, as in
what manner: the manner specificates the action, and makes it good, or bad
morally. Lastly, note (to conclude this point and therewith the whole
explication of the Text) our actions may be formed by Charity, either directly
and explicitly, which is, when in the act it self we think of the love of
God, and of our neighbor, to form the act thereby, as we go to Church, out
of our present love to the house and ordinances of God; we go to visit our
neighbor in any distress, because we suppose it a duty of love so to do: or
secondly implicitly and virtually, when the love of God and man is habitually
settled in our hearts, but yet we do not think thereof, in such or such an
action. I conceive, that for the maine duties of godliness, actual love is
necessary, but habitual love suffices for those which are of less moment,
and more ordinary. Whatsoever we do S. Paul will have us do it to the glory
of God, 1 Cor. 10.31. and so consequently out of our love to God. But in some
things, as the habitual intention of his glory, so the habitual love of him,
as it is a sufficient motive, so a sufficient form of our actions. The love
which I have proposed unto you, is not a mere notion, but a real virtue, and
so consists not in speculation but action, not in knowledge but application.
The objects unto which love is to be applied are four in general, although
in particulars infinite Ang. de doct. Christ l. 1. cap. 23.
unu^ quod supranos, the first and chiefest is above us, to be loved before our
selves, or any Si deus omni homine amplius diligendus est amplius quisque debet
eum diligere, quam seipsum Aug. de doct. Christ. l. 1. cap. 27.
man whatsoever. Alterum quod nos sumus. As the love of wife, parents, children
kindred, benefactors, friends, etc. Hence Lomb. observes 3 sent. d. 29. lit. C.
that the Commandment concerning our parents is honora, honor, not dilige,
love, because we do that naturally.
In the next place our selves: Tertium quod juxta nos est. Thirdly, he that is
next our selves, our neighbor. Quartum quod infra nos est. Fourthly, that
which is below us, our bodies. There are no precepts (says S. Augustine) Ib.
cap. eod. and cap. 26. Inconcussa natura lege quod sumus, and quod infra nos
est, diligimus, quae lex etiam in bestias promulgata est.
concerning the second and fourth object of Charity: For we naturally affect
them, and they who love not God, or their neighbor, love yet themselves, and
their own flesh even as bruit beasts also do by nature. Fugax enim animus ab
incommutab^li lumine omnium ^agnatore, id agit ut ipse sibi regnet, and corpori
suo: Et ideo non potest nisi and se and corpus suum diligere: For the mind
that flies from God the unchangeable light, and ruler of all men, labors it
self to domineere with the lusts of the flesh. Therefore it can love only it
self, and the flesh. Self-love then and so all second love which flows from
that fountain, has no need of any That is, any especial precept, for
doubtless it is included in the general commandment of love, as Lomb. again
notes Ib. did. 28. lit. A. p. 144.
precept, and so consequently requires no exhortation, being like the Augusti
d^ctum fuit apud Senec. in prefat. Epitom. controvers. l. 4. page 286. Haterius
noster sufflaminan dua^ est a Deo non currere, sed decurrere videbatur. sc. in
oratione su^.
Declamator in Seneca, qui sufflamine potius indigeat, quam irritamento, rather
to be restrained and held in, than to be incited and thrust forward. The
precepts of love then, and so the necessary motives thereunto, are only
concerning God above us, and our neighbor next unto us. But because our love
to God, and to our neighbor, is but Eadem est Charitas, Dei and proximi, sed
quia aliud est deus, and aliud proximus, gemina dicitur, vel propter duos
motus, qui in mente geruntur. Ideoque and duo praecepta dicuntur, ut alterum
majus, alterum minus, quia men's magis erga deum, quam proximum, movetur Id.
ibid. did. 27. lit. C.
one love, according to the Schools, and God himself tryes our love to him,
by the love of our neighbor, 1 Ioh. 2.9, 10. cap. 3.14.17. cap. 4.8.12.20, 21.
etc. Nec deus, sine proximo, nec proximus sine deo, diligi potest: Lomb. 3.
sent. did. 27. lit. H.
Neither can God be loved without our neighbor, nor our neighbor without
God. For how can he that loves God contemn him that is Gods Image, and whom
God commands to be loved? And whosoever loves his neighbor as he ought. Quid
in eo diligit nisi deum? what does he love in him, but God? Hence the love of
our neighbor Matthew. ^.^2. Gal. 5 24
is put for the whole Law. Quo magis enim, a dei dilectione recedimus, eo and a
proximi amore distamus, quanto propius, dei amori adhaeremus, tanto and
proximi: quanto and proximi, tanto and dei. Dorotheus doct. 6. Even as in a
genealogy the nearer men are in the collateral lines, to the first root, or
common head of the family, the nearer they are of kin, the one to the other:
and e converso the nearer they are of kin the one to the other, the nearer
they are set to the Father of their Tribe (...). The words were written by
Aratus, but are authorized by S. Paul, Act. 17.28. we are all Gods offspring,
God is the Father of mankind, the nearer we draw unto God in goodness, the
nearer we must needs approach to one another in good will; and the nearer we
draw to one another in love, the nearer we approach even to God himself:
Velut lineae quo magis a se invicem distant, eo magis a centro remo ^e sunt,
and e converso, qu^ magis a centro eo magis a se invicem distant. Deus vero
(secundum Empedo^lis doctrinam) sphaer^ est cuius contrum est ubique,
circumferentia vero nusquam. Et Iumblichus testatur deum circuli symbolo
hieroglyphice pingi ab Egiptiis. In circulo hoc infinito nos lineae sumus, Deus
ipse centrum est nostrum. Caetera Dorotheus loco citato^ pro nobis applicet sc.
Deo per charitatem proximi accedimus, per odium ab eo quandum a proximo
recedimus.
And the farther we are from our neighbor in affection, the farther we are
from God in godliness; and the more we depart from God by an evil heart, the
more we separate our selves from our neighbor by a malicious heart. Heb. 3.12.
The whole current therefore of my remaining discourse and time, shall run to
drive men to that love of one another, which corrupt nature most strives
against, turning all Charity aside as it were into a private channel of
self-love, which (like the sea) should disperse her self throughout the whole
world; according to that of Solomon, Prove. 5.16. Let thy fountains be
dispersed abroad and rivers of waters in the streets. This is a note of David's
good man, that he has dispersed abroad, etc. Psalm. 112.9. and is cited by 2
Cor. 9.9.
S. Paul: Now because Charity delights in order, give me leave to begin at
home, to commend her to my self and my brethren of the Clergy, Ad Clerum to
the Clergy.
that hence, as from the head, it may flow down like Aarons ointment, Psalm.
133. round about us, that others may run after the smell of it. My brethren
suffer the word of exhortation, to a double kind of love, mutual and
pastoral. 1. To provoke you to mutual love consider I pray; first, that under
the Law God led his people by the hand of Moses and Aaron, Psalm. 77.20. by
brethren, which had but one heart, and so but one hand as it were to conduct,
Of mutual love amongst the Ministers of the Gospel.
and feed Gods flock. For these two are reckoned amongst Gods Priests by
David, Psalm. ^9.6. Howsoever it is evident that they were both Gods instruments
to promulgate the Law. Secondly note, that under the Gospel Christ calling his
Disciples, chooses first one pair of brethren, sc. Peter and Andrew, then
another, sc. James and John, Matthew. 4. Again, when Christ sent his Disciples
forth to preach, he sent them out by paires; the reason of which Commission
made thus to two and two is given by the author of the imperfect work upon S,
Matthew, Homil. 7. Because the unity and concord of the Ministers of the Gospel
was requisite for the laying of the foundation of the Christian Churches; which
must be laid in love, both in respect of the building, and the builders: For
the people, they must not be compelled to the faith by hostile violence, but
rather are to be persuaded unto it by love. They who carried a trowell in one
hand, and a sword in the other, Nehem. 4.17. used not that weapon to build the
Temple, but to offend their enemies. And as by love they are drawn to the
faith; so by mutual love they are fastened and settled in it. Knit or compacted
together in love. In the original it is (...), etc. In the Epist. to the ^
Coloss. 2.2.
Love is the very caement of the Temples walls, uniting them in the band of
peace, Ephesians 4.3. Love is the very strength of the spiritual building.
Support you one another by love, Ephesians. 4.2. on the contrary side: Non
aedificatur altar ex sectis lapidibus: the Altar must not be built of hewn
stones, Exodus 20.25. Hewn stones (says Isidore out of Origin the master of
Allegories) are those that cut unity asunder, and divide themselves from
Christian society, by malice, or schism: Christ will (says he) have none such
in his mystical body, of which the Altar was a figure: but those only that
are consolidated in the unity of faith, and good life, are of his Church. But
mutual love is most especially required in respect of the builders of Gods
house, or Altar. For the Iam. 3.16. 1 Cor. 14.40. and v. 33.
discord of the workmen, causes a Babell, i. e. confusion of all things,
instead of decency and order, that is, a curse for a blessing. Let me add,
that as God chose more brethren to preach the Gospel, than to publish the law,
so he now requires more abundant love from us toward one another. In this
respect also it may be, that the commandment of love is called Ioh. 13.34.
new, which is not absolutely new, 2 Epist. Ioh. ver. 5. Because Christ's
doctrine does not only commend Charity, but also inlargeth it, if not above
the widest sense of the Law, yet certainly far beyond the practice of the
Jews, and the gloss of their doctors, as we are taught, Matthew. 5.43. etc.
This is indeed to love one another, as Christ has loved us, with entire and
ardent affection. Above all things then let us have fervent charity amongst our
selves: Let us who are the Priests of God, Levit. 6.12, 13.
continually nourish this fire of Charity, in the Temple of the Lord: Let it be
inflamed by the antiperistasis of worldly hatred, that gelicidium charitatis
(as Thomas a nova villa in concione quadam.
one phraseth it) that frost of Charity in these latter days foretold by
Christ, Matthew. 24.12. The love of many (even of the (...)) shall wax cold; see
the reason there also, because iniquity abounds, the which whilst we reprove,
we become the 1 Kings 22.8. and Gal. 4.16.
enemies of the whole world: yet I cannot conceal what is said in the verse
before. Many false prophets shall arise and shall deceive many: And therefore
the love of many may well be abated toward such, which commonly seek every
one their gain out of their quarter, but not of souls; these are worldly
wise, indeed foolish prophets. But let us have salt in our selves, and peace
with one another, Mark. 9.50. In quae verba, sic ait Greg. M. Cur. Past. part.
3. cap. 1. admonitione 23. sal (i. e. sapientia) sine pace (sc. charitatis) non
vittutis est donum, sed damnationis argumentum. Sapientia enim ista est anima
is, terrena, diabolica: sed sapientia quae desursum descendit, primo est pudica
(i. e. quae cast intelligit) deindo pacifica, quia per elationem se minime a
proximorum societate disjungit. Quo plus sapiunt homines (sapientia sc. terrena
quae inflat) eo a concordiae virtute desipiscunt: Haec Greg.
i. e. the salt of spiritual wisdom, and that peace which Christian Charity
brings; which are two virtues happily conjoined, but unluckily severed: For the
wisdom that descends from above is first pure, (not earthly sensual and
corrupt) then peaceable (not proud and factious, i. e. devilish) Iam. 3.15.17.
And the love that descends from above is wise and discreet, not inordinate,
and inconsiderate: It abounds in judgment, Phil. 1.9. Let both the gain which
wisdom teaches us, and the fellowship which charity invites us unto, be, if
not only, yet especially spiritual, let us not by the one be given to Tit.
1.7. and 1 Pet. 1.8.
filthy lucre, nor by the other to intemperancy, know you not what one has not
only spoken in the hearing, but published to the view of those that 2 King.
18.26.
stand upon the wall? I am loath to repeat, what he was bold to write,
perhaps we may translate it thus. Ministri omnium horarum incundissima socij,
Phrasis ipsa est Tiberij Neronis, alias Biberij Neronis, qui cum nocte^,
continuumque biduum, cum Pomponio Flaceo and L. Pisone, epulando potandoque
consumosisset, alteri Syriam Provinciam, alteri praefecturam urbis confestim
detulit, codicillis quoque Iucundissimos and omnium horarum amicos, professus
Suet. l. 3. cap. 42.
quorum textus, est fictile peto plenum, and quorum psalterium, est cantharus.
The best way of confutation, is rot by retorting contumelies, which Charity
forbids, but (as the Philosopher did refute him that disputed against natural
motion, only by walking) by speaking the words Act. 26.25.
and performing the actions of truth and sobriety. Else woe be unto those by
whom such scandalls come against all the rest. In the mean while, until
Charity teach men better language, let us possess our solves in patience, and
comfort one another with these words, The Disciple is not above his Master. Our
Master was accounted a glutton and a wine bibber, because he came eating and
drinking, Matthew. 11.19. And the Baptist came neither eating nor drinking, and
they said, he has a Devil v. 18. So the malicious censurer, with 1 Kings
22.13.
Zedekiah, makes himself horns of iron to push on both sides, and with him
there, verse 24. he will be sure to smite the Prophet, if not with the right
hand of justice, yet with the left hand of calumny. As the Satyrist says, O
Laertiade, quicquid dicam aut erit, aut non. So in this case (it seems) it is to
no purpose, for the Prophet to take care what to say o^ do: For O man of God,
whatsoever thou speak or do to the uncharitable men, either must be evil
or not, if not, malice will make it so, if so already, censure shall augment
it: malice sees things as it were through the water, so that what is straight
seems crooked, and what is small seems great, if it be bad enough to be seen
at all. And censure (as I have instanced) like the wind, blows with equal
violence, upon objects that are opposite the one to the other: And so it is to
be regarded as a wind that passes away (in rash breath) and returns not
again, as it were in judgment to consult upon what is past, to apply David's
words Psalm. 78.39.
to another sense then he intended with good leave: S. Paul tells the judging
men of Corinth plainly, I 1 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5.
pass not to be judged of you, etc. where he furnishes us with diverse reasons
(which your meditations may make use of) to defend our selves with, against
humane judgment, or if you please remember how our Savior has forwarned and
forearmed us, in his Apostles, Ioh. 15. v. 17, 18, 19, 20.
See what he commands you to do, to love one another, see how he encourages
you to suffer by his example. If the world hate you, you know that it hated me
before that it hated you, etc. again recollect what he says, Ioh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another:
Charity is as it were the livery of Christianity, but the especial cognizance
of the ministry of the Gospel, even an indelible character thereof. Had we now
(as the Apostles once had) power to work miracles, yet without this gift,
that, and more than that, were totum nihil^ all nothing, (1 Cor. 13.1.2.) I
mean, no sure sign of our profession. If a Lords servant or any officer goes
forth without the necessary badge of his service, or office; few or none
perhaps will or can take notice of him, but if he have that with him, every
where he is known by it. So Brethren, if we walk without Charity, who can
tell whose ministers we are by other common signs? But Charity is Sic ea
verba Critici distingunt ex Arist. 1. Rhet. 2. Of pastoral love 2.
(...), no common sign, but a proper note, by which we may manifest our
selves to be Christ's Ministers. In the next place I shall present unto your
Charity the Church of God, first in general, 2 Cor. 11.28.
then in that particular respect wherein your duty is especially engaged
universal care authoritative is Apostoli enim habebant potestatem uni loco,
aut certae ecclesiae, sed pl^nariam, and vniversalem: Docete (ait Christus)
omnes gentes: Et pradicate ^^ni Creature Marc. 16 Sic Paulus missus est ad
omnes gentes Act. 9.15. Romans 1 5. ut not Reverend. Episc. Sarisburiensis
Comment. in Coloss. 1. v. 1. At vero Episcopi cuiusque authoritas, restricta
est uni diocaesi, aut uni saltem provinciae, vel denique, uni Patriarchatui,
nec ipso Romano Episcopo excepto.
Apostolical, general is Episcopal: and no man takes this honor upon him
but he that is called thereunto. As was Aaron to the High-priest-hood as S.
Paul instructs us, Heb. 5.4. But charitable care or careful charity to desire,
and to our utmost power, to uphold the peace and prosperity of Jerusalem, is
the duty of each inferior pastor. To intimate what cordial love, they that
minister at the Altar, especially those that wear the Ephod, ought to show to
the Church of God: Exodus 28.29.
the legal High Priest, when he went to minister before the Lord, was
commanded to wear a Breastplate of judgment upon his heart, upon which were
engraven the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, which may teach us to bear
within our hearts, in a Brestplate of righteousness the names (as it were) of
all those Tribes, and families which profess the sure and sincere foundation
of the Christian faith, by unfeigned prayer and endeavor for the common
salvation of them all; why should it not be in the mystical body, as it is in
the natural, where the heart wishes, the tongue prays, the hand labors, for
the good, not only of some parts, but of the whole compound? But let the name
of our Israel amongst other nations, and of our peculiar people, amongst the
flocks of our companions, be stamped in Capital Letters, even as a seal upon
our hearts, as the chief object of our Charity, after the which we ought to
long, as S. Paul longed after all his, Philip. cap. 1.8. in the bowels of
Christ Jesus, as having them in his heart, v. 7. Let us follow S. Paul's
example, by practicing S. Paul's Doctrine, Act. 20.28. Take heed unto your
selves, and unto all the flock, etc. This is to love the flock of Christ by
Christ's own inference, Ioh. 21.15, 16, 17. But let your love to the flock of
Christ be (...), Charity, which is an orderly and descreete affection, not
Vsurpatur tamen haec vox aliquando a patribus (fateor) sensu optimo ut ab
Ignatio Epist. ad Romans (...), criticita men pro vicioso amore accipiunt.
(...), a love not once named by Christ, or his Apostles, a blind, inordinate
indulgence, or carnal love, such as was in old Eli toward his sons, or in
Amnon toward his sister. A corrupt and corrupting love, which either gives, or
suffers evil example, which the Scripture accounts the hatred of our selves,
or others. If we shall love the flock of Christ, only as Act. 29.25
Demetrius magnified Diana's Image, because by that means we have our wealth:
we make Divinity a sordid trade, and defile our selves with filthy lucre, and
so in effect hate our selves, Psalm. 10.5. Vulg. Tran.
being enemies to the good of our own souls. On the other side, if indulgent
love provoke us to flatter men, and forbid us to reproove them, we in Gods
phrase and account, hate them in our hearts, Levit. 19.17. We are Gods
Priests, we must not mix with our sacrifices, either the honey of sweet
tongued flattery, for advantage sake, nor the gall of bitter malice, for
revenge sake; but every sacrifice must be seasoned with salt, Levit. 2.13.
our sacrifice must always be Mark. 9.49. Ib. verse. 50.
salted with the fire of charitable zeal to sanctify them, and with the salt
Coloss. 4.6.
of discretion, to give both our words and actions a good savor, sometimes
with the salt of severity also, which though it cause corrupt minds to smart
for the present, yet it cleanses their corruptions in the end: This is to make
our love to abound in judgment. Phil. 1.9.
S. Paul seems to separate severity and love: Shall I come unto you with the
rod, or in love 1 Cor. 4.21.
? But S. Augustine Aug. cont. Epist Parmen. lib. 3. cap. 1.
conjoynes them together in the hand as of a natural, so of a spiritual
Father. Habet and virga charitatem, Sed aliud est charitas severitatis, aliud
est charitas mansuetudinis. Aut una quidem charitas est sed diversa, in
diversis operatur. The rod has love with it: David Psalm. 23.4. Ib. verse. 1.
found comfort not only in the staff of Divine supportation, but also in the
rod of Gods correction, who was his Father and his Shepherd, and therefore he
presumed that whatsoever he did was for his good. And S. Paul tells his
Corinthians, that when he comes he will not spare; yea, God himself bids
Isaiah Isaiah 58.1.
to lift up his voice and spare not. Lastly, experience teaches us, that August.
plures corrigit timor, licet amor meliores, the fear of the rod amends the
most, though love amends the best: yet that servile fear which admitts of no
filial love, and that rigid severity, which shows no fatherly love, seldom
produce any amendment. The bowels of a Father must be seen (though obscurely
as the Sun through a thin Cloud) through the angry countenance of a Father.
Although offenses have withheld and covered the love of mildness, and let the
offenders discern the love of severity, which is indeed the same love, but
works diversely toward diverse objects. But some may reply to all this, that
the forwardness of our affection to our people had prevented this exhortation,
were they competent objects of our pastoral love, but too many of them are
more like unto those 1 Cor. 15.32.
beasts, with whom S. Paul fought at Ephesus than unto the flock of Christ,
whose properties are innocence, gentleness, concord. But we with the Disciples
Matt 10 16.
are sent amongst devouring Woolves. Our heritage is not fallen in a goodly
place, Sed ubi licet culti sint agri, inculti prorsus animi and mores, Men with
us manure their lands, they Ier. 4.3.
break not up the fallow ground of their heavy and stony hearts; so that we
are enforced to sow the seed of the word amongst thorns: with us, as with
Ezekiel. 2.6.
Ezechiel, are briers and thorns, which vex and fleece us, yea with him, we
dwell amongst Scorpions, which carry stings in their tails, like those, Revel.
9.^0. sc. to wound us with virulent detraction, and killing censures, although
like those Scorpions v. 7. they bear the faces of men, (id est) says the
Geneva gloss, they pretend great gentleness and love, but they are wise,
politic, subtle. The truth is, we pastors are to wicked worldlings, as
shepherds to the Genesis 46.34.
Egyptians, even an abomination. Now we have learned from Saint Hierome
Hieronymus in Epist. quadam hanc sententiam ex innominato authore citat.
that Frustra laborare, nec aliud fatigando se, nisi odium quaerere, extremae
est dementiae.

To labor in vain and to get only hatred for our love, is a point of
extreme folly: Et plura saepe peccamus, dum demeremur, quam dum offendimus:
there may be more offense taken of such unwelcome officious love, than at a
just neglect or contempt.

Well all this, away our Christian patience and charity. First, for their
hard-heartednesse and stupidity, let it not be the occasion of scorn, but
pity, which may the rather moove our Charity to show 2 Timothy 2.25.
meekenes toward them, to prove if God will at any time give them repentance
for their words, fear them not as God encourages Ezechiel in the forecited
place; For their malice, or power to do us wrong, Christ has told us how
far they can go, and forbids us to fear them also, Matthew. 10.28. Hicro. in
Ep.
Apud Christianos enim non qui patitur, sed qui facit contumeliam (vel
injuriam) miser est. Amongst Christians not he that suffers, but he that does
any wrong, is a wretched man.

From our Savior we learn not only patience to overcome injuries, but
Charity to forgive those that do them: Ille enim, post alapas, crucem,
flagella, blaspemias, novissime pro crucifigentibus oravit: Pater ignosce ijs
nesciunt enim quid faciunt: Christ after he had suffered buffets, stripes,
repoaches, yea and part of the cruel pains of that wooden rack the Cross,
at last he Luke 23.34.
prayed for them that crucified him: Father forgive them, etc. Thus S. Peter 1
Pet. 2.21.23. c. 3.16, 17. 18, etc. For our imitation.
proposes Christ his master. It is also in Christ's person, and for our
instruction what Esaias speaks, Chap. 49.4, 5. I have labored in vain, etc.
and Chap. 65.2, 3. All the day long have I stretched forth my hands to a
rebellious and gainesaying people, Romans 10.21.
he who was (...), the Prophet, yea the Lord of life, who came himself like 2
King. 4.
El sha to the dead child, to raise Israel from a spiritual death, when the
Gal. 3.21.
Law (like the staff of Gehazi) could not give life, he (I say) came unto his
own to teach them; (and did that seem a small matter?) Also to shed his blood
for them, and his own received him not, Ioh. 1.11. No marvel then that he
forwarnes his Disciples to look for no better entertainment in their own
country, with men of this world, Matthew. 13.57. Ioh. 4.44.

If you will cull out of the Apostles of Christ, a man edecumatae charitatis,
of the choysest perfection of Charity. Behold S. Paul, prosecuting his
Corinthians with unwearied affection, though he well perceived that the more he
loved, the less he was beloved of them: 2 Cor. 12.15.
love being like an inheritance in Law, which either solely, or most usually
descends, not ascends; so love flows more freely and plenteously from God to
mankind, than it can ascend from man to God again: For the waters of Divine
bounty do but in part and from few places, and that slowly too, return to the
fountain from whence they came. In like manner Love descends very easily from
parents to children, without any legal constraint, but it comes up so hardly
from children to parents, that there is need both of a precept, and 2 Cor.
12.24.
promise to draw it forth. Now Pastors are spiritual Fathers, and Saint Paul
professes himself the only 1 Cor. 4.15.
Father of the Corinthians, and therefore he bears with them, as parents with
their unruly children. And he puts all faults off with an elegant and pleasant
Ironie: 1 Cor. 4.10.
We are fools for Christ his sake, and you are wise in Christ: we are weak,
and ye are strong, ye are honorable and we are despised.

It seems that some Schismatickes in the Church of Corinth had slighted S.
Paul, as a Secundum pateum traditionem, ptulus erat tricubitalis doctor, vir.
sci. pusillus, and exig^^e stature: Non mirum ideo est, si mayor ille fuit e
^onginquo reverentiae Mos enim esi vulgi, ut imperatores (iudicio Taciti lib
pri. histo.) Ita quoscunque praepositos, decore Corporis aestimare: Sed quam
parva ingentes arcula condit opes.
man of despicable presence though of powerful eloquence in those letters that
he wrote unto them, 2 Cor. 10.10. A trick there is which Sectaries have
learned in these days; every way to magnify their own factionists, and to
vilify their supposed Antagonists, to cry up in the one, vocal impudence for
zeal, and mere memory for learning, to cry down in the other, holy fear and
modesty for lukewarmenesse and ignorance: in the one to extol the art of
seeming, in the other to oversee real worth; affection either deluding or
overswaying judgment.

But since ye 2 Cor. 11.19.
suffer fools Animalia gloriae and aurae popularis mancipia, as S. Hierome
styles philosophers, i. e. vaineglorious Animals that enslave themselves to
popular applause, suffer me (also to speak) or receive me as a fool says S.
Paul, 2 Cor. 11. v. 16, 17, 18, 21.
and would to God you would bear with me a little in in my folly, v. 7. that
is, I pray you suffer me to commend my self as fools use to do, though not
foolishly with them, to bespeake a good report from the people; but as 2 Cor.
12.5.11. Chapter 12, 13. Chapter 10.8.17, 18.
compelled by you to justify Gods gifts and graces in me, and so to glorify
the author of all good. Those men look on things after the outward appearance,
2 Cor. 10.7. whereas Christ forbids all such kind of judgment, Ioh. 7.24.
But the kings daughter is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. Lastly, see how
he meets with those that reviled him, practizing upon them that revenge which
he had learned of Christ, Matthew. 5.44. and which he taught his Romans, Chap.
12.20. etc. sc. by rendering good for evil, by pouring upon their heads, who
were within full of heart burning toward him, Carbones congregabis, etc Romans
12.20. Non in maledictum et condemnatione^, sed in correctione^, and
poenitentiam, ut superatus beneficijs, ex^octus fervore Charita it is, inimi us
sse desistat Hier. circa finem lib. 1. Advers. pelag.
only such coals as were kindled by the fire of Charity, 1 Cor. 4.11. he
says (...) i. e. we are buffeted, it follows in the next verse (...) and
we labor. Again there, being reviled we bless, being persecuted we suffer
it, yea more yet, verse. 13. (...), i. e. being defamed we entreat; sc. God to
forgive our enemies, and 1 Timothy 4.10. we labor and suffer reproach: says he,
Odimur and laboramus, maledicimur, and benedicimus, we labor and suffer
reproach: we bless being reviled. Me thinks this is the most excellent
motto that can be inscribed on Levi his standard, like that divine impresse on
his forehead, Exodus 28.36. and on his horses bridles, Zach. 14.20. Holiness to
the Lord: It is like the inscription upon Constantine his ensign* of the
Cross of Christ: (A figure then terrible to the adversaries only, not to the
professors of Christianity) (...), by this we overcome, even the whole world:
for faith is our victory, Ioh. 5.4. and that works by such love as I have
described: with which I conclude all that I have hitherto spoken, and this almost
in S. Paul his own words, 1 Cor. 4.14. I write not (I speak not) these things
to shame you (either of the Clergy or Laity) but to warn you, (on that side as
beloved brethren, on this other) as beloved sons.

2. Of the application ad populum: To the Laity.
Then in the next place, Levi having first received his charge (as once his
maintenance apart from his brethren) be Genesis 49.2.
ye gathered together all ye other sons of Israel, in the unanimity of
affection, in the unity of the spirit, and in the band of peace, and hear
attentively what your spiritual Father says, in his house and in his
testament, both old and new, concerning first general love toward all men:
Secondly special love toward all Christians: Thirdly, more particular love
toward the Church, first National, then Local, wherein you live, and whereof
you are members: Fourthly singular love toward the Ministers of God, but
chiefly toward your own several pastors: Fifthly and lastly, mutual love
toward one another.

In our Liturgy we are truly taught to pray for 1, Of general love toward
al men ^^
all men; which we cannot do as we ought, if we be not in charity with all,
therefore we must love all: all men are our brethren, even the heathen jure
naturae, (as Tertul. in Apolo. cap. 39.
Tertullian says) i. e. by the right of nature, and nature teaches brethren
to love one another. Again (says S. Augustine Aug. de doct. Christi lib. 1.
cap. 27. Omnihomo, in quan^um est homo diligendus est propter deum, etc.
) Although a sinner, as a sinner ought not to be beloved, yet Charitas est
dilectio qua d^ligitur Deus propter se and proximus (qui est omnis homo)
propter deum, vel in Deo. Lomb. 3. sen. did. 27. lit. B concords cum
definitione Augustini lib. 3. de doct. Chris. Cap. 10 Sicut dilexi vos: id est,
ad quod dilexi vos, sci. ut f^ sitis, ut vitam habeatis. Lomb. loc. cita. lit.
D. and ibid. lit. b, ait. sicut dilexi vos id est: propter deum. Q^^ enim nisi
deum, dilexit in nobis Christus, non quem h^bebamus, sed ut haberemus? etc. ex
Aug. in loc. Io^*
every man as a man is to be loved for Gods sake, i. e. as bearing the same
image of God with us, or as a convertible unto God by our means, or others.
This is to love one another, as Christ has loved us, John 13. verse. 34. Namely
to love for Gods sake, and that we may be made our selves, and make others
the sons of God, that so they and we may have eternal life together.
Lastly, this love following our Saviors precept, Matthew. 5.45.48. is
correspondent to God his (...), Tit. 3.4.
i. e. his love to mankind. Verily God is loving to every man, and his mercy
is over all his works, Psalm. 145.3. The mercy of man (of frail imperfect man
surely) is toward his neighbor; Sci. His neighbor by reason of kindred or
cohabitation, or some beneficial relation: whereas he should love his
neighbor in the large^ extension. i. e. every man: est enim proximus multiplex
secundu^ Lomb. 3. sen did. 28. 1. condition primae nativitatis. 2. Spe
conversionis; bis duo bus modis, quisque homo est proximus. 3. Propinquitate
cognationis, sic est una tantum familia proximorum. 4. Ratione beneficij
exhibitionit. 5. Addendum ratione propinquae cohab^tationis quae est vulgaris
potius quam theologica verbi acceptio. 2. Of spiritual love toward al those
that hold the founation of christianity.
but the mercy of the Lord is upon all flesh, says the son of Sirach,
Ecclus. 18.13. then since God his hand of bounty is stretched out, and opened
to all flesh, what convulsion of uncharitableness is it, that so shrinkes up
our arms, that we cannot hold them out to our own flesh?

But truly God is (especially) loving, or good to Israel, Psalm. 73.1. so let
our chief love be toward the whole Church of God, stirring up our prayers,
and all our endeavors for the general peace of Jerusalem. For they shall
prosper that love her, Psalm. 122.6.

Surely if every man be to be loved as a man (as S. Augustine has taught us)
though not as a sinner: much rather every Christian is to be loved as a
Christian, though not as an erroneous Christian: As erroneous only I say. For
if he destroy the foundation, by any (...) i. e. damnable heresy as S. Peter
calls it, Ep. 2. Chapter 2.1. Non enim quaelibet haeresis destruit fundamentum and
mortifera est. Notissimum est quod tum apud patres, tum Scholasticos; quilibet
error circa religionem ortus haeresis d^citur, inveteratus vero and
pertinaciter defensus, schisma vocatur. Immo Zacharias papa, asserentes
Antipodes aliquas esse, haereseos damnavit.
or if he apostatize from the faith, he is then no Christian at all.

It was a famous proverb in the primitive times which now reflects infamy upon
our days: Tertull. in Apol. ca. 39. and vide Act. 4.32.
Ecce ut se invicem diligunt Christiani. See how the Christians love one
another. Then hatred of Christians declared men to be no Christians at all,
and can it now consist with any new stamp of Christianity? I conclude this
point with that of Saint Augustine, Aug. de Bap. Cont. donat. l. 3. cap. 16.
Non habent dei Charitatem, qui non diligunt ecclesiae unitatem, id est, they
have not the love of God in them, who love not the unity of the Church of God,
or the Church in unity.

In the next place let us look with a tender eye of affection upon our mother
Church, our Jerusalem which is as a City that is compact together, whither the
tribes go up to the testimony of Israel, Psalm. 122.3, 4. read the gloss on
the place, which runs thus, By the artificial joining, and beauty of the
houses, he means the concord and love that was between the Citizens: In
like manner, let us who are the united members of the same Church in joint
affection, though in several assemblies, endeavor all as one man to be of one
heart and of one mind, as those converts were, Act. 4.32. Away, far away
with that factious love, which is as it were impropriated from the unity of the
Church, and appropriated to I know not what selected brotherhood^ distinguished
by newfangled liveries of religion. This is to make Gods heritage a bird of
diverse (and therefore superstitious) colors, of which God complains, Ierem.
12.9. whereas the Church should be as an army with banners Cantic. 6.10 namely
in which all hold together, and follow the same colors: so let all Christians*
follow the unvaried ensign of Christ's Cross.
Why, I beseech you (good people) have not we all one father; Quanto dignino
fratres dicuntur, qui unum patrem deum agnoscant, qui unum spiritum biberunt
sanctitaris, qui de uno utero ignorantiae ejusdem, ad unam lucem expiraverunt
veritatis? Tertull. Apo cap 39.
Did not one God make us, Mal. 2.10. yea have we not all one father, as well
by redemption as by creation? Thou Lord art our Father, our Redeemer, Esa.
63.16. Or be some bastards and not sons; Are we not fratres uterini, borne
all of the same mother, the same Church, by the same Spirit, and by the same
laver of regeneration, brought out of the common womb of natural ignorance,
and original sin, into the marvailous light of the same divine truth and
grace.

Are we not all without question in Charities judgment, nourished with the
same spiritual and sacramental food? Did not our Savior pay a sufficient
price to redeem us all? or lastly, cannot one Sumus corpus de conscientia
religionis, and disciplina veritate, and spei foedere Coim^s in caetum and
quasi manufacta deum precationibus ambimus. Tertull in Apolog. cap. 39.
Church hold us all in the same faith and hope, under the same order of
discipline? or may not one heaven hold us all hereafter: sure I am, it cannot
hold us, and our uncharitable opinions, or schismatic practices: the
several rooms there are for several degrees of glory, certainly not for
several factions; For if Jerusalem that is below, much more she that is above
is a City that is compact together, or, (as another translation goes) at
unity in it self. The beauty of a body politic, or natural, consists not so
much in the excellency of several parts; as in the Symmetry and proportion of
all parts together: So that he that defaces any part, deformes and marres all:
even so the beauty and grace of Christ's body, the Church consists not in the
absolute perfection of some few parts, but in the relation which all the parts
have the one to the other, in the communion of Saints.

This makes Christ's spouse though Cant. 1.5.
black (by the relics of sin) yet comely by concord: and causes all her
actions to shine forth, though not without spot, yea in 1 Cor. 14.40.
decency and order, as the Moon shines in her season, for the Church is fair
as the Cant. 6.10. ibid.
Moon, even in this life: but she is clear as the Sun, only in the life to
come.

Now they which break this order of the Church by schism, not only impair
the comeliness, but alter the very constitution of Christ's body, and so
dispose it to final corruption. Divines prove God to be immortal, because he
is indivisible: and Philosophers prove both the greater world the universe, and
the lesser world man to be mortal; because both consists of contrary elements;
which by little aad little prepare unto the dissolution of the whole, which is
then near at hand when there is excess of any of them in a notable measure,
as the 2 Pet. 3.6.
overflowing of water destroyed the old world, and a 2 Pet. 3.10. (...), i. e.
Procellae in morem, interpret Erasmo. Sic mentio fit pluviae ignis. Genesis 19.24.
storm or flood of fire shall overwhelme this: or in the lesser world, as
redundancie of watery phlegm, or fiery choler, soon brings us to our end of
consumption.

But we are united to Christ our head by faith, and to one another by love,
neither do petty errors dissolve the one band, nor petty quarrels break the
other. For then Christ should be as often reunited to his members, and they to
one another as Maecenas, toties litem agebat cum uxore, and toties amorem cum
ca redinte grabat, ut dictum sit. Hunc esse, qui uxorem millies duxit cum unam
habuerit: Sen Epi. 114. Idem lib. de providen. c. 3. de scribit eundem
Maecenateum, amoribus anxium and morosae uxoris quoridiana repudi^ deflentem.
Maecenas was married to the same wife, as it were a new. But capital
heresies, which cut Christ the head of the Church quite off, or notorious
schisms, which divide the principal parts of the spiritual body, cause the
speedy ruin of a Church; For as the parts of a natural so of the spiritual
body, have no life in them, being severed from the head. Jerusalem may well
stand, though a few stones drop out of her walls, and draw some that lie
nearest unto them out with them: but when the entire walls begin to be battered
down at once, then her curse is near, viz. that a stone shall not be left
upon a stone. A Church may still flourish, though some busy factionists
separate themselves from her, and draw a few sectaries after them, whom she
may well miss and not want. But if heresy should be suffered to beat down
the foundation of faith, or schism, be able to destroy the wall of discipline,
then beware of Jerusalem her curse: Quod dij prius omen in ipsos Avertant
hosts -- Yet despise not petty contentions, or disturbances; for often a spark
causes a flame. King Asa died of a disease only in his feet, Pope Adrian was
choked with a fly; and that mighty soul of Julius Caesar was let out at a
bodkin hole. The least discord that is, argues the want of some necessary
degree of Charity, Charitas enim semper in unitate affectionis: sed non semper
in iudiciorum concordia consistit; iuxta Aquin. Hinc Apostolus, Romans 14.1. etc.
infirmum in fide, vult recipi (sc. charitate fraterna) sed non ad dubias
disputationes: sci. circa diversas opiniones, de rebus non fundamentalibus.
which can cause unity of affection, amongst them who differ in opinion. And so
much as there wants of Charity, so much there wants of holiness in the Church.
For love, and only love, fulfills the Law. But mark the Prophet Habacucke his
inference, Chap. 1.3, 4. There are that raise up strife and contention:
Therefore the Law is slacked. The Metaphor of slacking is taken in the
original (as one well notes) from the pulse of a man, which discovers the
state of his body to be healthy, if it beat with an equal stroke, to be
distempered, if it beat violently; to grow weak, if it beat slowly and
faintly; to be utterly gone, if it beat not all. So we may note, that where
the Law of God is observed with equal respects of impartial love, (as in
David, Psalm. 119.5, 6.) there is spiritual foundnesse of mind. Where the Law
is prosecuted in some relations only, and in some parts thereof, and not in
other: as in the first Table rather than in the second, wherein consists the
trial and exercise of love, there is a gross spiritual distemper.

Where the whole Law is slightly regarded, there Charity waxes cold, or at
least, there is a spiritual luke-warmenes. Where the Law is utterly rejected
and profaned, there is an evident spiritual death in sins and trespasses.
By this rule, let every one examine the state of his soul, and be a faithful
physician to himself, and so take care to be a sound member to the Church;
which would otherwise be infected by him, and so by contagion brought to
final corruption. For the children that are corrupt ( Esaias 1.4.) are also
corrupters, (as one translation goes) and so a seed of evil doers: even a
viperous seed renting the womb that bare them, living by their mothers death,
and with Act. 9.1. (...) quasi non aura aetherca, sed sanguine christiano
vescer^^.
Saul breathing out slaughter against the Church Vae praegnantibus his diebus,
Matthew. 24. 19. woe unto the Churches that teeme in these latter days, and
worst with the monsters of faction and schism, with false prophets, of whom
one says, lo here is Christ, another lo there, v. 23. Again v. 26. Behold
he is in the desert (one says) i. e. in a new unpeopled world, for this old
world lies in wickedness, 1 Ioh. 5.19. Another says, Behold he is in the
secret chambers, perhaps, that is, in the conventicles of sectaries at home.
Now ought we not rather to wish unto a Church dry Paps, and a miscarrying
womb; for which Hosea prays, Chap. 9.14. then such unhappy fruitfulness by
which foecundius nequiora proveniunt (as Minutius Felix has it in the
dialogue) by which she is fertile only to bring forth evil to herself.

Of the love of Christ's Ministers.
In the fourth place my method ingages me to commend unto you brethren the love
of the Ministers of the Gospel, especially of those that are set over your
souls in the Lord; For if the household of faith be especially to be beloved,
than of this household, more especially those who are the Ministers, by whom ye
believe, 1 Cor. 3.5. Love the Ministers as the only ordinary instruments of
the faith of Christ: 1 Thessalonians. 5.12.
We beseech you brethren that ye acknowledge (as worthy of esteem, and not
barely known) Ibid. v. 13.
them which labor amongst you; and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you:
That you have them in singular love for their works sake: sc. for the work of
the Ministry. They which are set over you in the Lord, are your spiritual
Fathers (as you heard) other Ministers are but your fathers brethren. Very
nature it self teaches you this morality to love your own fathers before the
nearest of their kindred, and your fathers house before the house of any other.
I have told you that Charity must be regular, and orderly, not preposterous. To
speak plainly, since there is a woe to the shepherd that leaves his flock,
Zach. 11.17. although (we suppose) it be to feed others whom he affects
better than his own; what shall we think of the flock that leave their
shepherd, to run after some Sic dictus a populo ^olendo, ut notat, ^^adius in
lib. pr. Flori, Cap. 9.
poplicola, some Chaplain of the multitude, some Levita ille Iudicum cap. 17.
v. 7, 8. etc. Qui nullo regente Israelem (ver. 6. errabundus victum and
vestitum, vill suo ministerio, (quod talipretio aestimabatur) quaeritabat. Aut
qualis erat, cirumforaneus ille monachus, rumigerulus rabula, quiper
imperitorum circulos, muliercularum que symposia, contra Hieronymum declamabat,
ut test^tur ipse Hierony Episto. ad Domini^^ Ideo Concilium Tridentinum vagos
huiusmodi praedicantes consulto prohibuit.
wandering Levite, some Sheba, like him, 2 Samuel 20.1. that blows the trumpet to
faction in Israel, and with the noise thereof, (as Orpheus with the sound of
his Harp, invited wilde^ beasts and stones to come unto him) draws the whole
country after him by the ears. Tacit. lib. 4. hist. pa. 605.
Apud plebem enim verba plurimum valent, bonaque ac mala, non sua natura, sed
vocibus seditio sorum aestimantur. My Text minds me of Charity, and the
mildest censure I can give is this: All these like sheep are gone astray: For
they err (surely) who forsake their own fold and shepherd, to follow rather
the voice of any other. Tell me all ye that so uncharitably inveigh against
double beneficed men, as against Polygamysts. Because an Elder must be the
husband of one wife, Tit. 1.6. i. e. the pastor of one Church, in Ambr. Tom. 4.
l. de digni. sa. serdota. cap. 4. (in Tit. 1.6. unius uxoris virum) Si ad
superficiem tantum literae respiciamus, prohibet digamum episcopum ordinari Si
vero ad altiorem sensum conscendimus, inhibet Episcopum duas usurpare
ecclesias. Et si adhuc introrsus prosundio ra perscruteris, monet, ne post
Catholicum dogma, sensum inveniatur Episcopum habere hereticum, sed Christianem
tantum Catholicam, and orthodoxam asso iet, fidem, ut unius tantummodo uxoris
and Catholicae Ecclesiae vir, Episcopus vocitetur.
S. Ambrose his interpretation, which in their sense is the minister of one
Parish: whereas with him the Catholic Church is that one Church, and two
Churches are two Faiths, Catholic and Heretical. But the Apostle literally
forbids (says he) digamum Episcopum ordinari, that is, that one that has two
wives should be ordained a Bishop. But I pray do not these erroneous courses
maintain, or erect a new kind of lay pluralities? Did not the same S. Paul
prophecy against these pluralities, 2 Timothy 4.12? The time will come when they
will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts they shall heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears: Again, all ye who esteem the
dispensable absence of Pastors from their cares as the negligence of the
Ostrich in Job, Job 39.14, 15, 16, 17.
that leaves her eggs in the earth, and forgets that the foot may crush
them. That is hardened against her young ones, as though they were not hers; and
all this is because (so far perhaps they will follow the allegory) God has
deprived her of wisdom. Or, you that judge of all such leaving the flock, as
Eliab judged of David his leaving of his few sheep in the wilderness. 1 Samuel
17.28, 29.
Namely that it is only out of pride and haughtiness of heart: Whereas one
may reply with David there: v. 29. What have I done, is there not a cause?
what, have I done, are not the sheep left with a keeper, v. 20. And is there
not a cause? have I not my leave and my message given me with David, ver. 17.
Tell me I pray you is not your straying from your own Pastors a new kind of
popular non-residence. You run too and fro the land, as if there were Amos
8.11.12.
a famine of the word; because it is not dressed according to your fastidious
appetite. Schismatic practices are to be avoided as well as schismatic
opinions; for factious courses and factious conceits do reciprocally beget
one the other, so that she which is the daughter of schism, by prodigious
incest; becomes again the fruitful mother of division. Matter me genuit, matter
mox gignitur ex me.
Correct then this ill humor by charity and wisdom. Wait upon those whom God
has set over you, Matthew. 24.45.
to give every one of you, your portion in due season. As 1 Pet. 2.2.
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word, from those breasts, which
are made for your nourishment) that you may grow thereby. I am sure you would
have mothers to nurce their own children, supposing the milk of any other
breasts, not so kindly. As for those that urge unto you; the example of the
Jewish people, who left their blind guids the Scribs, and Pharisees, and Matthew.
4.25.
came in great multituds from all parts, to hear Christ preach; I will only
tell you that they speak as wisely on the extreme, as he in Zanchy on the
other, who said that if S. Paul and Mr. Calvin should both preach at the same
time in Geneva, he would not leave M. Calvin to hear S. Paul. For this man (it
seems) equalled in his judgment an ordinary pastor with an Apostle, who had
immediate vocation from heaven, and was inspired with the spirit of
infallibility. Act. 9.15. Gal. 1.12. And the other debase in their opinion the
ordinary ministers of the Church of England into mere Scribes and Pharisees,
that is in our Saviors exposition ( Matthew. 15.14.) blind leaders of the
blind, that must needs cause the people to Pro. 29.18.
perish for want of vision. And on the other side they receive their new
fangled teachers only as the Galathians at the first entertained S. Paul as an
Angel of God even as Christ Jesus, Gal. 4.14. Whereas indeed every Minister
should be received so: For we are all Angels and Ambassadors of God, 2 Cor.
5.20.
and stand in Christ's stead, when we deliver Christ's message. But as Absalon by
complements insinuated himself into the people, and stole away their hearts
from David, 2 Samuel 25.5, 6.
Cui similis fere peromina Otho, de quotacit. l. 1. hi Nec deerat: Otho
protendens manum adorare vulgum iacere oscula, et omnia serviliter pro
dommatione. Subdolum quoque hanc artem capiandi populum describit psalmista.
Psalm. 10.9, 10. Et Apostolus ipse, 2 Timothy 3. v. 5, 6, 7. Gal. 4 15.
So there are (I fear) colloguing Sycophants, that creep first into men's
houses, and then into their bosoms, and so steal away their hearts by a new
kind of sacrilege, from their own Pastors, and churches to lead them captive
into error: least my phrase transgress the law of Charity, hear our Apostle
(a man pestered continually with such false brethren:) they zealously affect
you but not well They would exclude us, that you might affect them, It Is true, I
must say it, though S. Paul's lot there v. 16. fall upon me for speaking the
truth: as Absalon wished that he were judge in the Land, that he might do
every man justice: so these men would reign alone in the affection of the
people, and then every man should surfeit of Religion, until perhaps they did
complain of Sermons, as Israel of Manna, Number. 11.6. Lastly suppose Absalon
just, and innovators indeed zealous, yet away with rebellion, away with
faction, which bring greater disturbance and confusion with them, then the
justice and zeal of such men, can possibly do good unto the Church or Common
wealth. Wherefore S. Paul is so earnest to cry down all factious love to the
Ministers of the Gospel, that he blames those that make Cephas or Apollo, yea
or himself also, the head of faction, 1 Cor. 1.12. yea he is bold to reproove
that zelot also, who in any schismatic humor cries out there, I am Christ.
And I beseech you what is the faction of Jesuits at this day, but the
monopolizing of Jesus to themselves? Wherefore Pope Sixtus Quintus had a good
intention (how ever diverted) to change their title into Loyolites. For Christ
Jesus is no monopoly, to be engrossed into the hands of one society: He brings
common salvation, Iud. 3. the which he extends to the universal Church,
causing her by his Divine Charity to dwell in unity: that is, in himself, for
they dwell not in Christ, who dwell not in unity.

The members of Christ lie not scattered like Absertus his limbs rent in
several pieces, by unnatural divisions. Christ prays that his Disciples may
be one, as he and his Father are one, Ioh. 17.13. Now (then) I beseech you
brethren by the name of our Lord Christ, that ye all speak the same things
and that there be no divisions amongst you, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 10. mark them which
cause divisions and offenses, and avoid them, Romans 16.17. For by fair speeches
( Absalon-like) they deceive the hearts of the simple.

Once more. Must the Ministers of Christ be loved as spiritual Fathers? Then
let your filial affection show it self in Heb. 13.17.
obeying their just injunctions: In following their good 1 Cor. 11.1.
examples: In bearing patiently their corrections and reproves: by
interpreting all their actions and words to the best: lastly in being every way
a comfort, and no way a vexation unto them. Let Pro. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.8.
love cover their infirmities, though there be a multitude of them, since Act.
14.15.
they be men of like passions with you. I forget not what a blessing fell on
Shem and Iaphet, for covering their Genesis 9.
father Noah his nakedness, and what a curse was inflicted on Came and his
posterity, ( Quid filij meruere Quod tui Senec.
Canaan being cursed for his sake) for mocking at his fathers shame, though it
were the effect of a notorious sin.

In the judgment of Vincentius Lerinensis, Lib. conta. haeres. cap. 11.
they are the sons of Sem, and Iaphet, Qui viri sancti errata, nec adprobant,
nec produnt, who neither approve nor divulge the faults of one of Gods holy
ones, especially of the Fathers of the Church. Such a son of theirs was
royal Constantine, who professed that if he should take a Bishop in any
notorious offense, that he would rather cover him with his own imperial
robe, then suffer him to be an object of popular derision. They on the other
side, are the sons of Cham, (says that excelleht Author) who do not only
neglect to cover the infirmities of their spiritual Fathers, but publish them,
especially after their death, to vulgar scorn. We need not review antiquity
to fetch examples thence in this kind, which are frequently set before our
eyes. Each vulgar laicke does now usurp the office of Cato the Censor, in
Church and common wealth, but especially in the Church. (For men fear her
authority least) her censures are but bruta fulmina, vain threats to them; and
her Prophets are but Ier. 5.13.
wind; The Fathers of the Church are the Noah's, who in these days are made a
1 Cor. 4.9.
spectacle unto Angels and unto men, the bad I mean of both kinds. For the
good of either kind, which love God, love Gods Ministers. And we are glad, that
not a few such hear us this day, who know of these things, (I mean those rude
indignities which the Clergy daily suffers) and before whom we speak boldly,
as S. Paul Act. 26.26.
before Agrippa, If there be any to whom we are set forth as a spectacle even
as Apelles his picture to be censured by all manner of lookers on, from the
head to the foot, from the beginning to the ending; we are ready with Apelles
to correct the censorious Momus, that presumes to judge beyond his own Art.
Thou man of censure whosoever thou art, do thou think that the Ambassadors
of Christ stand in the Pulpit, as the prisoners at the bar, to expect
judgment, yea variety or rather contrariety of judgments to pass upon them?
And do thou with the rest of thy brethren and sisters, even Demetrius, and
all the Craftsmen, with every silly woman, 2 Timothy 3.6.7.
laden with sin, captivated unto errors, wedded so surely to her own
fancy, and faction, that wisdom it self cannot contrive her divorce from
them. Must these I say Et id genus omne, and all of the like kind sit upon
their several seats of justice as it were, and pass sentence upon us whether
right or wrong?

One says, perhaps with Festus, Act. 26.2^.
that much learning has made the preacher beside himself, whereas another (it
may be) thinks him but an ignorant man, because he can hear but few words of
the Sermon, and scarce understand any, and so you must think that much
ignorance has, made him a learned censurer. Again, suppose one accuses the
Preacher for lack of the spirit of prophecy, which should teach him what he
should preach in that hour, because he has not the gift of memory and
utterance. But if his memory be ready, and his speech fluent, then another is
likely to judge him more full of words than matter, as if it were a sign that
one is not laden with any great burden of prophecy, when he runs nimbly away
with his matter: so that we cannot tell, whether we go too fast or too slow,
for such censurers, whose judgments, like fire and water overthrow one another
and who like Christ's accusers, Matthew. 14.56. seldom agree together. They will
undertake to judge, who is a powerful Preacher, and who is an edifying
soule-saving Pastor: when as for the most part of them, they know not what
these very words, to preach, and to edify mean, in the Scripture phrase: yea
though perhaps, with him that had lived 50. years under a preaching Ministry,
they know not their See an example of this prodigious ignorance in Mr. Pembles
Sermon of ignorance. page 17.18.
own soul from their backebone, or their God from a man like to themselves.
Most commonly they mistake appearance for truth, seeming for being, noise for
substance, earnest and Quis est qui in lintre loquit^r ut ait ille apud
Quintillanum de quodam ^nimico declamatore qui corpus suum versabat in parts
omnes.
theatricall action on every side for zeal, bodily strength for power of the
spirit, memory for knowledge, and faction for Religion. If any here have thus
presumed not only to be teachers of the Law, as it is 1 Timothy 1.7. but also
judges of teachers, not knowing what the speak, or whereof they affirm: No
more than Balaams beast understood what she said, when she reprooved with
humane voice the madness of the Prophet; (Only here is the difference
between them) that God opened her mouth: but these in effect open their
mouths against God, with those Psalm. 12.4. I would wish them to confess their
fault unto God ingeniously, for the time past, in David's words: We have been
foolish and ignorant, even as a beast before thee: And for the time to come, I
entreat them to take Salomons, advice, Eccles. 5.1. viz. to be more ready to
hear Gods word taught by those that have first learned it themselves, then to
offer the sacrifice of fools, i. e. (to accommodate the words to my purpose)
to give a rash censure of what is spoken. This is a strange fire of false
zeal, which must not burn the sacrifice or incense that God will accept of:
If thou will present an offering that God shall not despise, take S. Augustine
his direction: Zelum tuum inflammet charitas, informet scientia; Let it be a
burnt offering of zeal, made ready for the Lord by knowledge, and set on fire
by love: For this love inflame^ knowledge to the desire of good, and knowledge
directing love to the performance of the same, fulfill the Law.

So I address my speech for a conclusion by way of brief but earnest
exhortation, 5. Of mutual love of Christians in what particular societies
soever they live together.
of you of the Laity also to mutual love in the Lord Jesus, Eccles. 12.11.
at least to the increase and continuance thereof. Supposing I may say with the
Apostle, 1 These. 4.9. and 10. As touching brotherly love, ye need not that I
write (or speak) unto you, for ye your selves are taught of God to love one
another: And indeed ye do it. Yet must I go on with S. Paul there. But we
beseech you brethren, that ye increase more and more, and that ye study to be
quiet, etc. v. 11. Although then you be in charity already with one another,
yet let the Eccl. 12.11.
words of the wise (even of the spirit of wisdom) be as goads (to drive you
forwards in this duty) and as nails fastened by the masters of the assemblies
(to fix this grace the surer in your minds) which are given from one shepherd
sc. Christ Jesus the chief shepherd and Bishop of our souls. B^^ I beseech
you in the bowels of Christ Jesus: Above all things (far above all
by-respects of self love) have fervent charity amongst your selves, 1 Pet.
4.8. To this purpose Consider one another to provoke to love, and to good
works (the effects of love) not forsaking the assemblings of your selves,
(like brethren together in unity) as the manner of some is, Heb. 10.24, 25. And
be at peace among your selves, 1 These. 5.13. Showing your love to one another,
by your agreement together. For hatred stirs up strife, Prove. 10.12. And it
is only pride that begets this hatred, for only by pride comes
contention, Prove. 13.10. But with the well advised is wisdom, says Solomon
there: And love, which covers all sins (as Solomon has it) Ib. sc. Prove.
10.12. is the freight of heavenly wisdom. For this wisdom is peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, Iam. 3.17. yea she is ready not only to accept,
but to offer agreement. For there v. 18. not only the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace, but it is also of them that make peace. So then my brethren,
not only have love, and be at peace, when love and peace are presented unto
you, but also (...). 1 Cor. 14.1.
(...), persequimur charitatem. Follow after or pursue Charity, 1 Cor. 14.1.
And likewise as David exhorts you, Psalm. 34.14. (...) quaere pacem and sequere
eam: i. e. seek peace and follow it Pagnin. in Lex. Qui tamen (...)
Quaere, non verbis solum, and interrogatione, hoc enim est (...) sed conatu,
and studi^ hoc enim (...) significat; The word in the original intimates, that
we should seek peace; not only in Psalm. 55 21.
words by inquiring after it, with an is it peace O Iehu, but in deeds also,
by serious study and endeavor to attain it. Although your souls with David's,
have long dwelt with those that are enemies to peace, and persecute it into
strife and faction, yet do you still (with David) pursue peace, to embrace and
possess it: Alas, love and peace like riches, Prove. 23.5.
make themselves wings and fly away, like an Eagle toward heaven: And like a
bird escaped, they are hardly caught and brought back again: O then you that
enjoy them, hold them fast, as Jacob held the Angel that they may bless you
ere they go away; or rather that they may not depart at all: So that either
your prayers and endeavors may return into your own bosoms, and make you
happy in your own consciences: or else may all so take effect abroad, and make
you happy in the fruit thereof among your brethren. For truth it self has
said, that Blessed are the peacemakers, Mat. 5.9. that is, not only they
which effect, but they also which heartily endeavor peace.

Col. 3.12.
Put on therefore (as the elect of God, holy and beloved) bowels of mercies,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekenes, long-sussering.

Forbearing one another, V. 13.
and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any: Even as
Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

And above all things put on Charity, V. 14.
which is the bond of perfection.

And let the peace of God (and so consequently, V. 15.
the God of peace) rule in your hearts.

Hear the conclusion of the whole matter which I have delivered unto you on my
Text, and that you shall have from S. Augustine, Si non vacat, etc. If thou
have no leisure to turn over all the leaves of holy writ, hold fast Charity:
And in her thou shall find all knowledge; so thou shall retain in thy mind,
both what thou have learned in Scripture, and also what thou have not learned.
Because upon Charity all the Law and the Prophets depend, Matthew. 22. In that
which thou understandest Charity is evident; in that which thou understandest
not, Charity lies hidden. He therefore holds fasts that which is manifest, and
that which is abstruse in Gods word, who keeps Charity in his conversation.
Charity is the bond of affections, without which the rich man is poor, and
with which the poor man is rich. How great is she? The safeguard of the soul,
the establishment of knowledge, the fruit of faith, the wealth of the needy,
the life of dying men. She alone is not troubled with other men's felicity,
for she envieth not. She alone is not lifted on high with her own
prosperity, for she is not puffed up. Among reproaches she is secure, in the
midst of hatred she is kind. Amongst quarrels she is gentle, amongst
treacheries she is innocent. Therefore she bears all things in this present
life, because she believes all things concerning the life to come. Whatsoever
more abundant good then my speech can utter, you shall find out in the
commendation of Charity, let it appear in your lives: Thus Ipsissima August.
verba sunt Tom. 10. page 232. sermon. 39. de Temp Si non vacat omnes paginas
Scripturarum evolvere, tene Charitatem, et in ea invenies omnem scientiam. Ita
tenebis, quod in Scriptura didicisti, tenebis etiam quod non didusti, Quia a
Charitate tota lex et prophet pendent, In eo quod intelligis, charitas patet,
in eo quod non intelligis, Charitas latet. Ille itaque tenet, and quod patet,
and quod latet in divinis sermonibus, qui charitatem tenet in moribus. Vinculum
est mentium, sine qua dives pauper est, and cum qua pauper dives est. Quanta
est ista? Animarum salus, scientiae solidamentum, fidei fructus, divitiae
pauperum, vita moricatium. Sola est, quam faelicitas aliena nompremit, qui a
non aemulatur Sola est quam faelicitas sua non extollit, quia non inflatur.
Inter opprobria secitra est. Inter odia benefica est. Inter iras placida est;
Inter insidias innocens. Ideo tolerat omnia, etc. ibid.
S. Augustine teaches you how to demonstrate by your practice, that Charity is
the fulfilling of the Law. Now S. Augustine having exhorted you to Charity;
Next let S. Gregory dehort you from strife and uncharitableness, Cur. pastora.
part. 3. cap. 1. admo. 24. Perpendant seminantes jurgia, quam multipliciter
pecant, qui dum unam nequitiam perpetrant ab humanis cordibus canctas simul
virtutes eradicant. In uno enim malo innumera peragunt, quia seminando
discordiam, charitatem quae virtutum omnium matter est, extingunt, i. e. Let
those (on the other side) that sow contention (amongst Christian brethren)
consider how manifold their offense is, who by committing one sin root out
all virtues whatsoever out of men's hearts: for in one evil they commit many,
because they destroy Charity, which is the mother of all virtues. And thus men
of contention, demonstrate by their lives, that uncharitableness is the
violation of the whole Law of God.

I shut up all with one patheticall exhortation, and one fervent prayer; both
learned of our Apostle S. Paul. The first is, Phil. 2. V. 1.
Phil. 2.1, etc. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, V. 2.
etc. Fulfill ye my joy, that ye may be like minded, having the same love,
being of one accord, V. 3.
of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, etc. Look
not every man to his own things, etc. V. 4.
And this I pray (with S. Paul, Phil. 1. V. 9.
Phil. 1.9, etc. That your love may abound yet more and more, in knowledge and
in all judgment. V. 10.
That ye may approve things that are excellent (which are the things of
Charity, 1 Cor. 12.31. and Chap. 13. ibid) that you may be sincere and without
offense, until the day of Christ. Being filled with the fruits of
righteousness, V. 11.
which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. Amen.

(...).

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 98. line. 18. for (...), read (...). p. 118. l. 23. for incundissima r.
incundissimi. p. 144 l. 21. for (...), r. (...). p. 145. l, 22. for (...), r.
(...). p. 152. l. 15. for (...), r. (...).

In the Margent.
Page 69. l. 20. for tantum, r. tantam. p. 80. l. 5. for unam, r. unum. p. 96.
l. 29. for flax, r. fax. p. 125. l. 2. r. potsstatem non astrictam uni, etc. p.
r 41. l. 10. for ille fuit reverentiae, r. illi fuit reverentia. p. 154. l. 27.
for unam, r. unum. p. 155. l. 4 for Deam, r. Deum.


