EVTHYMIAE RAPTVS; OR The Tears of PEACE: With Interlocutions. By GEO. CHAPMAN.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Rich. ^onian, and H. Walle^: and are to be
sold at the spread-eagle, near the great North-door of S. Paul's Church. 1609.

TO THE HIGH BORN PRINCE OF MEN, HENRY, THRICE-ROYALL INHERITOVR TO THE UNITED
KINGDOMS OF GREAT BRITANNE.

THE TEARS OF PEACE.
INDVCTIO.
NOw that our Soueraign, the great King of Peace,
Has (in her grace) outlabour'd Hercules;
And, past his Pillars, stretched her victories;
Since (as he were sole Soul, t'all Royalties)
He moves all Kings, in this vast Universe,
To cast chaste Nets, on th'impious lust of Mars;
See, All; and imitate his goodness still;
That (having cleard so well, wars outward ill)
He, God-like, still employes his firm desires,
To cast learned ynke upon those inward fires,
That kindle worse War, in the minds of men,
Like to incense the outward War again:
Self-love, inflaming so, men's sensual blood,
That all good, public, drownes in private good;
And that, sinks under, his own ouer-freight;
Men's Reasons, and their Learnings, shipwrackt quite;
And their Religion, that should still be One,
Takes shapes so many, that most know it in none.
Which, I admiring (since, in each man shinde
A light so clear, that by it, all might find
(Being well informd) their object perfect Peace,
Which keeps the narrow path to Happiness)
In that discourse; I shund, (as is my use)
The iarring preace, and all their times abuse;
T'enioy least trodden fields, and fre'est shades;
Wherein (of all the pleasure that inuades
The life of man, and flies all vulgar feet,
Since silent meditation is most sweet)
I sat to it; discoursing what maine want
So ransackt man; that it did quite supplant
The inward Peace I spoke of; letting in
(At his loose veins) sad war, and all his sin.
When, suddenly, a comfortable light
Brake through the shade; and, after it, the sight
Of a most grave, and goodly person shinde;
With eyes turned upwards, and was outward, blind;
But, inward; past, and future things, he saw;
And was to both, and present times, their law.
His sacred bosom was so full of fire,
That it was transparent; and made him expire
His breath in flames, that did instruct (me thought)
And (as my soul were then at full) they wrought.
At which, I casting down my humble eyes,
Not daring to attempt their feruencies;
He thus bespake me; Dear mind, do not fear
My strange appearance; Now it is time t'outweare
Thy bashful disposition, and put on
As confident a countnance, as the Sun.
For what have thou to look on, more divine,
And horrid, then man is; as he should shine,
And as he does? what, freed from this worlds strife;
What he is entering; and what, ending life?
All which, thou only studiest, and clost know;
And, more then which, is only sought for show.
Thou must not undervalue what thou have,
In weighing it with that, which more is graced;
The worth that weighs in ward, should not long
For outward prices. This should make thee strong
In thy close value; Naught so good can be
As that which lasts good, betwixt God, and thee.
Remember thine own verse -- Should Heaven turn Hell,
For deeds well done, I would do ever well.
This heard, with joy enough, to break the twine
Of life and soul, so apt to break as mine;
I brake into a trance, and then remainde
(Like him) an only soul; and so obtainde
Such boldness, by the sense he did control;
That I set look, to look; and soul to soul.
I viewed him at his brightest; though, alas,
With all acknowledgement, of what he was
Beyond what I found habited in me;
And thus I spoke; O thou that (blind) do see
My heart, and soul; what may I reckon thee?
Whose heavenly look shows not; nor voice sounds man*
I am (said he) that spirit Elysian,
That (in thy native air; and on the hill
Next Hitchins left hand) did thy bosom fill,
With such a flood of soul; that thou were feign
(With ^^clamations of her Rapture then)
To vent it, to the Echoes of the vale;
When (meditating of me) a sweet gale
Brought me upon thee; and thou did inherit
My true sense (for the time then) in my spirit;
And I, invisibly, went prompting thee,
To those fair Greenes, where thou did english me.
Scarce he had uttered this, when well I knew
It was my Princes Homer; whose dear view
Renewed my grateful memory of the grace
His Highness did me for him: which, in face,
Me thought the Spirit showed, was his delight;
And added glory to his heavenly plight:
Who told me, he brought stay to all my state;
That he was Angel to me; Star, and Fate;
Advancing Colors of good hope to me;
And told me, my retired age should see
Heavens blessing, in a free, and harmless life,
Conduct me, through Earths peace-pretending strife,
To that true Peace, whose search I still intend,
And to the calm Shore of a loved end.
But now, as I cast round my ravished eye,
To see, if this free Soul had company;
Or that, alone, he lovingly pursude
The hidden places of my Solitude;
He rent a Cloud down, with his burning hand
That at his back hung, twixt me, and a Land
Never inhabited; and said; Now, behold
What maine defect it is that does enfould
The World, in ominious flatteries of a Peace
So full of worse then war; whose stern increase
Deuours her issue. With which words, I viewed
A Lady, like a Deity indew'd;
(But weeping, like a woman) and made way
Out of one Thicket, that saw never day,
Toward another; bearing underneath
Her arm, a Coffine, for some prize of death;
And after her (in funeral form) did go
The woddes foure-footed Beasts, by two, and two;
A Male, and Female, matched, of every kind;
And after them; with like instinct enclinde,
The ayrie Nation felt her sorrows stings;
Fell on the earth, kept rank, and hung their wings.
Which sight I much did pity, and admire;
And longd to know the dame that could inspire
Those Bestials, with such humane Form, and ruthe;
And how I now should know, the hidden Truth
(As Homer promised) of that maine defect
That makes men, all their inward Peace reject
For name of outward: Then he took my hand;
Led to her; and would make my self demand,
(Though he could have resolved me) what she was?
And from what cause, those strange effects had pass?
For whom, She bore that Coffine? and so mournd?
To all which; with all mildensse, she returned
Answer; that she was Peace; sent down from heaven
With charge, from the Almighty Deity given,
To Attend on men; who now had banished her
From their societies, and made her err
In that wild desert; only Humane love
(Banished in like sort) did a longtime prove
That life with her; but now, alas, was dead,
And lay in that wood to be buried;
For whom she bore that Coffine, and did mourn;
And that those Beasts were so much humane, borne,
That they, in nature, felt a love to Peace;
For which, they followd her, when men did cease.
This went so near her heart, it left her tongue;
And (silent) the gave time, to note whence sprung
Men's want of Peace, which was from want of love:
And I observed now, what that peace did prove
That men made shift with, and did so much please.
For now, the Sun declining to the Seas,
Made long misshapen shadows; and true Peace
(Here wa^king in his Beams) cast such increase
Of shaddowe from her; that I saw it glide
Through Cities, Courts, and Countries; and descride,
How, in her shadow only, men there lived,
While she walked here ith Sun: and all that thrived
Hid in that shade their thrift; naught but her shade
Was Bullwarke against all war that might invade
Their Countries, or their Consciences; since Love
(That should give Peace, her substance) now they drove
Into the Deserts; where he sufferd Fate,
And whose sad Funerals Beasts must celebrate.
With whom, I freely wished, I had been nursed;
Because they follow Nature, at their wurst;
And at their best, did teach her. As we went
I felt a scruple, which I durst not vent,
No not to Peace her self, whom it concernd,
For fear to wrong her; So well I have learnd,
To shun injustice, even to doves, or flies;
But, to the Devil, or the Destinies,
Where I am just, and know I honor Truth,
I Will speak my thoughts, in scorn of what ensu'th.
Yet (not resolved in the other) there did shine
A Beam of Homers fre'er soul, in mine,
That made me see, I might propose my doubt;
Which was; If this were true Peace I found out,
That felt such passion? I proved her sad part;
And prayed her call, her voice out of her heart
(There, kept a wrongful prisoner to her woe)
To answer, why she was afflicted so.
Or how, in her, such contraries could fall;
That taught all joy, and was the life of all?
She answered; Homer told me that there are
Passions, in which corruption has no share;
There is a joy of soul; and why not then
A grief of soul, that is no skathe to men?
For both are Passions, though not such as reign
In blood, and humor, that engender pain.
Free sufferance for the truth, makes sorrow sing,
And mourning far more sweet, then banqueting.
Good, that deserves joy (receiving ill)
Does merit justly, as much sorrow still:
And is it a corruption to do right?
Grief, that discharges Conscience, is delight:
One sets the other off. To stand at gaze
In one position, is a stupide maze,
Fit for a Statue. This resolved me well,
That Grief, in Peace, and Peace in Grief might dwell.
And now fell all things from their natural Birth:
Passion in Heaven; Stupiditie, in Earth,
Inuerted all; the Muses, Virtues, Graces,
Now suffer^ rude, and miserable chaces
From men's societies, to that desert heath;
And after them, Religion (chac't by death)
Came weeping, bleeding to the Funeral:
Sought her dear Mother Peace; and down did fall,
Before her, fainting, on her horned knees;
Turned horn, with praying for the miseries*
She left the world in; desperate in their sin;
Marble, her knees pearc't; but heaven could not win
To stay the weighty ruin of his Glory
In her sad Exile; all the memory
Of heaven, and heavenly things, rac't of all hands;
Heaven moves so far off, that men say it stands;
And Earth is turned the true, and moving Heaven;
And so it is left; and so is all Truth driven
From her false bosom; all is left alone,
Till all be orderd with confusion.
Thus the poor brood of Peace; driven, and distressed,
Lay brooded all beneath their mothers breast;
Who fell upon them weeping, as they fell:
All were so pinde, that she containde them well.
And in this Chaos, the digestion
And beauty of the world, lay thrust and thrown.
In this deiection, Peace pourd out her Tears,
Worded (with some pause) in my wounded Ears.
INVOCATIO.
O ye three-times-thrice sacred Quiristers,
Of Gods great Temple; the small Universe
Of ruinous man: (thus prostrate as ye lie
Brooded, and Loded with Calamity,
Contempt, and shame, in your true mother, Peace)
As you make sad my soul, with your misease:
So make her able fitly to disperse
Your sadness, and her own, in sadder verse.
Now (old, and freely banished with your selves
From men's societies; as from rocks, and shelues)
Help me to sing, and die, on our Thames shore;
And let her lend me, her waves to deplore
(In yours, and your most holy Sisters falls)
Heavens fall, and humane Loves, last funerals.
And thou, great Prince of men; let thy sweet graces
Shine on these tears; and dry, at length, the faces
Of Peace, and all her heauen-allyed brood;
From whose Doves eyes, is shed the precious blood
Of Heavens dear Lamb, that freshly bleeds in them.
Make these no toys then; gird the Diadem
Of thrice great Britain, with their Palm and Bays:
And with thy Eagles feathers, daigne to raise
The heavy body of my humble Muse;
That thy great Homers spirit in her may use
Her topless flight, and bear thy Fame above
The reach of Mortals, and their earthy love;
To that high honor, his Achilles won,
And make thy glory far outshine the Sun.
While this small time gave Peace (in her kind Throes)
Vent for the violence of her sudden woes;
She turned on her right side, and (leaning on
Her tragique daughters bosom) looked upon
My heavy looks, drowned in imploring tears
For her, and that so wronged dear Race of hers.
At which, even Peace, expressed a kind of Spleen.
And, as a careful Mother, I have seen
Chide her loved Child, snatched with some fear from danger:
So Peace chid me; and first shed tears of anger.
The Tears of Peace.
Peace. THou wretched man, whom I discover, borne
To want, and sorrow, and the Vulgars scorn:
Why haunt'st thou freely, these unhaunted places,
Empty of pleasures? empty of all Graces,
Fashions, and Riches; by the best pursude
With broken Sleep, Toil, Love, Zeal, Servitude;
With fear and trembling, with whole lives, and Souls?
While thou break'st sleeps, digst under Earth, like moules,
To live, to seek me out, whom all men fly:
And think to find, light in obscurity,
Eternity, in this deep vale of death:
Look ever upwards, and live still beneath;
Fill'st all thy actions, with strife, what to think,
Thy Brain with Air, and skatterst it in ink:
Of which thou make weeds for thy soul to wear,
As out of fashion, as the bodies are.

Interlo. I grant their strangeness, and their too ill grace,
And too much wretchedness, to bear the face
Or any likeness of my soul in them:
Whose Instruments, I rue with many a Stream
Of secret Tears for their extreme defects,
In uttering her true forms: but their respects
Need not be less'ned, for their being strange,
Or not so vulgar, as the rest that range
With headlong Raptures, through the multitude:
Of whom they get grace, for their being rude.
Naught is so shund by Virtue, thrown from Truth,
As that which draws the vulgar Dames* and Youth.

Pea. Truth must confess it: for where l^ues there one,
That Truth or Virtue, for themselves alone,
Or seeks, or not contemns? All, all pursue
Wealth, Glory, Greatness, Pleasure, Fashions new.
Who studies, studies these: who studies not
And sees that study, lays the vulgar Plot;
That all the Learning he gets living by,
Men but for form, or humor dignifie
(As himself studies, but for form, and show,
And never makes his special end, to know)
And that an idle, ayrie man of News,
A standing Face; a property to use
In all things vil^, makes Booke-wormes, creep to him:
How scorns he books, and booke-worms! O how dim
Burns a true Souls light, in his Bastard eyes!
And, as a Forest ouer-grow'n breeds Flies,
Todes, Adders, Sauadges, that all men shun;
When, on the South Side, in a fresh May Sun,
In varied Herds, the Beasts lie out, and sleep,
The busy Gnatts, in swarms a buzzing keep,
And guild their empty bodies (lift aloft)
In beams, that though they see all, difference naught:
So, in men's merely outward, and false Peace,
Insteade of polisht men, and true increase,
She brings forth men, with vices ouer-growne:
Women, so light, and like, few know their own:
For mild and humane tongues, tongues forkt that sting:
And all these (while they may) take Sun, and spring,
To help them sleep, and flourish: on whose beams,
And branches, up they clime, in such extremes
Of proud confusion, from just Laws so far,
That in their Peace, the long Robe sweeps like war;

Int. That Robe serves great men: why are great so rude,

Pea. Since great, and mean, are all but multitude?
For regular Learning, that should difference set
Twixt all men's worths, and make the mean, or great,
As that is mean or great (or chief stroke strike)
Serves the Plebeian and the Lord alike.
Their objects, show their learnings are all one;

Int. Their lives, their objects; Learning loved by none.
You mean, for most part: nor would it displease
That most part, if they heard; since they profess,
Contempt of learning: Nor esteem it fit,
Noblesse should study, see, or countenance it.

Pea. Can men in blood be Noble, not in soul?
Reason abhorres it; since what does control
The rudeness of the blood, and makes it Noble
(Or has chief means, high birthright to redouble,
In making manners soft, and man-like mild,
Not suffering humanes to run proud, or wild)
Is Soul, and learning; (or in love, or act)
In blood where both fail then, lies Nobless wrackt,

Interlo. It cannot be denyde: but could you prove,
As well, that the act of learning, or the love,
(Love being the act in will) should difference set,
Twixt all men's worths, and make the mean or great,
As learning is, or great, or mean in them;
Then clear, her Right, stood to man's Diadem,

Pea. To prove that Learning (the souls actual frame;
Without which, it is a blanke; a smoke-hid flame)
Should sit great Arbitresse, of all things done,
And in your souls, (like Gnomons in the Sun)
Give Rules to all the circles of your lives*
I prove it, by the Regiment God gives
To man, of all things; to the soul, of man;
To Learning, of the Soul. If then it can
Rule, live; of all things best, is it not best?
O who, what god makes greatest, dares make least?
But, to use their terms; Life is Root and Crest
To all man's Cote of Nobless; his soul is,
Field to that Cote; and learning differences
All his degrees in honor, being the Cote.

Simi. And as a Statuarie, having got
An Alablaster, big enough to cut
A humane image in: till he has put
His tools, and art to it; hew'n, formd, left none
Of the redundant matter in the Stone;
It bears the image of a man, no more,
Then of a Woolf, a Cammell, or a Boar:
So when the Soul is to the body given;
(Being substance of Gods Image, sent from heaven)
It is not his true Image, till it take
Into the Substance, those fit forms that make
His perfect Image; which are then impressed
By Learning and impulsion; tha inuest
Man with Gods form in living Holiness,
By cutting from his Body the excess
Of Humors, perturbations and Affects;
Which Nature (without Art) no more eiects,
Then without tools, a naked Artizan
Can, in rude stone, cut The Image of a man.
How then do Ignorants? who, often, we try,

Int. Rule perturbations, live more humanely
Then men held learnd?

Pea. Who are not learned indeed;
More then a house framed loose, (that still does need
The haling up, and joining) is a house:
Nor can you call, men mere Religious,
(That have good-wills, to knowledge) Ignorant;
For, virtuous knowledge has two ways to plant;
By Power infused, and Acquisition;
The first of which, those good men, graft upon;
For good life is the effect, of learnings Act;
Which th'action of the mind, did first compact
By infusde love to Learning against all ill,
Conquests first step, is to all good, the will.

Int. If Learning then, in love or act must be,
Mean to good life, and true humanity;
Where are our Scarre-crowes now, or men of rags,
Of Titles merely, Places, Fortunes, Bragges,
That want and scorn both? Those inuerted men?
Those dungeons; whose souls no more contain
The actual light of Reason, then dark beasts?
Those Clouds, driven still, twixt Gods beam and their breasts?
Those Giants, throwing goulde^ hills against heaven?
To no one spice of true humanity given?

Peace. Of men, there are three sorts, that most foes be
To Learning and her love; themselves and me:
Active, Passive, and Intellectiue men:
Whose selfe-loues; Learning, and her love disdain.
Your Active men, consume their whole life's fire,
In thirst of State-height, higher still and higher,
(Like seeled Pigeons) mounting, to make sport,
To lower lookers on; in seeing how short
They come of that they seek, and with what trouble;
Lamely, and far from Nature, they redouble
Their pains in flying, more then humbler wits,
To reach death, more direct. For Death that sits,
Upon the fist of Fate, past highest Air,
(Since she commands all lives, within that Sphere)
The higher men advance; the nearer finds
Her seeled Quarries; when, in bitterest winds,
Lightnings, and thunders, and in sharpest hayles
Fate casts her off at States; when lower Sails
Slide calmely to their ends* Your Passive men
(So called of only passing time in vain)
Pass it, in no good exercise; but are
In meats, and cups laborious; and take care
To lose without all care their Soule-spent Time;
And since they have no means, nor Spirits to clime,
Like Fowls of Prey, in any high affair;
See how like Kites they bangle in the Air,
To stoop at scraps, and garbidge; in respect,
Of that which men of true peace should select;
And how they trot out, in their lives, the Ring;
With idly iterating often one thing,
A new-fought Combat, an affair at Sea;
A Marriage, or a Progress, or a Plea.
No News, but fits them, as if made for them,
Though it be forged, but of a woman's dream;
And stuff with, such stolen ends, their manlesse breasts,
(Sticks, rags, and mud) they seem mere Puttocks nests:
Curious in all men's actions, but their own;
All men, and all things censure, though know none.
Your Intellectiue men, they study hard
Not to get knowledge, but for mere reward.
And therefore that true knowledge that should be
Their studies end, and is in Nature free,
Will not be made their Broker; having power
(With her sole self) to bring both Bride, and dowre.
They have some shadows of her (as of me,
Adulterate outward Peace) but never see
Her true, and heavenly face. Yet those shades serve
(Like errant Knights, that by enchantments swerue,
From their true Ladies being; and embrace
An ougly Witch, with her phantastique face)
To make them think, Truths substance in their arms:
Which that they have not, but her shadows charms,
See if my proofs, be like their Arguments
That leave Opinion still, her free dissents.
They have not me with them; that all men know
The highest fruit that does of knowledge grow;
The Bound of all true forms, and only Act;
If they be true, they rest; nor can be rackt
Out of their posture, by Times utmost strength;
But last the more of force, the more of length;
For they become one substance with the Soul;
Which Time with all his adjuncts shall control.
But since, men wilful may believe perchance
(In part of Errors two-folde Ignorance,
Ill disposition) their skills look as hie
And rest in that divine Security;
See if their lives make proof of such a Peace,
For Learnings Truth makes all life's vain war cease;
It making peace with God, and ioines to God;
Whose information drives her Period
Through all the Bodies passive Instruments;
And by reflection gives them Soule-contents,
Besides, from perfect Learning you can never
Wisdom (with her fair Reign of Passions) sever;
For Wisdom is naught else, then Learning fined,
And with the understanding Power combined;
That is, a habit of both habits standing;
The Bloods vain humors, ever countermaunding.
But, if these show, more humor then th'vnlearn'd;
If in them more vain passion be discerned;
More mad Ambition; more lust; more deceit;
More show of gold, then gold; then dross, less weight;
If Flattery, Avarice have their souls so given,
Headlong, and with such devilish furies driven;
That fools may laugh at their imprudencie,
And Villanes blush at their dishonestie;
Where is true Learning, proov'd to separate these
And seat all forms in her Souls height, in peace?
Raging Euripus, that (in all their Pride)
Drives Ships against roughest winds, with his fierce Tide,
And ebbes and flows, seven times in every day;
Toils not on Earth with more irregulare swaye,
Nor is more turbulent, and mad then they.
And shine; like gould-worms, whom you hardly find,
By their own, light; not seen; but heard like wind.
But this is Learning; To have skill to throw
Reigns on your bodies powers, that nothing know;
And fill the souls powers, so with act, and art,
That she can curb the bodies angry part;
All preturbations; all affects that stray
From their one object; which is to obey
Her Sovereign Empire; as her self should force
Their functions only, to serve her discourse;
And, that; to beat the straight path of one end
Which is, to make her substance still contend,
To be Gods Image; in informing it,
With knowledge; holy thoughts, and all forms fit
For that eternity, ye seek in way
Of his sole imitation; and to sway,
Your life's love so, that he may still be Center
To all your pleasures; and you, (here) may enter
The next life's peace; in governing so well
Your sensual parts, that you, as free may dwell
Of vulgar Raptures, here; as when calm death
Dissolues that learned Empire, with your Breath.
To teach, and live thus, is the only use,
And end of Learning. Skill that does produce
But terms, and tongues, and Parrating of Art,
Without that power to rule the errant part;
Is that which some call, learned ignorance;
A serious trifle; error in a trance.
And let a Scholar, all earths volumes carry,
He will be but a walking dictionarie:
A mere articulate Clock, that does but speak
By others arts; when wheels wear, or springs break,
Or any fault is in him; he can mend
No more then clockes; but at set hours must spend
His mouth, as clocks do; If too fast, speech go
He cannot stay it; nor haste if too slow.
So that, as Trauaylers, seek their peace through storms,
In passing many Seas, for many forms,
Of foreign government; endure the pain
Of many faces seeing; and the gain
That Strangers make, of their strange-louing humors;
Learn tongues; keep note books; all to feed the tumors
Of vain discourse at home; or serve the course
Of State employment, never having force
T'employ themselves; but idle complements
Must pay their pains, costs, slaueries, all their Rents;
And, though they many men know, get few friends:
So covetous Readers; setting many ends
To their much skill to talk; studiers of Phrase;
Shifters in Art; to flutter in the Blaze
Of ignorant countenance; to obtain degrees
And lie in Learnings bottom, like the Lees,
To be accounted deep by shallow men;
And carue all Language, in one glorious Pen;
May have much fame for learning: but the effect
Proper to perfect Learning; to direct
Reason in such an Art, as that it can
Turn blood to soul, and make both, one calm man;
So making peace with God; does differ far
From Clearkes that go with God and man to war.

Int. But may this Peace, and man's true Empire then,
By learning be obtainde? and taught to men?

Pea. Let all men judge; who is it can deny,
That the rich crown of old Humanity,
Is still your birthright? and was never let down
From heaven, for rule of Beasts lives, but your own?
You learn the depth of Arts; and (curious) dare
By them (in Natures counterfaits) compare
Almost with God; to make perpetually
Motion like heavens; to hang sad Rivers by
The air, in air; and earth, twixt earth and heaven
By his own paise. And are these virtues given
To powrefull Art, and Virtue's self denied?
This proves the other, vain, and falsified.
Wealth, Honor, and the Rule of Realms does fall
In less then Reasons compass; yet, what all
Those things are given for (which is living well)
Wants discipline, and reason to compel.
O foolish men! how many ways ye vex
Your lives with pleasing them? and still perplex
Your liberties, with license? every way
Casting your eyes, and faculties astray
From their sole object? If some few bring forth
(In Nature, freely) something of some worth;
Much rude and worthless humor runs betwixt;
(Like fruit in deserts) with vile matter mixed.
Nor (since they flatter flesh so) they are bold
(As a most noble spectacle) to behold
Their own lives; and (like sacred light) to bear
There Reason inward: for the Soul (in fear
Of every sort of vice, she there contains)
Flies out; and wanders about other men's;
Feeding, and fatting, her infirmities.
And as in ancient Cities, it was the guise
To have some Ports of sad, and hapless vent,
Through which, all executed men they sent;
All filth; all off all, cast from what purged sin;
Naught, chaste, or sacred, there going out, or in:
So, through men's refuse ears, will nothing pearse
That's good, or elegant; but the sword; the hearse;
And all that does abhor, from man's pure use,
Is each man's only Siren; only Muse.
And thus, for one God; one fit good; they prise
These idle, foolish, vile varieties.

Int. Wretched estate of men, by fortune blessed;
That being ever idle, never rest;
That have goods, ere they earne them; and for that,
Want art to use them. To be wonderd at
Is Justice; for Proportion, Ornament;
None of the Graces, is so excellent.
Vile things, adorn her: me thought, once I saw
How, by the Seas shore, she sat giving law
Even to the streams, and fish (most loose, and wild)
And was (to my thoughts) wondrous sweet and mild;
Yet fire flew from her that dissolved Rocks;
Her looks, to Pearl turned pebble; and her locks,
The rough, and sandy banks, to burnisht gould;
Her white left hand, did goulden bridles hold;
And, with her right, she wealthy gifts did give;
Which with their left hands, men did still receive;
Upon a world in her chaste lap, did lie,
A little Iuory Book, that showed mine eye,
But one Page only; that one verse containde,
Where all Arts, were contracted, and explainde;
All policies of Princes, all their forces;
Rules for their fears, cares, dangers, pleasures, purses,
All the fair progress of their happiness here,
Justice converted, and composed there.
All which I thought on, when I had expressed
Why great men, of the great states they possessed,
Enjoyed so little; and I now must note
The large strain of a verse, I long since wrote.
Which (me thought) much joy, to men poor presented;
God has made none (that all might be) contented.

Peace* It might (for the capacity it bears)
Be that concealed and expressiue verse,
That Justice, in her Iuorie Manuell writ;
Since all Lines to man's Peace, are drawn in it.
For great men; though such ample stuff they have
To shape contentment; yet, since (like a wave)
It flittes, and takes all forms, retayning none;
(Not fitted to their pattern, which is one)
They may content themselves; God has not given,
To men mere earthly, the true Joys of heaven;
And so their wild ambitions either stay;
Or turn their headstrong course, the better way.
For poor men; their cares may be richly easde;
Since rich (with all they have) live as displeasde.

Int. You teach me to be plain. But what is the cause,
That great, and rich, whose stares win such applause;
With such enforced, and vile varieties,
Spend time; nor give their lives glad sacrifice;
But when they eat, and drink, with tales, jests, sounds;
As if (like frantique men, that feel no wounds)
They would expire in laughters? and so err
From their right way; that like a Trauayler,
(Weariest when nearest to his iourneys end)
Time best spent ever, with most pain they spend?

Pea. The cause, is want of Learning; which (being right)
Makes idleness a pain; and pain delight.
It makes men know, that they (of all things borne
Beneath the silver Moon, and goulden Morn)
Being only forms of God; should only fix
One form of life to those forms; and not mix
With Beasts in forms of their lives. It does teach,
To give the soul her Empire; and so reach
To rule of all the bodies mutinous Realm;
In which (once feared* She then takes the Helm,
And gouernes freely; stering to one Port.
Then, (like a man in health) the whole consort
Of his tuned body, sings; which otherwise,
Is like one full of weiward maladies,
Still out of tune; and (like to Spirits raisde
Without a Circle) never is appaisde.
And then, they have no strength, but weakens them;
No greatness, but does crush them into stream;
No liberty, but turns into their snare;
Their learnings then, do light them but to err;
Their ornaments, are burdens; their delights,
Are mercinarie, servile Parasites,
Betraying, laughing; Feends, that raisde in fears,
At parting, shake their Roofes about their ears;
The Imprisoned thirst, the fortunes of the Free;
The Free, of Rich; Rich, of Nobility;
Nobility, of Kings; and Kings, Gods thrones;
Even to their lightning flames; and thunder-stones.
O liberal Learning, that well used, gives use
To all things good; how bad is thy abuse!
When, only thy divine reflection can
(Th^^ lights but to thy love) make good a man;
How can the regular Body of thy light,
Inform, and deck him? the Ills infinite,
That (like beheaded Hydra's in that Fen
Of blood, and flesh, in lewd illiterate men)
Answer their amputations, with supplies
That twist their heads, and ever double rise;
Herculean Learning conquers; And O see
How many, and of what foul forms they be?
Unquiet, wicked thoughts; unnumbered passions;
Poorness of Counsels; howrely fluctuations;
(In intercourse) of woes, and false delights;
Impotent wills to goodness; Appetites
That never will be bridled; satisfied;
Nor know how, or with what to be supplied;
Fears, and distractions, mixed with greediness;
Stupidities of those things ye possess;
Furies for what ye lose; wrongs done for nonce;
For present, past, and future things, at once
Cares vast, and endless; miseries, wolne with pride;
Virtues despisde, and vices glorified.
All these, true Learning calmes, and can subdue:
But who turns learning this way? All pursue
War with each other, that exasperates these;
For things without; whose ends are inward peace;
And yet those inward Rebels they maintain.
And as your curious sort of Passive men,
Thrust their heads through the Roofs of Rich and Poor;
Through all their lives, and fortunes, and explore
Foreign, and home-affayres; their Princes Courts,
Their Counsel, and Bedchambers for reports;
And (like free-booters) wander out, to win
Matter to feed their mutinous Route within;
(Which are the greedier still) and ouershoote
Their true-sought inward Peace, for outward boot;
So Learned men, in controversies spend
(Of tongues, and terms, readings, and labors pend)
Their whole lives studies; Glory, Riches, Place,
In full cry, with the vulgar giving Chase;
And never, with their learnings true use strive
To bridle strifes within them; and to live
Like men of Peace, whom Art of Peace begat:
But, as their deeds, are most adulterate,
And show them false Sons, to their Peaceful Mother,
In those wars; so their Arts, are proved no other.
And let the best of them, a search impose
Upon his Art: for all the things she knows
(All being referd, to all, to her unknown)
They will obtain the same proportion
That does a little brook that never ran
Through Summers Sun; compared with The Ocean.
But, could he Oracles speak; and wright to charm
A wild of Sauadges; take Natures Arm,
And pluck into his search, the Circuit
Of Earth, and Heaven; the Seas space, and the spirit
Of every Star: the Powers of Herbs, and Stones;
Yet touch not, at his perturbations;
Nor give them Rule, and temper, to obey
Imperial Reason; in whose Sovereign sway,
Learning is wholly used, and dignified;
To what end serves he? is his learning tried
That comforting, and that creating Fire
That fashions men? or that which does inspire
Cities with civil conflagrations,
Countries, and kingdoms? That Art that attones
All opposition to good life, is all;
Live well ye Learnd; and all men ye enthrall.

Interl^. Alas they are discouraged in their courses,
And (like surprised Forts) beaten from their forces.
Bodies, on Rights of Souls did never grow
With ruder Rage, then barbarous Torrents flow
Over their sacred Pastures; bringing in
Weeds, and all rapine; Temples now begin
To suffer second deluge; Sinne-drownde Beasts,
Making their Altars crack; and the filde Nests
Of vulturous Fowls, filling their holy places;
For wonted Ornaments, and Religious graces.

Pea. The chief cause is, since they themselves betraie;
Take their Foes baits, for some particular swaie
T'inuert their universal; and this still,
Is cause of all ills else; their living ill.

Int. Alas! that men should strive for others swaie;
But first to rule themselves: And that being way
To all men's Bliss; why is it trod by none?
And why are rules so dully looked upon
That teach that lively Rule?

Pea. O horrid thing!
It Is Custom powers into your common spring
Such poison of Example, in things vain;
That Reason nor Religion can constrain
Men's sights of serious things; and the only cause
That neither humane nor celestial laws
Draw man more compass; is his own slack bent
T'intend no more his proper Regiment.
Where; if your Active men (or men of action)
Their Policy, Avarice, Ambition, Faction,
Would turn to making strong, their rule of Passion,
To search, and settle them, in Approbation
Of what they are, and shall be (which may be
By Reason, in despite of Policy)
And in one true course, couch their whole Affairs
To one true bliss, worth all the spawne of theirs;
If half the idle speech, men Passive spend,
At sensual meetings, when they recommend
Their sanguine Souls, in laughters, to their Peace,
Were spent in Counsels how they might decrease
That frantique humor of ridiculous blood
(Which adds, they vainly think, to their lives flood)
And so converted, in true humane mirth,
To speech, what they shall be (dissolved from Earth)
In bridling it in flesh; with all the scope
Of their own knowledge here; and future hope:
If (last of all) your Intellectiue men
Would mix the streams of every iarring Pen.
In one calm Current; that like land floods, now
Make all Zeales bounded Rivers ouer-flowe;
Firm Truth, with question, every hour pursue;
And yet will have no question, all is true:
Search in that troubled Ocean, for a Ford
That by it self runs; and must bear accord
In each man's self; by banishing falsehood there,
Wrath, lust, pride, earthy thoughts; before elsewhere.
(For, as in one man, is the world inclosde,
So to form one, it should be all disposde:)
If all these would concur to this one end,
It would ask all their powers; and all would spend
Life with that real sweetness, which they dream
Comes in with objects that are mere extreme:
And make them outward pleasures still apply
Which never can come in, but by that key;
Others aduancements, others Fames desiring;
Thirsting, exploring, praising, and admiring;
Like lewd adultererers, that their own wives scorn,
And other men's, with all their wealth, adorn.
Why, in all outraying, varyed joys, and courses,
That in these errant times, tire all men's forces,
Is this so common wonder of our days?
That in poor foretimes, such a few could raise
So many wealthy Temples, and these none?
All were devout then; all devotions one;
And to one end converted; and when men
Give up themselves to God; all theirs goes then:
A few well-giuen, are worth a world of ill;
And worlds of Power, not worth one poor good will.
And what is the cause, that (being but one Truth) spreds
About the world so many thousand heads,
Of false Opinions, all self-lov'd as true?
Only affection, to things more then due:
One Error kissed, begets infinite.
How can men find truth, in ways opposite?
And with what force, they must take opposite ways
When all have opposite objects? Truth displaies
One colored ensign; and the world pursues
Ten thousand colors: see (to judge, who use
Truth in their Arts;) what light their lives do give:
For wherefore do they study, but to live?
See I Eternities straight milke-white way,
And One, in this life's crooked vanities straie;
And, shall I think he knows Truth, following Error?
This; only this; is the infallible myrror,
To show, why Ignorants, with learned men vaunt,
And why your learned men, are so ignorant.
Why every Youth, in one hour will be old
In every knowledge; and why Age does mould.
Then; As in Rules of true Philosophy
There must be ever due Analogy
Betwixt the Power that knows, and that is known,
So surely ioynde that they are ever one;
The understanding part transcending still
To that it understands, that, to his skill;
All, offering to the Soul, the Soul to God;
(By which do all things make their Period
In his high Power; and make him, All in All;
So, to ascend, the high-heauen-reaching Skale
Of man's true Peace; and make his Art entire,
By calming all his Errors in desire;
(Which must preceede, that higher happiness)
Proportion still, must trauerse her access
Betwixt his power, and will; his Sense and Soul;
And evermore th'exorbitance control
Of all forms, passing through the bodies Power,
Till in the soul they rest, as in their Tower.

Int. But; as Earths gross and elementall fire,
Cannot maintain it self; but does require
Fresh matter still, to give it heat, and light;
And, when it is enflamed; mounts not upright;
But struggles in his lame impure ascent;
Now this way works, and then is that way bent,
Not able, straight, t'aspire to his true Sphere
Where burns the fire, eternal, and sincere;
So, best souls here; with heartiest zeales enflamed
In their high flight for heaven; earth-broos'd and lamed)
Make many faint approches; and are feign,
With much unworthy matter, to sustain
Their holiest fire; and with sick feathers, driven,
And broken Pinions, flutter toward heaven.

Peace The cause is, that you never will bestow
Your best, t'enclose your lives, twixt God, and you;
To count the worlds Love, Fame, Joy, Honor, nothing;
But life, (with all your love to it) betrothing
To his love; his recomfort; his reward;
Since no good thought calls to him, but is heard.
Nor need you, think this strange; since he is there,
Present: within you; ever, every where
Where good thoughts are; for Good has no estate
Without him; nor himself is, without That:
If then, this Commerce stand twixt you entire;
Try, if he either, grant not each desire;
Or so conform it, to his will, in stay;
That you shall find him, there, in the delaie,
As well as the instant grant; And so prove, right
How easy, his dear yoke is; and how light
His equal burden: whether this Commerce
Twixt God and man, be so hard, or perverse
(In composition); as, the Raritie,
Or no-where-patterne of it, does implie?
Or if, in worrhy contemplation
It do not tempt, beyond comparison
Of all things worldly? Sensuality,
Nothing so easy; all Earths Company,
(Like Rubarb, or the drugges of Thessalie)
Compared, in taste with that sweet? O try then
If, that contraction (by the God of men)
Of all the law, and Prophets, laid upon
The tempting Lawyer; were a lode, that None
Had power to stand beneath? If Gods dear love,
Thy Conscience do not, at first sight approve
Dear, above all things? And, so pass this shelfe;
To love (withal) thy Neighbor as thy self?
Not, love as much; but as thy self; in this,
To let it be as free, as thine own is;
Without respect of profit, or reward,
Deceit, or flattery; politic regard,
Or any thing, but naked Charity.

Interlo. I call, even God, himself; to testify
(For men, I know but few) that far above
All to be here desired; I rate his love.
Thanks to his still-kist-hand, that so has framed
My poor, and abject life; and so, inflamed
My soul with his sweet, all-want-seasoning love;
In studying to supply, though not remove,
My desert fortunes, and unworthiness,
With some wished grace from him; that might express
His presence with me; and so dignifie,
My life, to creep on earth; behold the sky,
And give it means enough, for this low plight;
Though, hitherto, with no one hours delight,
Hearty or worthy; but in him alone;
Who, like a careful guide, has haled me on;
And (every minute, sinking) made we swim,
To this calm Shore; hid, with his Son, in him:
And here, ay me! (as trembling, I look back)
I fall again, and, in my haven, wrack;
Still being persuaded (by the shameless light)
That these are dreams, of my retired Night;
That, all my Reading; Writing; all my pains
Are serious trifles; and the idle veins
Of an unthrifty Angel, that deludes
My simple fancy; and, by Fate, extendes
My Birth-accurst life, from the bliss of men:
And then; my hands I wring; my bosom, then
Beat, and could break open; fill the enraged Air;
And knock at heaven, with sighs; inuoke Despair,
At once, to free the tired Earth of my lode;
That these recoiles, (that, Reason does explode;
Religion damns; and my armed Soul defies;
Wrastles with Angels; telling Heaven it lies,
If it deny the truth, his Spirit has writ,
Graven, in my soul, and there eternisde it)
Should beat me from that rest; and that is this;
That these prodigious Securities
That all men snore-in (drowning in vise lives
The Souls of men, because the body thriues)
Are Witch-crafts damnable; That all learnings are
Foolish, and false, that with those vile lives square;
That these sour wizzards, that so gravely scorn
Learning with good life; kind against kind suborne;
And are no more wise, then their shades, are men;
Which (as my finger, can go to my Pen)
I can demonstrate; that our knowledges, Knowledge of our selves.

(Which we must learn, if ever we profess
Knowledge of God; or have one Notion true)
Are those, which first, and most we should pursue;
That, in their searches, all men's active lives,
Are so far short of their contemplatiues;
As Bodies are of Souls; This life, of Next:
And, so much does the Form, and whole Context
Of matter, serving one; exceed the other;
That Heaven, our Father is; as Earth our Mother.
And therefore; in resemblance to approve,
Who are the true bredde; fatherd by his love;
(As Heaven it self, does only, virtually
Mix with the Earth; his Course still keeping hie,
And Substance, vndisparag'd; (though his Beams
Are dround in many dung-hils; and their Steames,
(To us) obscure him; yet he ever shines:)
So though our souls beams, dig in bodies Mines,
To find them rich discourses, through their Senses;
And meet with many myddins of offenses,
Whose Vapors choke their Organes; yet should they
Disperse them by degrees; because their swaie
(In Power) is absolute; And (in that Power) shine
As firm as heaven; heaven, nothing so divine.
All this, I hold; and since, that all truth else,
That all else know, or can hold; stays and dwelles
On these grounds uses; and should all contend
(Knowing our birth here, serves but for this end
To make true means, and ways, to our second life)
To plie those studies; and hold every strife
To other ends (more then to amplify,
Adorn, and sweeten these) deservedly)
As balls cast in our Race; and but grass knitt
From both sides of our Path; t'ensnare our wit:
And thus, because, the gaudie vulgar light
Burns up my good thoughts, formed in temperate Night,
Rising to see, the good Moon oftentimes
(Like the poor virtues of these vicious times)
Labor as much to lose her light; as when
She fills her waning horns; And how (like men
Raisd to high Places) Exhalations fall
That would be thought Stars; I Will retire from all
The hot glades of Ambition; Company,
That (with their vainenesse) make this vanity;
And cool to death, in shadows of this vale:
To which end, I will cast this Serpents skale;
This load of life, in life; this fleshie stone;
This bond, and bundle of corruption;
This breathing Sepulcher; this spundge of grief;
This smiling Enemy; this household-thiefe;
This glass of air; broken with less then breath;
This Slave, bound face to face, to death, till death;
And consecrate my life, to you, and yours:
In which objection; if that Power of Powers
That has relieved me thus far; with a hand
Direct, and most immediate; still will stand
Betwixt me, and the Rapines of the Earth;
And give my poor pains, but such gracious birth,
As may sustain me, in my desert Age,
With some power, to my will; I still will wage
War with that false Peace, that exileth you;
And (in my prayed for freedom) ever vow,
Tears in these shades, for your tears; till mine eyes
Pour out my soul in better sacrifise.

Peace. Nor doubt (good friend) but God, to whom I see
Your friendlesse life converted; still will be
A rich supply for friends; And still be you
Sure Conuertite to him. This, this way row
All to their Country. Think how he has showed
You ways, and by ways; what to be pursew'd,
And what avoided. Still, in his hands be,
If you desire to live, or safe, or free.
No longer days take; Nature does exact
This resolution of thee, and this fact:
The Foe hayles on thy head; and in thy Face
Insults, and trenches; leaves thee, no worlds grace;
The walls, in which thou art besieged, shake.
Have done; Resist no more: but if you take
Firm notice of our speech, and, what you see;
And will add pains to write all; let it be
Divulged too. Perhaps, of all, some one
May find some good: But might it touch upon
Your gracious Princes liking; he might do
Good to himself, and all his kingdoms too:
So virtuous, a great Example is;
And that, has thankt, as small a thing as this;
Here being stuff, and form, for all true Peace;
And so, of all men's perfect Happiness.
To which, if he shall lend his Princely ear,
And give commandment (from your self) to hear
My state; tell him you know me; and that I,
That am the Crown of Principality,
(Though thus cast off by Princes) ever vow
Attendance at his foot; till I may grow
Up to his bosom; which (being deaw'd in time
With these my Tears) may to my comforts clyme:
Which (when all Pleasures, into Palseys turn,
And Sunne-like Pomp; in his own clouds shall mourn)
Will be acceptiue. Mean space I will pray,
That he may turn, some toward thought this way;
While the round whirlewindes, of the earths delights
Dust betwixt him and me; and blind the sights
Of all men ravished with them; whose increase
(You well may tell him) fashions not true Peace.
The Peace that they inform; learns but to squat,
While the slye legal foe (that leuels at
War, through those false lights) soudainly runs by
Betwixt you, and your strength; and while you lie,
Couching your ears; and flatting every lymme
So close to earth, that you would seem to him
The Earth it self: yet he knows who you are;
And, in that vantage, poures on, ready war.

Conclusio.
THus, by the way, to humane Loves interring,
These marginall, and secret tears referring
To my disposure (having all this hour
Of our vnwordly conference, given power
To her late-fainting issue, to arise)
She raisde her self, and them; The Progenies
Of that so civil Desert, rising all;
Who fell with her; and to the Funeral
(She bearing still the Coffine) all went on.
And, now gives Time, her states description.
Before her flew Affliction, girt in storms,
Gasht all with gushing wounds; and all the forms
Of bane, and misery, frowning in her face;
Whom Tyranny, and Injustice, had in Chase;
Grimme Persecution, Poverty, and Shame;
Detraction, Envy, foul Mishap and lame;
Scruple of Conscience; Fear, Deceit, Despair;
Slander, and Clamor, that rent all the Air;
Hate, War* and Massacre; uncrowned Toil;
And Sickness (t'all the ^est, the Base, and Foil)
Crept after; and his deadly weight, trod down
Wealth, Beauty, and the glory of a Crown.
These vsherd her far of; as figures given,
To show, these Crosses borne, make peace with heaven*
But now (made free from them) next her, before;
Peaceful, and young, Herculean silence bore
His craggie Club; which up, aloft, he hild;
With which, and his forefingers charm he stild
All sounds in air; and left so free, mine ears,
That I might hear, the music of the Spheres,
And all the Angels, singing, out of heaven;
Whose tunes were solemn (as to Passion given)
For now, that Justice was the Happiness there
For all the wrongs to Right, inflicted here.
Such was the Passion that Peace now put on;
And on, all went; when soudainely was gone
All light of heaven before us; from a wood
Whose sight, foreseen (now lost) amazed we stood,
The Sun still gracing us; when now (the Air
Inflamed with Meteors) we discouerd, fair,
The skipping Got; the Horses flaming Mane;
Bearded, and trained Comets; Stars in wane;
The burning sword; the Firebrand, flying Snake;
The Lance; the Torch; the Licking fire; the Drake:
And all else Metors, that did ill abode;
The thunder chid; the lightning leapt abroad;
And yet, when Peace came in, all heaven was clear;
And then, did all the horrid wood appear;
Where mortal dangers, more then leaves did grow;
In which we could not, one free step bestow;
For treading on some murtherd Passenger,
Who thither, was by witchcraft, forced to err.
Whose face, the bird hid, that loves Humans best;
That has the bugle eyes, and Rosy Breast;
And is the yellow Autumns Nightingall;
Peace made us enter here secure of all;
Where, in a Cave, that through a Rock did eat
The monster, Murder, held his impious Seat:
A heap of panting Hearts, supported him;
On which, he sat, gnawing a reeking lymme,
Of some man newly murtherd. As he eat
His graue-digg'd Brows, like stormy Eaues did sweat,
Which, like incensed Fennes, with mists did smoke;
His hyde was rugged, as an aged Oak
With heathie Leprosies; that still he sed
With hot raw lyms, of men late murdered.
His Face was like a Meteo^ flashing blood;
His head all bristl'd, like a thornie wood;
His neck cast wrinkles, like a Sea enraged;
And, in his vast Arms, was the world engaged,
Bathing his hands in every cruel deed;
Whose Palms were hell-deepe lakes of boiling lead;
His thighs were mines of poison, torment, grief;
In which dug Fraud, and Treachery, for relief;
Religions Botcher, Policy; and Pride;
Oppression, Slavery, Flattery glorified;
Atheism, and Tyranny, and gain unjust;
Frantic Ambition, Envy, shagge-heard Lust;
Both sorts of Ignorance; and Knowledge swelled;
And over these, the old wolf Avarice held
A goulden Scourge, that dropped, with blood and vapor;
With which, he whipped them to their endless labor.
From under heaps, cast from his fruitful thyes,
(As ground, to all their damned Impieties)
The mourneful Goddess, drew dead Humane Love*
Nor could they let her entry, though they strove;
And furnac't on her, all their venomous breath;
(For; though all outrage breaks the Peace of death)
She Coffind him; and forth to Funeral
All helped to bear him: But to sound it all,
My Trumpet fayles; and all my forces shrink.
Who can enact to life, what kills to think?
Nor can the Souls beams beat, through blood and flesh,
Forms of such woe, and height, as now, afresh,
Flowed from these Objects: to see Poesy
Prepared to do the special obsequie,
And sing the Funeral Oration;
How it did show, to see her tread upon
The breast of Death; and on a Fury lean;
How, to her Fist, (as rites of service then)
A Cast of Ravens flew; On her shoulders, how
The Fowls, that to the Muses Queen we vow,
(The Owl, and Heronshawe) ^a^e how, for her hair,
A hapless Comet, hurld about the Air
Her curled Beams: whence sparks, like falling stars,
Vanished about her; and with winds adverse,
Were still blown back; To which the Phoenix flew;
And (burning on her head) would not renew:
How her divine Oration did move,
For the vnredeemed loss of humane Love;
Object man's future state to reasons eye;
The souls infusion; Immortality;
And prove her forms firm, that are here impressed;
How her admirde strains, wrought on every Beast;
And made the woods cast their Immanitie,
Up to the Air; that did to Cities fly
In Fuel for them: and, in Clouds of smoke,
Ever hang over them; cannot be spoke;
Nor how to Humane love (to Earth now given)
A lightening stoop't, and ravished him to heaven,
And with him Peace, with all her heavenly seed:
Whose outward Rapture, made me inward bleed;
Nor can I therefore, my Intention keep;
Since Tears want words, and words want tears to weep.
Corollarium ad Principem.
THus shook I this abortiue from my Brain;
Which, with it, lay in this unworthy pain:
Yet since your HOMER had his worthy hand
In vent'ring this delaie of your Command,
To end his Iliades; deigne (Great Prince of men)
To hold before it your great Shield; and then
It may, do service, worthy this delaie,
To your more worthy Pleasure; and I may
Regather the sperst fragments of my spirits,
And march with HOMER through his deathless merits,
To your vndying graces. Nor did he
Vanish with this slight vision; but brought me
Home to my Cabine; and did all the way
Assure me of your Graces constant stay
To his souls Being, wholly naturalliz'd
And made your Highness subject; which he prized,
Past all his honors held in other Lands;
And that (because a Princes maine state stands
In his own knowledge, and his power within)
These works that had chief virtue to begin
Those informations; you would hold most dear;
Since false Joys, have their seasons to appear
Just as they are; but these delights were ever
Perfect and needful, and would irke you never.
I praying for this happy work of heaven
In your sweet disposition; the calm Even
Took me to rest; and he with wings of Fire,
To soft Airs supreme Region did aspire.
By the ever most humbly and truly dedicated to your most Princely graces. GEO.
CHAPMAN.


