A REPLY to a Censure written against the two answers to a Jesuits seditious
Pamphlet.

By William Charke.

1. Reg. 20. 11.

Let not him that gurdeth on his armor boast as he that puts it off

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

ANNO. DOM. 1581.

To the Christian Reader.
AS there have risen up in the Church from time to time false Prophets and
teachers, 2. Pet. 2. 1.
which oppose them selves to the holy Prophets of God, and true teachers of
his word: so among the people where such contrariety of doctrines has been
delivered, like contrariety of hearers has always followed, not only in
judgment, but also in their affection. For as some through the mercy of God
and the sincere preaching of the Gospel, have yielded obedience to his word:
so many, carried away with corrupt teachers, have for want of judgment embraced
error in place of truth, and carnal worshippings, in stead of the pure
worship of God, which evermore consists John. 4. 24.
in spirit and truth. Against this so dangerous infection of false teachers,
the holy Apostle Saint John has given us a most wholesome counterpoyson:
willing us not to believe every spirit, but to try and examine the spirits
whether 1. John. 4. 1.
they be of God. But (to speak of our times) this examination and trial may
seem very hard, seeing the teachers on both sides are thought learned, and al
pretend to teach the truth. For, it is not denied but both sides have had
their education in schools of learning, they have also labored in the
liberal arts, to furnish them selves to greater matters: whereupon they al
bring very good words, some show of reason, and seem to have no small force
of persuasion. How then shall the simple people judge, how shall they
discern, whose judgment and discretion should be framed by their teachers,
and settled by their sownd, and plain doctrine? To this I answer, S. John in
that place makes the matter more easy then it appears at the first show.
For, exhorting us not to believe every spirit, he does draw our consideration
to the spirit and doctrine of the teachers, and not to these outward gifts of
an eloquent style, or a sweet sownde of pleasing words, which may be common
to good and evil: yea wherein the evil, for want of a good cause labor to
excel, and from which the godly abstain for the sufficiency of their cause
without it, and are also restrained, lest our faith should stand in the
wisdom of men, and not in the 2. Cor. 2. 5.
power of God. But Saint John, to make this his trial of spirits yet more full
and plain, adds, that every spirit which confesses Christ Jesus to have 1.
John. 4. 2.
come in the flesh, is of God, and every spirit which confesses otherwise, is
of Antichrist. Now therefore, let us see bow the Apostle frames us to a
spirit of discretion, to discern the spirits of true and false teachers. If
any man shall teach and consesse that Christ was made man, and ordained of God
the Father a Prophet, alone to teach: a King, alone to rule: and a Priest,
alone to sanctify us, and to reconcile us to his Father by the obedience of
faith, this confession and doctrine is of the holy spirit of God, and to be
received, what spirit soever shall mightily or cunningly persuade the contrary.
On the other side, if any spirit shall teach that Christ is not our only
teacher by his holy Gospel, but that we must admit unwritten belief and
traditions, from we know not whom, to be of like authority with the written
word: secondly, if any spirit make not Christ alone our King and head to rule
us by his holy spirit, but teach that a mortal and sinful man must sit in
our consciences, and for hatred or gain (which is his practice) bind or loose
at his pleasure: lastly, if any spirit impeach the alsufficiencie and entier
virtue of Christ's sacrifice offered up once for ever, and teach that themselves
must renforce it from day to day by the continuance Heb. 7. 27. and 9. 12. 26.
28. and 10. 10.
of their daily sacrifice of the Mass, offered for the quick and dead: it
appears manifestly, that such spirits are not of God, nor their doctrine to
be received, though it be delivered with never so much persuasion of eloquent
speech, or offered to us with never so much expectation of worldly honor. For,
to deny the most absolute virtue and effects of Christ's offices, is in effect
to deny the authority of his person, and to lose the benefit of all his
graces, because they withdraw a part. To this examination of spirits, without
regard of persons, the godly Reader is to be exhorted. For the doctrine that
gives al glory to God, is of God: the doctrine that attributes some glory
and ascribes some merits to man, is of men: the religion also that is
agreeable to flesh and blood, making an acceptable sound and show to the
outward senses, is carnal and vain: finally, what religion so ever is not
joined with the knowledge and exercises of the word of God, that is no true
religion, but a disguised and blind mask full of deuilish superstition. The
adversaries take a contrary course in making trial of their doctrine: for they
would have this examination of spirits utterly suppressed, and under one title
of that falsely named Catholic Church of Rome, they would bind all men to
receive for undoubted true religion what corruptions so ever they teach,
without any further question. Which being granted them, the examination of
spirits need not: for if Rome affirm it, the matter is sufficient and must
not be denied. Also these enemies of the truth leave the touchstone, which
tries al metalles, namely the doctrine, and for it they draw the teachers
into examination: supposing that if they can discredit or disgrace the men,
they shall easily undermine and overthrow their doctrine. For trial of this
long practice, there are so many books, that I need not allege any, but
this late Censure written as in defense of popish religion: but the author
shifting his hands very cunningly of the direct and plain maintenance of the
questions in controversy, does but offer at them, or give some false fire: his
leauell and battery is against their persons and credit, that maynteining the
truth, cannot but assail the doctrines, and put in hazard the authority of
the popish Church.

Therefore I am in the name of the truth to crave it of the good Reader, to
lay aside respect of men, and the regard of those gifts that may please him
much; and deceive him more: and if it be his desire, not so much to see the
fight, as to behold the issue and enjoy the victory: then let him embrace that
doctrine most, that attributes least to the broken arm, or blind judgment
of man, that in the Church all the power and wisdom of our salvation may be
ascribed to God alone, through Christ Jesus our Lord.

Amen.
W. Chapter

A Reply to a Censure written against the two answers to a Jesuits seditious
Pamphlet.
IT is much to be lamented, that in the things of this life, there is not a
cause so good, nor a title so just, but when it is brought into question, the
quarelling party will readily find out some form of pleading against it, and
in the judgment of ye ignorant or partial hearer, seem to have a good cause
and great reason on his side, when in deed, he has neither the one nor the
other. But it is much more to be lamented, that in the things of a better
life, namely in the matters of our salvation, there is nothing so plain in the
word of God, nothing so agreeable with the use of the primative Church, but it
has enemies that cry out against the light as if it were darkness, and
against the truth as if it were falshoode, whereby the ignorant are
interteyned in their ignorance, and the obstinate hardened in their rebellion.

If the truth be subject to such injuries and reproaches, they that mayntaine
the truth, must partake with it also, but always with an affiance therein,
that it is mighty and will prevail. As many also as love the truth, and yet
for want of knowledge, do as it were stagger in so great contrari^rie of
opinions, they must not have their faith in respect of persons, or be carried
James 2. 1. Ephe. 4. 1^.
about with every blast of doctrine, in the uncertainty or hazard of men, who
are exercised in cunning ways, and lie in wait to deceive. For this Religion
is not true, because such learned men teach it, or that false, because such
wise men do condemn it: but whatsoever is truly taught, and plainly proved
by the holy word of God, if thou ^^care it with fear and reverence, that will
confirm thy judgment, and establish thy heart in a good conscience of the
truth. But in handling these controuersi^s, because an earnest zeal of the
truth, does prouoi^^ the godly to a great hatred of error, and a blind love of
superstition carry away others to the slander of wholesome doctrine: let both
sides remember, that there is one that s^eth and judges in these actions,
whose final sentence shall stand in that great day of the Lord Jesus against
Romans 1. 18.
al, that withhold the truth in unrighteousness. This, being well considered;
will join christian love with godly-zeale on the one side, and somewhat stay
the other, that they break not out into a defyaunce of the truth, and into
the same open faults, wherewith they so much and so unjustly accuse others.
For, many in great want of arguments, recompense the matter with unchristian
taunts and slanders; and not being able to overthrow the truth, are yet
always armed with variety and colout of words to charge it as a lie, and the
defenders thereof as forgers of lies, and as maynteiners of daumable
absurdities. Notwithstanding, as the truth was not tied 2. Tim. 2. 9.
when Paul was in bands: so good causes are not confuted, though the defenders
thereof be never so scornefully reproched. This may appear, as by many other
treatises against our brethren heretofore, so by the late Censure of Ed.
Campion or some other for him, that was more ready before hand, to deal
somewhat with the answers made to his proud and seditious libel. For in a round
style this quareler would carry away the maintenance of an evil cause, and under
the title and authority of a Censurer, ratify his manifold and unjust
accusations, that so finally he may sit down to give open sentence against the
truth. But for an answer to those accusations, and a repeal of his false
sentence, I mind to follow him, as from line to line, where just occasion is
offered, that upon examynation it may appear, how little force there is
against the naked truth of Gods causes, in the painted words of man's wisdom.

This Censurer takes in hand the open defense of ye Jesuits seditious
Pamphlet, and as a man of authority and judgment, to censure my answer to
it: but as he has nor performed the one, so he has greatly missed of the
other. For the arguments alleged to prove Campions seditious enterprise in
every part of his libel, and to open the like practices in his fellow Jesuits,
and other Papists, that employ all their labors against the Church of God,
and the good estate of this kingdom, they remain all unanswered: the Censurer
did not think it safe to give his sentence in these matters, although he knew
well, they were the chief things that he should have answered. The matters
handled by the way, as of the sect and doctrine of Jesuits, of Ed. Campions
person, of disputation, of Christian Frankens treatise against the Jesuits,
they are the matters that the Censurer has chosen out to abide his bitter
taunts, and receive his unjust sentence. Thus this judge, that for the skill
and authority he takes upon him, should have censured the matter it self,
has dealt only with certain accessaries, leaving the principal cause in full
force against the Jesuit.

But for proof hereof, to come now to the Censure, Campion o^ the like spirit
in some other petie champion, does at his entrance, give an aduertisment to
abuse his reader, that the Jesuits offer required not so much an answer in
writing, as shorter trial in disputation. In which words he would seem to
make it a matter out of doubt, that he and his confederates can soon confute
the religion established, and by a short way defend their Popish superstition,
if they might come to the trial. But these few words do bewray much vanity.
For who is Campion, or who are the rest of these seedmen, that they should
presume so much of themselves, as to make so short work in anowing that popish
religion, that has nothing to uphold it but tyranny, nothing to defend it but
lies, nothing to restore it but hypocrisy and rebellion: Where have these
disputers stayed so long time: Now they are come, what can they get by renewing
the battle so often, and so lately refused and avoided by their chief
fathers and ancient captains: Surely, if your studied D. Watson. M. Peoknam
and prepared books, be a sure argument what you can do in a present
disputation, then I doubt not, if it were granted, but you would therein make
a short tria^^ of your vain ch(...)ge, and leave a sure testimony of your
(...)tichristian religion.

This your advertisement is joined with a bold and malicious accusation, not
so much against M^st. Hamner and me, as against the religion, and as many as
profess ye same. For not having a watch before your lips, you affirm it as
clear, that there can be had nothing from us but words. Mast. Hamner has
with his words brought more reason and truth against you, then you will be well
able to answer. Whether I bring nothing but words or no, I leave it to them
that (...) measure my answer, by their own indifferent judgment, and not by
ye prejudice of your unlawful Censure. Whereas you would seem briefly to
gather ye effect of my book^ in stead thereof you spread abroad your own
uncharitable and untrue terms, censuring me and not my answer. For you accuse
me of subtlety, of falsifying, of malice, of flattery for profit, of
infinite repeticions in the terms of Pope and Popery, of invention and excess
in railing, and of bold lies and assertions whatsoever with out blushing.
Almost every line sounds loud with some foul reproach. Therefore to answer
you in them al, (...) report not y^ challenge; subtillie for my purpose, but for
a plain discovery of Campions practice, which is full of distoyaltie, full of
Popish rebellion, and I have don^^t so justly, that you have thought it good to
say little or nothing in his defense. Secondly what moved you to charge me as
falsifying: the challenge, whereas you have not in all your censure so much as
mentioned the least corruption against me: I know I followed some special
copies, which came neither co(...)tiy nor corrupted to my hands: but (...)ed
their coming, and one an other with great consent. Such a charge makes your
false accusation to fall upon your self; as a false accuser, for a just
recomp^nce of your unjust sentence. The third ^ccus^t^on of malice, is against
the brotherly love yon speak of: for the report of Campions dissoyall and
seditious practices, being apparauntly true, and in soine of you broken out
into actual and unnatural rebellion, and found ready to break out in
others, you cannot well charge me with malice in declaring a truth, except
you can for full execution of your office look into my heart, and there find
that I never felt. (...)s no excuse in this place to maynteine your Jesuits
and Semynaries, that their seeds of sedition, their libels, their masses,
their bulls and open ^rmes, are things done for conscience and religion: for
in making such traiterous practices, the effects of your religion and
conscience, you subscribe to Saunders book, and both make the tree very evil,
because the fruit is very badde: therein also you grant me that, which
afterward you do deny. Touching the fourth accusation of palpable flattery
toward (...) states for gain: if you think them vnw(...) thie of such
praise, examine the thoughts of your own heart in that behalf: if my duty
and conscience bound me to say no less in their defense against Campions
ungodly suggestions, you have judged before the time, and one, who by the grace
of God is well able to prove his special hatren of flattery and gain by such
ungodly means. In the fifth reproach I take it as a plain note of somewhat,
that your ears tingle and are wearied with the terms of Pope and Popery. But
your infinite repetition of such superstitions cause often repetition of these
fittest words to express the same: for the matter must be wearisom and worn
out with you, before the proper terms thereof be worn out or buried with us.
Neither can I promise it then, for as the notorious superstition of Scribes and
Pharisees, the iniquity of Pilate, and the hardness of Pharao while they
lived, will in no age suffer their odious names to die: so the Pope and popery
may for like rebellion receive the like punishment, remaining for ever in all
detestation. But you (for what cause I can easily guess) have scarsely once
mentioned the Pope in all your book, although he be your Lord and father,
and to you nearer and deerer, then either the Prince, or the love of your
country.

Upon my answer you promised to enlarge your self, and in brotherly love: but
you do only enlarge your self in answering a few articles cited against the
Jesuits out of Donatus Gotuisus: in all the rest you are very short, so that
my answer is not answered, but by your malicious and bold Censure here and
there noted, for a word or for a syllable, making little for you or against me:
in the rest it is charged and ouercharged, with your free taunts and unjust
sentence. Your brotherly charity, I think, is somewhere else bestowed.

My order in answering the pamphlet from point to point, it pleases you to
call rouing, that you may persuade the reader, I did not leauell at the
certain mark in my answer, nor keep a right order. Wherein you give me
occasion to speak of your order, which may fitly be called a disorder, such as
also may be looked for (...) your hands, if you and your fellows should come
to disputation. The order you have framed to your self in four parts: first;
touching the sect of Jesuits: secondly, touching Campion: thirdly, touching
the challenge: and lastly, touching the dialogue added to the answer, is at
your pleasure, to roue in deed at your own marks, to be large or short, to
touch or pass by, to answer or leave unanswered, as may serve best for your
skill and make most for your purpose. Notwithstanding, seeing you have frained
this order, and laid down these 4. parts to my hand, I will follow them in
the same order, least I might seem with you to make some answer where I
please, and let the rest alone.

Touching the Jesuits.
I Acknowledge my labor employed to bring in discredit the Jesuits, whose
infections The first part.
are well known abroad, and are now entered to work treason in the land.
Also I grant the speeches which in all hatred of Popish practices, so directly
attempted against the Majesty of God, and peace of this noble kingdom, I
uttered in diverse places of my answer, and are now by you not unfitly
gathered together to be seen in one view. And because you charge me with
ordinary railing, I might fully requite you with placing your ordinary and
extraordinary railings in one rank, that you may know your own, and take
them home. But I have no such purpose: and if I had, where you have gathered my
fit words against the wicked monkish friars or frierly monks to fill ten
lines, I might gather of your reproaches more then can come into ten leaves.
Therefore I leave it to the indifferent reader of your book to judge with what
mind it is like you accused me of railing, that rail so your self, or for
want of modesty, you that have been so immodest and so bitter, or of absurd
assertions, you that have so many.

Concerning your charge, that I abuse the Jesuits those learned men: I
answer, that godliness is true learning, and the only foundation of good life,
without the 1. Tim. 4. 7.
which, if they had any learning, or have any show of good life, the greater is
their sin and hypocrisy, in employing such gifts of God to so vile a
purpose, as the defense of manifest falshoode and superstition. True it is,
that the world does know them, and such as they be: But it is a small thing
to be known or loved of the world: our joy is, that God does know his and
maynteine 2. Tim. 2. 19. Psalm. 9. 4. Ier. 50. 34.
their right.

That I call the Jesuits a sect (which you so find fault with all) it is not
my doing alone, but many have done it before me and that learnedly, as shall
appear afterward. But your definition is first to be noted, as coming
somewhat out of place and untrue. Touching the place I will not contend, the
matter cannot be justified, in that you define Sectaries to be in deed such as
cut themselves off in opinion of religion, from the general body of the
Catholic Church. For herein, as not remembering your own art, you confound
heretics with sectaries, making no distinction, between the general and the
special: for (howesoeuer the names are sometimes confounded) in the received
distinction of matter, all heretics are sectaries, but all sectaries are not
heretics: so that being diverse in nature, they cannot have the same proper
definition. Beside your fault of confounding even in a definition, which should
serve to distinction, and to bring clear knowledge, this also is to be
considered, that of the two, it does most fitly agree unto heretics, whose
sin and heresy stands in cutting them selves off from the communion of the
Church in opinion and doctrines of faith. Lastly, though one man once divide
him self, and so be guilty in this particular of schism, yet by the word in
common use, we call it not a sect, till there be many drawn away. For if
Layolas alone had trodden that new path, and vowed that special vow, for his
division and superstitious trade, he alone should not have been called a sect.
Wherefore your definition has bewrayed great want of learning.

But to give you a truer definition, A sect, according to the true etymology
of y^ word, is a company of men, that differ from the rest of their religion,
either in matter of form of their profession. Seeing therefore the Jesuits
receive a peculiar vow to preach as the Apostles did, every where, to do it
of free cost, to whippe and torment them selves after the example of a sect
called by the name of whippers, and Chronica. chronic. fol. 21 5.
condemned long ago: seeing they also as a divided company from all others,
do follow the rule of Layolas, it appears plainly, the Jesuits are a
sect. As for the examples of Elias, Elizeus, Daniel, and John Baptist, they are
no less wickedly then unlearnedly alleged, to auow their order. What are you
able to bring out of the word of God, why Elias should after more then 2000.
years be brought in for a patron of Friars: What was in Elizeus or Daniel,
that may liken them to Jesuits: John Baptist that may seem to make most,
makes nothing at all for you: for it is to be thought he was Luke 1. 15.
an extraordinary and perpetual Nazarite, and therefore his calling warranted
him for his austere and extraordinary attire and diet, which restraint or the
like, is not now laid upon those that teach in the Church; having all their
several offices expressed Romans 12. 6. 7, 8.
in the word of God. Moreover John's preaching in the wilderness of Judea did
not withdraw him as is imagined, into solitary and waste mountains, but the
hilly part of Judea was in comparison of other places, called a wilderness,
being notwithstanding a country well inhabited, as appears in the book of
Joshua. Thus it Josh. 1^5 61.
is clear, that neither your definition nor examples can prove the Jesuits to
be no sect. Nevertheless, as I have answered one definition with another: so
will I answer your examples far from the matter, with examples plainly
declaring that which is in question. Saint Paul does accuse the Corinthes of
Schism, only because they said, I am of Paul: I am of 1. Cor. 1. 10. and 11.
18.
Apollos: I am of Cephas: I am of Christ. These did not cut themselves off in
opinion of religion, they did not hold a several faith to themselves: but for
this Schism he sharply rebuked them, saying, Is Christ divided: Therefore the
Jesuits, following in y^ like, or in more wicked steps, receive sentence
from Saint Paul, wherein they are accused of Schism, and condemned as a sect.
For do not these votaries of Rome, do not these irregulars say, I am of Auste^,
I am of Frauncis, I am of Dominick, and these last men, I am of Jesus: Is Jesus
then divided: or not rather you divided ye Jesuits, being cut off as
heretics from the mystical body of Christ, and rent as Sectaries in your own
bowels: Also the Pharisees are an other example to overthrow your definition,
and Mat. 23. 2. Acts 26. 5. Joseph. antiq. Iudaic. 1. lib. 13. page 394.
prove y^ Jesuits a sect. For they did not cut off themselves from the religion
of the Church, yet for their several order they were a notorious sect.

As I have plainly showed, that the Jesuits are a sect, so it is true, that
they are a blasphemous sect. For what a blasphemy is it to abuse the most
blessed name of Jesus, for a color to their blasphemous practices, in rooting
out the pure and sincere preaching of the Gospel, that afterward they may
bring in all the execrable superstitions and heresies of Popery, and after
many outrages, establishe again the intolerable yoke of Antichrist: This also
increases the offense, that they draw to themselves alone, the most gracious
and comfortable title of our fellowship and union in Christ Jesus, which is
common to Ephesians. 3. 6. Ephesians. 4. 4.
all that do believe, without any division or distinction. Wherefore, howsoever
the discovery went near the heart, and made you complain, for me to call the
Jesuits a blasphemous sect, was neither lewd nor unlearned. It is one of your
nothings to make a show of something, when you say, they call not themselves
Jesuits, but the Society of Jesus: making a distinction where none is, or if
there he any, it is made against the received speech every where, and against
your self, who, in calling them so often Jesuits, do by the practice allow
your self the liberty of that speech, which you reprehend in me. And to
discover your manifest untruth in this small matter that can yield you n^
reward of a lie, I must tell you that Turrian Tur^ianus in Apologetico cap. 1.
and cap. (...).
an other Layolas calls his society by the name of Jesuits, which you deny.

The second note against me, as contumeliously deprauing all religious men, to
deface the Jesuits, is an other slander: for I honor and pray for all
religious men, as many as for true religion are united in the body of Christ,
which is the Church. ^p^^, 1. 22.
But if you account only the popish Monks and Friars religious men, and so take
the title of religion only to your selves, excluding al others, even those
also that are of your church, as many as are not of some regular order and
habit, you have well laid down my meaning: for I hold them all as wicked
ministers of Antichrist, and worthy to be severely censured, for making the
name of religious men proper to themselves, which is common to all Christians
every where. Neither am I herein to be compared with the old Heretics: for
they dispraised the good, and I have spoken against the badde: they did it
untruly, and I in truth. Therefore it is a manifest misconstruing of my
words, as delivered to the dispraise of the^, wh^^ it was not in my thought to
dispraise: as also it wa^ a plain injury to match those ancient Monks of the
primitive Church, with the Monks and Friars of the Popish orders, between whom
there is so great difference, that the name excepted, there is almost nothing
wherein they should be compared. For the Monks in the primitive Church, whom
Austen and others commend so Aug. dem^. ribus Eccl. Catho. ca. (...) Item. de
opere. Monach. ca. 14. and 15.
highly, were, in life and conversation holy, painful and learned, they lived
in their houses without any superstitious vows, as professed students of
Divinity do in their Colleges: they labored with their hands, to relieve
them selves and do good to others. Finally their societies were nurceries of
good learning and godly life, that from thence the Churches might be
continually Aug. epist. (...) Item. ^p. 76.
furnished with godly Ministers and Teachers. These being once called to the
ministry of the Church, ceased to be Monks and left their monasteries. But
the Monks and Friars in these ages are, as one of your fellowpapistes writes
of Cardinal Wolsey, the dregs of the people, and the reproach of mankind.
And that you may not charge me again with these or any other like speeches
delivered against popish Monks and Friars, I must foretell you, that Austen
does clear me in writing as I have done. For speaking of them, but when their
wickedness first began to open it self, he does cry out against Aug. de opere
Monach. cap. 28.
them, as against idle, vagrant, proud, and unclean Monks (accompanied since
with your beggarly Friars) such as now pester the Cloisters, burden the earth,
infect the air, and plant detestable superstitions in all places where they
find their kingdom of hypocrites. Bernard, a nearer witness of their
wickedness, does wonderfully thunder De coena Do^. sermon. 15.
against them, painting out their corruptions with fit words, but with more
reproach then I have used, or can with modesty repeat. Wherefore, howsoever
it might have been a fault to speak against ancient Monks, it is no fault to
speak against the bastard Monks of this late age. But it was your hatred
without other cause to compare me with old heretics* and your deceit (as I
noted) notwithstanding so great difference, to match the old Monks with your
new Friars. The writings of the Fathers are not herein against me, but their
practice for me* For as I praise the good with them, s^ they disprayse the
^adde with me: such as then began to declyne, and are now degenerated
altogether, having made up the measure of iniquity, that was wanting in their
predecessors. Saint Austen also* the lowest that you will or can bring to
prove any great good in Monks, in his 137 Epistle, the title whereof is
corruptly Aug. epi^t. 137.
set down for the purpose, as he wills us not to infame all Mankes for a
few that be evil, so he wills us not to praise al, for a few that be good.
But here I must not let you plead a false title: for if all the wisdom and
authority of your Censureship should join in the matter, it cannot make this
our Austen a Friar, or so win seven or eight hundred years, to advance the
antiquity of your Friars. And this also I must remember you of, that when you
charge me as making war against all the Saints of God, for speaking against
wicked Monks, you do therein much more accuse these Saints and Fathers them
selves, who have done the same before me, having less occasion, because the
disease in their time was not so foul, nor the infections so general. But
presently in the same cause again, to say I have a spirit ^arre differing from
the Spirit of Christ, is a false and presumptuous sentence, pronounced boldly
as from his seat, that does search the reins and know the heart. For Christ
called the Scribes and Mat. 12. 34.
Pharisees a generation of Vipers, and oftentimes repeated these words against
them, Woe be unto you ye Scribes, ye Pharisees, ye Hypocrites, they were not
Mat. 23. 13.
worn out terms with him nor slanderous: as they are not also being used
against their successors, be they Monks or Friars, or any other which have
that leaven. Your self also bring the name of Friar as able to disgrace even
good men, saying in contempt, Friar Bale and Friar Luther. Lastly Christ's
example is alleged for Jesuits, but most blasphemously and against his
Majesty. For though Duk. 9. 58.
Christ had not where to lay his head, yet his example agrees less with you
in this matter, then the example of Saint John Baptist. For John came neither
eating Mat. 11. 18.
nor drinking in such sort, as men do ordinarily: but Christ came eating and
drinking, he frequented public assemblies, and was sometimes interteined at
great feasts. How do you then draw the life of Christ, to uphold the wicked
institution of Iesi^ites: When did he whippe himself; to warrant your practice
in so doing? What worldly blessings given him of his Father did he at any time
abandon: How does his example recommende voluntary poverty to you Jesuits
or t^ any: except you would by virtue of this example, have all men be of your
order, because all should be followers of Christ, and hold it as commanded,
or recommended for an example to be followed of all, whatsoever he has done
before. Thus your ready words have soon carried you into a manifest error.
For by this your doctrine kings must (...)* don their regalities, and after the
example of Charles the fifth, al Monarchs must leave their scepters, and beta^e
them selves to Isag. chron. Abrah. Buchol.
a F^yers weed, if they will be followers of Christ, and ^^e that is
recommended unto (...) by his example of voluntary poverty. And for an
example to touch you nearer, the Pope he must above all other, put off Peter's
cope, and throw away his triple crown, and become a brother of this your
beggarly order.

In the third place you note my endeavor to bring the Jesuits into ^^n^empt by
their obs^ure co^ce^tion from one Layolas a Spanyard, all which I grant is
true. Nevertheless I may not let you pass away with a plain untruth. Where do
I (...) al my answer call Lay^las a Soldier? yet you say I have done it
contumeliously. For the time when Jesuits began, it was hard for any man not
of your nourcerie, to set down the very day and year, when your mother
brought forth those two ^wynnes the Theatines and Jesuits: because their
obscure conception and secret educat^^ was such, that for long time there was
no difference known, and the differences which you make out of Payua depends
upon his credit. But for the matter, Payua says, The Jesuits had their full
creation in the time of Paulus tertius: Kem^^sius says, they had it not before
the time of Paulus quartus. I pray you what authority has Payua against me,
that Kemnisius has not against you: Notwithstanding let the matter be as it
is, you can gain nothing by it, for Turrian a father Ies^ite says, that the
Jesuits were confirmed by Torrian in apolog, in (...)at.
Paulus tertius, and by other Popes afterward: (among whom was Paulus quartus)
which proves my report sufficiently. In handling this question, you grant
that which I affirmed of the Jesuits, that they were created by the Pope in
Martin Luthers time. To your common objection, that our faith began with Martin
Luther, I answer, you may as^el say, the religion of the Jews, and knowledge
of the Law, began in Josias time: and that Hilkia was 2. King. 22. (...) 2.
Chro. 34. 15.
their progenitour, because he found the book of the Law in the house of
God: who notwithstanding found no new thing, but only the authentical book
of Moses, whereupon the king and his people, by a diligent reading and regard
thereof, were won the rather to a notable reformation. 2. Kin. 23. (...)*
For our faith is the same that has been evermore laid and builded upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Ephesians. 3. 20.
Jesus being the chief corner stone, which has also continued from age to
age, although sometimes with small show to the world, because of many
persecutions and Apoc. 12. 6.
great falling away, both in life and doctrine. Wherefore it is your evil
speech, so basely to speak, and bitterly to deface the religion of Jesus
Christ, that has received in the eyes of all the world so great testimony
from God, to prove the work is his own work, and the Gospel his own
everlasting truth, the power whereof is still dedlared from day to day, in many
wonderful issues for the enlargement of his kingdom, and most of all, by
adding to the Gospel daily such as appertain to his holy election.

Concerning the praise you give to Jesuits, as reformers of vice, in my
answer I have proved that your religion must first be reformed, and your
intolerable dispensations and indulgences taken away. For so long as these
marchandises are to be bought so commonly and for so small a price, sin must
needs abound, and the complaint of the Lord will be most just against you,
which was made against the covetous and unclean priests in Israel: They eat
the sins of my people, and lift Hos. 4. 8.
up his mind every one to their iniquity. The Jesuits abandoning of all
worldly pleasures and possibilities of preferment in the same, so far forth
as none of that society has or may take any spiritual or temporal livings
or commodities whatsoever, is nothing else but a superstitions worship, without
commandment (as has been declared) invented by themselves: being moreover
against the order of the pr^mitiue Church, and sauouring not a little of
Anabaptistrie, in condemning the pr^pertie or private po^^ession of earthly
bl^ssings. But howsoever you sound a trumpet one before another, to show the
Jesuits contempt of worldly riches, and that they receive not the
preferrements, wherewith mighty Princes have pressed them, yet, I think your
meaning is not, ^ut y^ if the Pope entreat them, they will be sone entreated.

The humility of their spirit was noted in y^ answer. They can be content in
h^pocrisie, to abase themselves, as to the du^, but it is, that afterward they
may rule o^^r all estates in the land, as he did, whose (...) was to the Pope,
I and my king. So also I proved that the Jesuits come to meet meddle with
matters of estate, and offered them (...) wrong therein, as shall appear in a
^^tter place, when you assay to prove the contra^y.

The Censurer in the next place comes to a discourse of three leaves touching
Ignatius Layolas and Martin Luther, but altogether from the purpose: for proof
whereof, let his two arguments be examined, the one for Layolas and the
Jesuits, the other against Martin Luther and the professors of the truth. For
the Jesuits he brings this reason: Whosoever leaving his former calling,
shall betake him self to a votaries life, and therein win souls, may be
f^ther of a Society: Layolas did so: therefore Layolas may be father of a
Society. The first proposition is omitted by the Censurer, but without it ^e
can prove nothing for the Jesuits. For if any man leaving the field, or the
like calling, may not begin a new order as Layolas did, how can Layolas and
his brood ^ustifie their Society? The second proposition, y^ Layolas, leaving
his former calling, proved so good a man and won souls, is more then
doubtful. Thus it appears, that upon two former propositions, the one false,
the other doubtful, the Censurer can make no true or clear conclusion, that
the Jesuits have a good warrant for their new Apostleship. Against y^
professors of the Gospel, there is another argument made, but with a^ ill art
and success. For thus the Censurer does reason: If Luther were a wicked man,
and taught many beastly doctrines, the Protestants may be ashamed of their
progenitor: but Luther was such a one: therefore the protestants may be
ashamed of their father and religion. The first proposition is altogether
false: for Luther is not our progenitour, nor the father of our faith. If he
had offended, yet the truth and professors thereof are not guilty, or thereby
justly touched in credit. The second proposition is also false: for howsoever
false witnesses come in one upon another to swear against him, Martin Luthers
worthy praise, shall continue in all ages: the Lord has showed him a token of
Psalm. ^5. (...).
good: they that hate him shall see it and be ashamed. Wherefore these two
propositions being false, must needs bring forth a false and s^au^derous
conclusion. Thus the Censurer appears much more careful, smothely to deliver
foul reproaches, then to bring a good reason for maintenance of his cause. His
arguments being thus laid open, it remains to consider the particular
speeches, whereby he sets such colors upon his slanders delivered against
that holy and learned man Martin Luther and upon his praises, for Ignatius
Layolas.

And first for the life of Ignatius Layolas, I pass it over, as a thing from
the matter, and having in it nothing to be answered: when it comes into the
Legenda, it may have some credit in your Church: but as it is now reported, I
see no honor that comes to you by the tale, nor harm to us. But to you this
harm may grow, that hereafter by so slender an example, other Friars may be
brought in as much to raygne over you, as you would raygne over all the Monks
and Friars that have been before you. (...) marvel how in this story of
Layolas you left out yt, which, if it had been true, would have made more for
you then al his life beside. It is his wonderful vision when in a trance he
did behold Jesus receiving him Turrian in Apologetico. page 10.
and his fellows into protection. You know that without a miracle your new
creatures of the Pope have neither life nor soul.

For Martin Luther, what may truly be said f^r his just honor, that shall
appear afterward: now I am to answer unto your reproaches against him. And
first (howesoeuer you think your credit discharged by alleging them) Hosius,
Cochleus, Lindanus and Xaintes have no voice where truth or reason are
admitted for witnesses. For in this action they are specially sworn and
forsworn against Martin Luther the ruin of their estate, being all agreed to
lend and borowe lies, and in one tale to conspire the death and detestation of
his name. Although the sentence were true, yet would you not censure him that
should give sentence against your unholy father, according to Martin Luthers
testimony? Why then do you think that we will any more admit Lindan and
his fellows against Martin Luther, then you will admit him against the Pope?

Therefore in alleging Lindan, Cochleus, Hosius and Xaintes, with some others,
you commit many faults without any gain to your cause. First you abase your
self more then needs, in not thinking your own credit as sufficient with us
to prove any thing against us, as their credit is. For although these witnesses
are dashed in, to make a show in the margent, and to deceive the ignorant
readers that know neither their names, nor their weak authority: yet the
Censurer, if his name were well known, has against us as much credit in his
own cause, as Lindan has, or Hosius, albeit he was your great president in
the Council of Trent. Secondly in citing your own partial men, more carried
I think, with malice against Luther and these causes, then your self, their
sentence can have no more authority, then when a man does stand out to bear
witness in his own cause, or when one thief gives in evidence to acquit an
other. We go not about to ouerbeare you in the like causes with the bare
authority or reports of Martin Luther, of John Calvin, of Peter Martyr, or
other like men: for these are all parties, and the law allows no such for
sufficient witnesses in their own causes. Therefore, how unequal is your
measure, how insufficient is your trial in bringing such testimonies against
us, as your selves would hiss at, if the like, or better were brought against
you(...) Lastly, in alleging such partial and forsworn witnesses, you
bewray an evil cause, that can not otherwise be maintained, then by such
unlawful and insufficient proofs. But (seeing there can be had nothing from
you and your witnesses but slau^ders) let us examine how small cause you have,
so bitterly to slander those that are gone before, and for so wicked purposes,
to infect the judgment of such as shall come after. Entering into the slanders
of Martin Luther, you give a note, that he was the beginner of the new Gospel.
Do you not still bewray Campions spirit in charging the religion now
established in this land with novelties, and most scornefully calling the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, which we preach, a new doctrine? This is not upon
good ground to speak against a few Friars, but in a blasphemous spirit, to
speak against God. But before I answer the particular slanders laid down
against Martin Luther, I must again add that which you have left out, namely
how Luther was begotten of a devil. Surely this is Gab. Pr^^eol.
as true as the rest, and Proteolus as much to be believed as the others.
Therefore the same spark of modesty which made your paper blush to receive
this, as a thing incredible, as offensive to every man's ears, and as bewraying
your insatiable malice, might also have refused to tell the other slanders of
like bitterness and no less untruth. Now, that Martin Luther was stricken
with a thunderbolt in a meadow, though you easily dare report it from an enemy,
yet you shall hardly ^^nde a wise man that will believe you* the matter being
of it self so incredible. A thunderbolt would have taken away life, or left
a mark behind it, for a manifest and sure note of that which otherwise can
not be proved. I will no more believe Lindan in this, then in his large and
wonderful tale of a mad dog pursued with a multitude of armed men, whose
venomous teeth Lindan himself escaped, by the help Defug. Idol. 144.
of Saint Hubert, as they call him, for the which delivery he and all his
house were afterward dedicated to the worship of the same Hubert. I will
believe him no more against Martin Luther, then against our own country men,
of whom he writes that they of the religion in England (whom he calls
Caluinists) do worship the image of ye devil. Of like credit is your ^idem.
100.
other tale of ye devil, horribly crying out of Martin Luthers mouth, and as
much to be believed from Cochleus alone, as from him and a thousand such,
making no conscience to cast out in their writings so malicious and so
intolerable libels. You add these words, that upon a certain emulation and
contention between him and the Friars of Dominiks order, he left his
religion, cast away his habit, broke his vows, married a Nun, and by little
and little, began to preach strange new doctrines, especially tending to all
liberty and carnalitie. How roundlye are these things written, and how calm
does the flood of malicious words seem to flow, partly to disgrace that, yt
was lawfully done, and partly to charge him with that evil, which he never
thought? For when the Lord did open his eyes to see (as many before have seen)
the abominable hypocrisy and superstition of your religion and orders, no
otherwise then for hatred thereof, he left his former superstition (which you
call religion:) he cast away also his superstitious order and the pharisaicall
habit thereof: and thinking him self no longer tied to his unadvised and
superstitious vow, he married in the Lord, and all this was lawful. That by
little and little he began to preach strange and new doctrines, especially
tending to all liberty and carnalitie, it shall be found an untruth delivered
against the man, and a malice against the doctrine which he taught: your own
examples shall make the proof.

First therefore, you charge him to teach, there is no sin but incredulity:
neither can a man damn himself, do what mischief Luth. de captiuit. Babil.
Eccles. Tom. 2. Ien. page 271.
he can, except he will refuse to believe. I will not here measure unto you, as
you have measured unto me, I will not disgrace you first, and then examine the
matter: for therein you have offered me great wrong, as shall appear when I
come to answer those places. But I may plainly pronounce, that in this place
you do in words and matter report an open untruth. For Martin Luther has no
such doctrine. First it was far from him to think there was no sin but
incredulity, and therefore he would never write so manifest an untruth. He is
vehement in condemning many other sins, as (beside infinite other places) it
appears in his expounding the Operationes Luth. in Psalm. 15. Tom. 3.
xv. Psalm, and more largely in his brief exposition upon the ten
commandments. This it is that you have wonderfully perverted: Martin Luther
says, Incredulity, Item in breui expos. Decalogi. Tom. 7. ^19.
(yt is, not to believe the promise of God) does argue the promise of God to be
a lying promise, which is a most high sin of all other. Again, he does not
say as you report, a man can not damn him self, for that is against all
knowledge, either of man's iniquity, or of Gods just judgments: but he
speaks of the baptized, De Cap^a. Babil. eccles. Vol 2.
which believe, and of the truth of Gods promise, who cannot deny himself.
Wherein he shows that it does wonderfully comfort a man's soul, and encourage
him to the hope of mercy, if he shall consider the promise of God made
toward him: of which promise Martin Luther says, it is impossible it should
lie, being entire and not changed or change able through any of our sins. And
hereupo^ he declares what armor we have in respect of Gods true promise, and
how to answer when sin troubles the conscience. Afterward speaking of the
riches of a believer, he concludes saying, Thus thou see a Christian man, or
one baptized how rich he is, who though willing, yet cannot lose his salvation
through his sins how great soever, except he will not believe: for no sins
can damn him but incredulity alone, if faith in the promise of God, made to
the baptized, return and stand, all other vices are swallowed up in a moment,
by the same faith, yea by the truth of God that can not deny 2. Tim. 2. 13.
Tit. 3. 8.
him self, if thou confess him and cleave faithfully to him that promises.
In which words Martin Luther speaks not of a faith separated from good
works, or accompanied with sin only; but of that faith which brings
foorch as fruits and effects those good works which God has prepared, that
we should walk in Ephe. 2. 10. Gal. 5. 6.
them. This is the true and comfortable doctrine of Martin Luther, to prove it
impossible, that the elect should be deceived or fall away, or that the
multitude of their sins, should bar the grace and promise of God.
Wherefore seeing Martin Luther says, Incredulity is the greatest sin, and
you say, he affirms there is no sin but incredulity: Seeing he says in
respect of Gods promise all the sins of the righteous man without want of
faith can not condemn him: and you utter it most corruptly, as if he said, a
man can not damn himself do what sin he can: Lastly, seeing Martin Luther
speaks of the elect, and you utter it as spoken of all, even of the wicked,
the godly reader may behold your malicious and false reports that have in
this first place, hainously charged Martin Luther with a doctrine, which was
never in his heart to embrace, much less in his purpose to publish by
writing. Yet I confess this his found doctrine of our certain salvation, is
against your Trent doubtfulnes, in so undoubted a covenant, Council. Triden. de
iusti. Cau. ^3.
as is that which the Lord has confirmed to his children with an oath that
ca^ never be repealed.

2 In the second place out of his sermon touching Moses, misreporting the title
as I think, you cite these words. The ten commandments apperteine nothing
unto us. Wherein you would bring the reader unto an opinion, that Martin Luther
altogether rejects the moral law of God, Luth. Concione quo modo et quo
fructu lib. Mosis^ Christ. legendi sint. tom. 3. ^en.
setting men free from the obedience or regard thereof. If you could prove but
this one article against him, without your further reproaches, it were sufficient
to bring his honor to the dust. But I dare auowe in your name, that you are
not so ignorant, as not to know his clear doctrine to the contrary, both in
other books, and in that from whence you drew out these words, leaving the
sense behind. I grant he has such words, but never laid down so nakedly, or
to prove such an error, as your report imports. For speaking against such as
urged the policy of the Jews, and laid the yoke of Moses Law upon
christians, he resisted this doctrine, expounding the differences between the
two couenantes of Gal. 3. 11. 12. and 4. 24.
God: one in the ministry of Moses, which is the perfect obedience af all the
Law: the other in the mercy of Christ apprehending righteousness by faith. The
first as he teaches, apperteyned for a time to the Jews alone, yt second
afterward both to Jews and Gentiles, as many as believe. Whereupon Romans 2. 16.
he proves at large, that the law does not apperteyne unto us, as it did to
the Jews: the yoke and ceremonies thereof, lie not upon us to observe in such
sort as it pressed them. All which doctrine, is as largely taught by the
Apostle, proouing Romans 6. 14.
that we are not under the Law, but under grace: and in another place, that
the law was given because of transgression, Gal. 3. 19.
til the seed came which was promised: again in the same place, the Law was
our schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be made righteous by faith, but
after faith is Ibidem. 24.
come, we are no more under the schoolmaster. Which places do clearly show,
yt Moses Law apperteineth not to us, as to the Jews: we are not under it as
they were, the yoke and condemnation thereof does not bind us as it did them:
which is all that Martin Luther teaches: distinguishing our time from their
time, and our estate under Christ and the Gospel, from their condition under
Moses and the Law, according to that excellent distinction of S. John: The law
was given by Moses John 1. 19.
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. We are under Christ and under
grace, not under Moses and the yoke of his law: we have the truth and not the
multitude of shadows and ceremonies, that were under the Mosaical
administration. Now, that Martin Luther did acknowledge the doctrine of the
law profitable to us, though the yoke and former mynisterie thereof be taken
away, it appears by his exposition of the Law, and by his words out of the
same sermon which you allege, where he says, We receive and acknowledge
Luth. in ^^pofit. (...). 7.
Moses for a teacher in deed, whence we learn much wholesome doctrine: as a
lawegiuer or governor we do not acknowledge him. Also afterward having
repeated the commandments, he demands, saying, Is it not necessary for
us to keep these? are they Luth. eadem concione.
not universally commanded to all men? I answer, says he, they are to be
kept of all and apperteyne unto all. Thus it is clear, although M. Luther
acknowledges not the yoke, the curse, the Mosaicall government, which were
proper to the Jews, and appertain not unto us: yet in other respects he is
plentiful in showing the profit and use thereof to Christians: for it is, as
David says, a lantern Psalm. 119. 105.
to our steps, and a light unto our path. Therefore you shall do well to
regard your steps, least your self seem to neglect the law of love and
truth as apperteyning nothing to you, if you thus misreport and misconster any
man's wholesome doctrine.

3 Your third report of Luthers doctrine In praesa. ad ^ou. testam.
is, that it is a false opinion, and to be abolished, that there are four
Gospels. Touching this third place, I find the effect of your report else where,
for these first and Luth. ena^* rat. in epist. Petri. ^om. (...). witteb.
chief words: but the latter words concerning John's Gospel, that it is the
only fair, true, and principal gospel, I cannot find, I think there was
never any such preface written in latin by Luther, as you cite for your
defense. You have in many places used the avouch at large, which Lawiers think
unlearned in their cases, and oftentimes you cite books not to be gotten, as
this preface, and that book de missa angulari, and laid down one title for
an other, with such like practices, to occupy your answerer more in finding
out your places, then in making answer to four of your books. But I thought
only to note your practice herein: now let us return unto the matter. Martin
Luther does neither him self exclude Matthewe, Mark, or Luke, from being the
Gospel, neither would he have any man bar the other writings of the
Apostles from that title, because all that was written by the four
Evangelists, and what so ever the holy Apostles wrote beside in the new
Testament, all that is one Gospel in substance, though there be four whose
several books usually are called four several Gospels. Therefore to speak
of the four Evangelists first, in respect that the holy Ghost used them as
four pens, and four witnesses, all writing the Gospel and story of the
doctrine Act. 1. 2.
and deeds of Christ: we may say there are four Gospels. But in respect they
(...)te in an heavenly harmony, in one Spirit, in one truth, for one and the
same work of faith, the Gospel being one and the same in all four, there
are not four, but one Gospel. As for the rest of the Apostles, what they have
left to the treasure of the Church in the book of God, that also is the same
Gospel, and the Apostle does call Romans 2. 16. and. 16. 25. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5.
his doctrine and Epistles by that name: which is to be observed for avoiding a
corrupt judgment, in thinking less authority or majesty of Gospel in the
Epistles, then is in the books of the four Evangelists: for in respect that
they were sent from the Apostle, to the Churches absent, they are called
Epistles: as other men's letters are called in like case: but in respect of the
doctrine therein delivered, it is the same which saint Luke and saint John did
write, and bear no less honor, how so ever some custom of speech otherwise
does hinder a right judgment in this behalf.

To this third article only has the Censurer given his Censure, wherein he
has not so much reproched Luther, as bewrayed some want of exercise or
judgment in the Scriptures. His words are that Luther said this, because the
other three Gospels spoke too much of good works: whereby the Censurers
opinion is clear, that Saint John speaks less of good works then the
rest. I grant that John has a special course in describing the divinity of
Christ, and the love of God toward us: but that he is inferior to the rest
in teaching good works. I can not grant it, neither can the Censurer prove
it. But for proof of that I say, one or two places of many may be sufficient.
If love be the fulfilling of the Law, and the new commandment, not to love
John 13. 34.
one another, as every man loves him self, but more perfectly and more
abundantly, as Christ has loved us: if to bring forth much fruit, as
branches in the vine, be the John 15. 2.
fountain of every good work: if to follow the shepherd Christ and to obey
his voice, John 10. 4.
be better then al sacrifices: then John does most mightily teach the true
doctrine of good works.

4 The fourth report is, if any woman cannot, or will not prove by order Luth.
sermon. de matrim. Tom. 5. witteb. page 120. a.
of (...) the insufficie^cie of her husband: let her request at his hands a
divorce; or else by his consent let her lie privily with his brother or with
some other man. Accuse not us for your fault: but cover it or take the s^^me
thereof to your selves. True it is, Luther gave this evil counsel, but as he
answers for himself, he did it when he was yet among you, teaching shriuing
Ibid. page 119. b.
priests, what to answer when such doubts are moved by them that come to
shrifte. Also he says it was his advice, when he was holden with the fear
of Antichrist: but now says he (speaking of the time after his conversion) my
mind is Ibid. page 120. a.
to give other counsel. What holy writings can be free from your foul
reproaches, if you will thus rack a piece of sentence against the manifest
purpose of the writer? But it appears that you wrote these things by he are
say, or made none account what examination your book abide, your name being
unknown.

5 In the fifth place you lay down these words against Martin Luther. If the
wife will not, let the maid come. Luth. Sermon. de matrimonio. Tom 5. witteb.
These words thus barely set down, import a wicked opinion and doctrine
tending to carnalitie, as if Martin Luther allowed of fornication, sending the
unruly husband to his maid servant upon any refusal of the wife. But they
were of set purpose and malice tent from the other words and sense of the
writer, to make a show of that opinion which was never in M. Luther reclaymed
to the knowledge of the Gospel. For in this place he speaks of a third cause
of divorce, when the woman shall obstinately refuse her husbands company: and
brings in the man often threatening his wife with these words, which if they
prevail not, he makes his complaynt to the Magistrates, and does nothing
but after a solemn diuorcing, as was that of Vasthi, and after a solemn
espousing, (...) (...) and (...).
as that of Esther: which example he sets down in the same place, and
alludeth unto it by some Dutch phrase, not founding so west in other tongues as
the matter will bear being rightly taken. If this opinion of divorce seem
gross, as it may, yet your Popery, whence this proceeded, has somewhat more
gross even in this point. For it permits a man if he Pet. Lomb. Tit. 4.
did. 36 tomb. code^ libro, did. 39
will, to put away his wife, because she was a bondwoman, and he knew it not
before the marriage. The like is alleged out of Austen, to prove that a man
may be divorced from his wife for covetousness, or such other sins, because
they are spiritual fornication.

6 The sixth report of Luthers doctrine Luth. lib. de vot. ^uang.
is, that Matrimony is much more excellent then virginity. Marriage was
ordained in Genesis 2. 22.
Paradise, marriage increases the number of saints, it is honorable among all
men: (...) Heb. 13. 4.
so much cannot be said for virginity. The comparison I will not stand upon,
they are both good, yet neither good for all: but marriage for him that can not
conteyne: and virginity in some respects, as the Apostle 1. Cor. 7. 2. 27.
Sermon. de matrim. page 126. (...) cap. prior. ad Corinth. page 16.
notes: which Luther in many places does like wise acknowledge. The sixth point
might seem to you a beam in his, which to us would not have been deemed a
mote in your eyes.

7 Your seuently report is, that Christ Luth. lib. de Vot. Monast
and Saint Paul did not counsel, but dissuade virginity unto Christians. It
is not hard. I suppose, to draw out from you the justification of this
doctrine: for you cannot think that Christ persuades all men to abstain from
marriage: Seeing his words are not generally spoken to all whatsoever, but to
alsuch as can contain* He that can receive le^ him receive. Which words for
avoiding of sin, implie thus Matt. 19. 12.
much also, not as counsel only, but as a commandment: he that can not
contain let him marry to avoid fornication as S. (...). Cor. 7. 9.
Paul inforceth. So that all Christians, which have not that rare gift of
continency for avoiding of sin, are counseled to marry: all that have the
gift, for them it is more profitable many ways to abstain. This Luther
teaches out of Christ and Sermon. de matrim. 126.
Paul's doctrine, not to overthrow virginity, but to condemn your ungodly
vow of chastity, without due examination, whether you have the continent gift.

8. The eight report is like the former, Lib. de vot. coniu. et in assert. art.
16.
making it as necessary for every man to have a wife, as it is to eat, drink
or sleep. It is as necessary for him that has not the gift to marry for
avoiding of sin, as it is to eat and drink for avoiding of famine, that is
not so dangerous as sin. When you drew so deep as these matters, you were
desirous rather to bring nothing in deed then nothing in show.

9. Your last report is, that M. Luther Luth. sermon. de Trinit.
should make all Christias as holy and as just, as (...) mother of God, and as
y^ Apostles were. These words are true in respect of Christ, in whom all the
faithful have holiness, and honor equally, notwithstanding there may be
inequallitie in their gifts, and in the measure of their glory. I will not
stand upon the comparisons of these distinctions serving little to edification:
He Psalm. 84. 11.
that is but a door keeper in the house of God, the new Jerusalem, has
infinite glory. Apoc. 21. 2.
Yet because you make the virgin Marie and Apostles to bear more rule with
Christ in heaven, then they did while they lived upon earth: Martin Luther
teaches us, there is no such respect of persons with God: but in Christ Jesus
whether in heaven Act. 10. 34.
or on earth, there is neither Jew nor Grecian, bond nor free, neither male
nor female, Gal. 3. 28. Col. 3. 11.
but we are all one in him. They have all the same glorious inheritance, as
they 2. Pet. 1. 1.
had al like precious faith. For the diversity of measures I have not been a
companion of your bastard Denis in his journey to heaven, to describe the
degrees and dignities there, or to determine that, which Christ referred Mat.
20. 23.
to the determination of his Father, who shall sit at his right hand in his
kingdom, and who at his left. Thus I have answered these places of M. Luther
faithfully and without any of your bitterness in scoffing and vassting at a
vantage of nothing, as if you had thereby gained the whole cause. By my answer
it may appear, these nine places contain no strange new doctrine, as you
have reported without that regard of truth or modesty which is pretended.
But what is that you dare not write, to bring the man's divine and clear
doctrine into contempt, with as many as will be carried away with your smooth
style and bold accusations: For, as not contented with these untruths, you
would make y^ reader believe, y^ you leave other infinite beastly doctrines of
his, invented by much conference with the devil, as you avouch the matter out
of Lindan. But touching the broken and insufficient credit of this Lindan and
other your authors I have noted somewhat before: and such as your witnesses
are, such are their testimonies also: the witnesses not lawful, and the
testimonies not true. For Lindan, that has here filled one page of your
Censure, as a false witness, writes that the devil Lindan de sugien. idolis
cap. (...).
has been seen talk bodily with Martin Luther, by men of very great credit.
The men are not named, nor the matter probable: therefore we may behold a
conspiracy to leave the matter, and disgrace the man: one begins a
slander, and the rest come in, one after another to justify the same upon
that foremans credit. If we had no better testimonies, this practice would be
as plentiful and strong for us as for you: but we have not so learned Christ,
neither Ephesians. 4. 20.
do we stand in need of evil evidences to auow a good cause. But in this
matter, because you bring in Luthers words against himself, to prove some part
of your report, let us see your misconstruing, brought for a defense of your
misreport. It is well known, M. Luther felt many tentations, and endured great
conflictes with the enemy, which are very strange to the most of your
religion. Christ has rendered the reason of your quiet, and godly men's
disquiet in this affliction of conscience: when a strong armed man, says he,
Luke 11. 18.
keeps his Palace, the things are in peace which he possesses. As long as
Satan had Luther in possession, kept in the chains of ignorance and
superstition, he felt not the malice of his spiritual enemy: Satan had no
cause to disquiet a superstitious man, whom he had for the time in quiet
hold: but when the Lord opened his eyes to see, and framed his heart to
withstand the kingdom of Satan and Antichrist, the the enemy assailed him
grievously, as himself complains in many places. All which conflictes were
not as you dream, in an outward or bodily conference with the devil: but in
those inward battles, in those spiritual combats between the flesh and the
spirit, between the tentations of Satan and the desires of the New men: such
as the Apostle notes in diverse places. Gal. 5. 17. Ephe. 6. 12.
Though the Jesuits be not by experience acquainted with this grievous whippe
of God, wherewith he scourges many of his dear children, yet by reading they
might have known what it meant. For Christ endured such tentations (...) Paul
acknowledges Matthew. 4. (...)*
(...) in y^ flesh given him, and the angel of Satan to buffet him. But 2. Cor.
12. 7.
to make all thin plain, that Luther was not otherwise tempted, then in the
exercise of his conscience, and with these inward conflictes of the flesh,
fyghting against the Spirit, and again with the agonies of the spirit,
resisting the assaults of the Devil, which (as was noted) other ^^intes of
God have suffered; and Christ himself, it appears by his own words in the
far places Luth. de missa priuata et Vnct. saccrd. To(...) 7. wittch. page
230.
cited for your purpose. I see ^yght well; says Luther in David and in the
other Prophets; (...) greatly they did wraste and gro(...) in those battayles
and the like; against Satan and his horrible assaults, Christ also him self
(thouth without sin) what tears, what anguish, and what agonies endured he
for us against Satan? He does infinitely press our hearts, and cease not,
but when he is beaten back with the word of God. Wherefore you do not only
in this slander intollerablie reproach Martin Luther, but you speak evil
also of the ways of GOD, whereby he works in the hearts of his children,
true mortification and strength in Jesus Christ, to overcome such sharp Luc.
22. 31.
and dangerous tentations. The treatise of Luther de missa angulari so often
aledged by your fellows, I could never see, therefore it is as the allegation
of his testimony that is dead, or can not be found to give in evidence face
to face: when he is revived and comes forth to bear witness, he shall be
ansered. Touching Luthers death slain (as you think) by y^ devil, going
drunken to bed ouernyght, you should never have dis(...)ed your own
discretion in reporting so foul a lie from so insufficient witnesses, the
contrary being known, to Ioh. Sleid. Comment. lib. 16.
many yet alive, and written by men more indifferent, and of better
intelligence touching the story. As Lindan has thus flaundered his death, so
you slander his life, saying that almost thirty years he lived in all
sensuality and pride. If there had been any material argument, or some false
witness at hand, you would not have come in your self all alone to be sworn
upon this deposition. That which you lay against him of dissension, has
somewhat to be granted. For (if you call it dissension) he did altogether
dissent from Papists, being open enemies of the Gospel: but for Occolampadius,
Bucer, and others, although in some points they disagreed, yet there was among
them a singular care of unity in the Gospel. Whereupon, beside the
intercourse of many loving and godly letters, they set down articles of
agreement, subscribing their names for a testimony of their love, as appears
especially by an act of concord agreed upon at Marburge: Actiones de concordia
Marpurgae. 3. oct. Anno. 15 (...). Item Wittenberge. Anno 1536.
and after that by another concluded at Wittenberge. We might far most justly
require you with this accusation of dissension among your selves, although you
are banded together in a consent against the kingdom of Christ: but this is
from the question, although you often fall into it.

After these praises of (...). Layolas, and many fold slanders against Martin
Luther delivered in the best manner, without any proofs against the one, or for
the other, you leave the matter for the in different reader to judge* The
judgment is soon given, if your proofs were as manifest as your boldness in
uttering untruths.

A most patient mind can not brook a libell so seasoned to itching ears. Our
corrupt nature is more patient and glad to read a whole book, written with a
pleasing grace of scoffs and tauntes against another, then a lease written
sicly to correct and teach our selves: and we are both more skilful to write
and more apt to conceive reprothes, then any doctrine of importance: for the
one is home bredde, the other must come down from above. But notwithstanding
Iam. 3. 15.
all your cunning, if the reader stand upon proofs; and not upon bare speech:
if he stand upon witnesses of credit, and not upon these false subdrued
witnesses, the matter will fall out against Layolas as a superstitious obscure
fellow: and for Martin Luther as a m^n that has written more, then Layolas (I
think) ever read: that has taught more, then Layolas could conceive: that
has suffered for a good conscience, more then ever did Layolas under his
voluntary whippe: who finally was the mean by the mercy of God to plant
more, then all the brood of Layolas shall ever be able to hinder in y^ grouth,
or by their infinite and shameless lies any ways to impeach in worthy
estimation.

The Censurer not satisfied with all these ungodly injuries against Martin
Luther, now breaks out into such words of stomach against M. Calvin, saying
that the like life or worse is written of him by a French man that lived with
him sometimes of the same religion. You take the best way throughout all your
Censures to bring the men still into suspicion and hatred, because you can
effect no more against the cause. But for Mast. Calvin, beside so many as yet
remain alive witnesses of his godly and blameless life, his writings shall
testify to all ages hereafter, that the Lord raised him up, as a singular
Minister of the Gospel, and endued him with such a spirit of wisdom and
learning, as may worthily kindle greater love to him in godly men's hearts,
then is malice against him in your uncharitable spirits. The Lord is most
wise, and testifies his love in the dispensation of his singular graces: So
great gifts of true zeal, of an understanding heart, of a mind not overcome
with any service of the Church, with any labor for the brethren, are real
arguments, that, as the Lord did sanctify and defend him against all the
malice of his enemies while he lived, even against the fiery darts of Satan:
so now, though the man be laid up in peace, yet the Lord will preserve his
name in honor upon the earth: and they that would bring shame upon him, it
shall light upon them selves, as a just recompense from him, who evermore
preserves Deuteronomy. 32. 10. Zach. 2. 8.
his saints as the apple of his eye. Therefore it was no evil chance, but
the Lords good will, that hitherto the translation of your libel against him
should be suppressed.

I marvel how you passed by the story written against M. Bucer, serving you
so well for this purpose. Seeing you have left it out, I will briefly note it for
a proof of my exceptions taken to Lindan, as to a shameless liar against the
holy men of God. M. Bucer lived to the great good, and died amongst us with the
great and public sorrow of many. His life and death is written by M. Carre, a
man against whom you can take no just exception, who has these words of him:
He lived so as no man better: Epis. Nichol. Carr^ad Io. Checu(...) de obitu
Buceri.
he died so as no man more blessedly* his sickness was such that no man did set
him sorrow: he died so that no man did perceive his departu^^. Many are (...)
alive that will witness as much as M. Carre has written: Yet your great
author Lindan is not ashamed to make M. Bucers death as horrible, and as
monstro(...) as may be suspected, comparing it with Lind. de sugien. idolis.
cap. 11. page 91.
foul words and in all horror to the most shameful death of (...)ius that
(...) tique. I appeal to them among you (if there be any) which (...) the
truth, that they (...) reform them, or giu^ (...) against such manifest
(...), (...)us to God and (...), who ar^ into (...) of their ma(...) and (...)
that (...) in their (...) a(...)tion^ have (...) (...)es to thy(...) Deuteronomy. 29.
19.


In the fourth (...) I am (...) (...) the Jesuits (...) ^ited out of the (...)
is, it shall hereafte^ more (...) For if the Censures himself, reporting most
(...), in (...) of M. Luther, has ^ot thought his (...) discharged, if he
report the matter as it is in his own corrupt authors, Hosius, Lyndanus and
Cochleus: how much more have I discharged my credit, in reporting the Censure
of Colen faithfully out of a learned treatise of Don. Gotuisus, alleged for
my warrant: for I pretended not to cite their words out of the Censure of
Eolen, which I could never get, but expressly protested, to take them, out of
a treatise concerning this matter, the author whereof is quoted in the most
books: and having performed this touching the sense faithfully; as may appear
by conference, I (...) in no respect h^e charged with ^alsifying, howsoever to
undermine the truth, and discredit the (...) thereof, you (...) about words
left out or put in, with* (...) any change of matter. But you that challenge
me^ for additions, why do you twice add the word (Very) to help your
(...)l, and once misconster me, as if I would have men know I minded to bring
(...)able of mine own? This is to ^all (...) to a st^^ight account of that I
never undertook: and in nice points to take (...) of syllables, when you can
take no just vantage of words and sentences.

Wherefore to take away from you the only matter of show in all your Censure, I
confess that I do not deliver the scriptures in the number of words and
syllables, but in the full weight of true sense and matter. Which practice,
beside example of Mat. 4. 4. Gal. 3. 10. etc.
the fathers, we^ have also in Christ and his Apostles. This you know, and yet
of an evil purpose you dissemble the matter, proving your self thereby to be
a manifest cauiller, as was declared. Therefore I need not be ashamed to offer
my book in this point to be censured by you, or examined by any. Neither am I
privy, as the Lord knows, to any purposed falshoode be it never so little,
or to any evil practice in allegation of scripture, or other writings of any
man. But you, either with shame or without shame, in the next sentence utter with
one breath four untruths. For first we have not all printes to our selves, as
you say, for then you could not so soon have printed your censure and some
other books: S^c^^ly, our searchers are not so watchful, that nothing can
pass our hands, as your own book will testify against it self in this
sentence: Thirdly, we can neither say nor print what we will, but that only,
which after view and diligent examination has, or should have, ^riu^ledge from
her Majesty's lawefull authority. Lastly, you would make your reader believe,
that you were beyond* Sea, when you wrote and sent this shameless censure,
which now is evidently known to be otherwise. Wherein I note the judgment of
God against you, that in o(...) sentence where you have falsely charged us with
uttering slanderous untruths, you have your self written these four
manifest lies. Moreover, that it may appear, who it is in deed that utters
many manifest and inexcusable untruths, let it ^^e also considered, what you
think of the preaching of Gods word in England, and what manifest untruths
you utter afterward, saying, that what I and my fellows dare auouche, in our
sermons, speeches and discourses (as you cast them) we are sure, shall never
come to the examination. Daily experience gives sentence against you in this
matter, and one of your late books, repeating certain articles corruptly
gathered out of Sermons, made in the country the last S^mmer. Here also you
distou^r C(...)pions vein, in charging the Magistrates and learned Bishops, as
if they were careless, what docttrine is delivered unto the people. For my
self, I admit not your comparison between my writings and my preachings, as
if I durst be bolder to fail in a Sermon, then in writing a book, that may
be disclosed. For, to answer also for my godly fellow ministers, we preach as
before 1. Tim. 3. 15. and 6. 3.
God and Angels: and dare as little in their presence presume to preach
otherwise then his word gives commission, as we dare to write otherwise
before men then the truth can allow.

Now follow the XIII articles of doctrine, wherewith the enemies of the
truth are charged, especially the Jesuits as the chief mainteiners thereof.
And because you offer your selves to be holden guilty of al other doctrines
whereof you are accused, if these articles be proved against you: I would
have you stand to your own condition: for my part; I accept your conclusion
to be judged as I have dealt with the Jesuits, in well reporting or
misreporting their doctrine out of mine author.

The first article out of the Jesuits I
blasphemous doctrine, has, as ^otuisus reports, and as you will not deny:
it is Cenl. Col. 54. 89.
not sin whatsoever is against the word of God. The report lies upon my
author (as I have said) yet you charge me with the words, as guylefully
reported, as peeced and culled out for my purpose. But notwithstanding this
charge, you presently acquit both mine author and me, granting the words to
be most true in their sense. If they be in their sense most true, why do you
take any exception to my report, who only lay them down to yield what sense
you can make: Therefore before I wade any further, let me ask you a question
or two. If any one of these XIII points of doctrine be false, why did you not
plainly deny it? If they be all true, why did you not plainly grant them?
why did you wrangle, making them true and false, fast and loose, perfect and
imperfect at your pleasure? Through all your discourse, do you not plainly
grant them: and yet to help your own credit, and to purchase against m^e
some note of bad dealing, would you not seem in some fort to deny them? But
as this pretended denial of those articles was an injury to me, so the open
mayntenaunce of them again was your trusty service toward the Jesuits, and
the covenant of your right hand. It was also safe dealing to grant them,
because if you would deny any one of them in the plain sense, wherein it is
aduouched, yet the aduouchment should be proved against you by your own
records. Thus the good reader may see your dealing, that so accuse me, that
so double and redouble the lie upon me, for laying down nothing, but known
grounds of popish doctrine, which you could not deny, and whereof the*
Jesuits have lately undertaken the principal defense.

To return to the matter, the* Censure of Colen was made (as you say) against
Monhemius Catechism: and among other points to condemn him for saying that
concupiscense, remaining after baptism, is a damnable mortal sin, albeit no
consent of heart be given unto the same. To avoid your doubtful speech of
damnable mortal sin, and the distinction of mortal and venial sin, you
must understand, Monhemius spoke not of the sin unto death, for the which we
are taught, that a 1. Ioh. 5. 16.
man must not pray. Otherwise understanding mortal sin according to the
word Romans 6. 23.
of God, and not as you do, without Christ all sins are mortal: and (that
one sin against the holy Ghost excepted) in Christ Matt. 12. 31. 1. Ioh. 516.
Mich. 7. 19. Col. 2. 1^. (...). John 1. 9.
all sins venial(...) which true sense, Monhemi^s did truly affirm, that
concupiscence is a dam^able sin. But you deny (...) definition, to establish
your own: Let us therefore examine the gross faults, which these Ie^uites of
Colen commit in one definition, notwithstanding they were so many, and (as you
say) so learned men. They teach, by your report first, that sin is an action.
Whatsoever they say, or Thomas of Aquine in this question, you shall find that
injustice is a sin, and yet no action: and that it is a sin as well not to
do the thing commanded, as to commit the thing which is forbidden, which
leaving of good offices undone, you know is called the sin of omission: and
yet no action, as you would have it. For Andradius distinction in this matter,
is (...).
beside are and to no purpose. Also in this place, how childishlie do you
cast in an exception of evil men and such like, that they are against the law
of God, confounding and huddling in deed: The question is altogether of the
corruption, transgression and sin which man c^mitteth, and you run to
beasts and to the sin of devils: where in it is good to note, that as you
speak not to the question, so your speech is not true. For evil men as they
are the creatures of GOD, are not against the Law, but the evil in men: not
the devils, but the corruption and evil in them: not evil laws, as they
command, but yt evil in laws, as it is either commanded or executed. You must
put a difference between the creatures and ordinances of God, which are all
good as they were created Genesis 1. 3^.
and ordained, and the same as they are now by themselves, corrupted and made
abominable. To that you say these things are not properly sins, for that they
are no actions, I answer, If nothing be sin, but that which is an action, what
Censure will you give upon Gods judgment against Hely, for not using
discipline toward 1. Sam. (...). 2^.
his sons: What sentence will you pronounce for those watchmen, that sound
not E^^^h. ^3. (...).
the trumpet, when they see the enemy coming? Here is no evil action done,
but a good action left undone, and yt is a sin, and has received the
punishment of sin.

It follows in the Jesuits definition. Sin is an humane or reasonable
action. I would not say, sin is an humane or reasonable, but a beastly or
unreasonable action of a man endued with reason. Yet in the Censurers
judgment, if a mad man or a fool kill a man, it is properly no sin: but
these effects of sin, these great in^irmities of folly and madness shall
excuse murder, adulteri^ and other like enormities. Lastly you say, in the
definition of sin, it must be added, that it is a voluntary action, and done
wittingly. Al these additions are additions in deed, and lay open notable
corruptions in your doctrine. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, be it
against thy Romans 14. 23.
will, or with thy will, be it an action or no action, be it reasonable (as you
speak) or against reason. If this part of their definition were true, the^
original sin should he no sin, because you cannot make it an action done
willingly or wittingly. Moreover, touching manslaughter done unwillingly or
unwittingly, and to one that is not hated, it De^^. 4. 43.
may be answered, that he that has so killed a man must flee to the city of
refuge: if he be found from the bounds and liberties thereof, then the anenger
of blood may kill him. Also he cannot depart from the City of refuge, till the
death of the high Priest; Nomb. 35. 25
whose death seems herein in some sort to prefigure the forgiveness of his
sin, in the death of Christ, the great high Priest. Lastly Howlets book
acknowledges a sin of ignorance against Christ the wisdom of the Father: and
he makes willing sin and wittingly committed, to come near the sin
against the holy Ghost. Thus between your doctrine and his, it will fall out
that some sins are no sins: and again, that all sins are done wittingly,
and therefore are in some sort against the holy Ghost, and not easily remitted.
Which doctrine condemns all venial sin, and leaves no place for
indulgences and Pardons: for all sin is wittingly and willingly done, says
the Censure: and all such sins are against the conscience, and therefore
damnable says Howlets author. This is the harmony and consent of your
doctrine, to mitigate the sorrows of a weak conscience with many discordes
placed in an evil concord. As for your example, that Jacob sinned not in lying
with Lea, because Genesis 29. 23.
he knew it not, it is to make no sin of a double sin: for Jacob sinned in
judgment, not knowing what he did, and so sinned, as upon the like ignorance
for want of regard, he might easily have committed the fowlest incest. Also
it cannot be proved that the bed was altogether undefiled. To conclude
therefore howsoever you allege Austen to approve your definition, it is no way
so large as sin, and therefore a most unlearned definition. You provide for
some way to escape by these your last words: And this is to be understood
of actual sin properly, between properly and improperly, between actual
and not actual, you think to find a defense, because the words may be
diversely taken. But if every thing repugnant to the law of God be sin in
deed, though not actual, the question is granted, and nothing left to you,
but a war of words against the truth.

The contrary doctrine follows: The transgression of the law is sin. How
1. John 3. 4.
tauntingly and how scornefully, does y^ masker play his part: He would make
his reader believe I have made a vow not to deal plainly in any one thing,
and that I can not allege one little sentence without falsifying. I praise the
Lord it is far from me to make any such vow, or to have any such ungodly
purpose, (...) (...) approve my conscience eue^ to my enemies. That you may
have a proof he^^of, this very place out of S. Ioh. which you so w^der at,
shall be a witness, being in sense truly and fitly aleaged to prove it sin,
whatsoever is against or beside yt law of God* For as si^ is the transgression
of the law, so again the transgression of the Law is sin: these two are
converted, as the ^^finition and the thing defined: and as the terms which are
mutually verified one of another. To give you an example whereof, we say, The
Gospe^ is the power of God to salvation, and again, The power of God to
salvation is the Gospel. As for the (...), let the same Aposties words be
ma(...), (...) the fourth chapter, where he says, God is a John 4. 24*
Spirit, yet the words lie thus in the Greek text, a Spirit is God,
wherefore let not a transposition seem (...) to you; when you see it brings
no (...)* but a true sense, neither accus^ (...) when there is no fraud (...)
of truth. To make some shew^ of your fa^^^ accusation, you lay down a fal^^
example: for a man (...), are not terms generally verified one of another,
being one the general, and containing more, the other the special, and having
less. If you had brought an example of the like, it would have followed well
without any show of fraud. For, as Every reasonable creature is a man, so
again Every man is a reasonable creature. They that are exercised but a little
in the knowledge of these propositions, may easily see your erro^r, or purposed
deceit in the example, and your false accusation in the matter. But after a
false example, let us see a false conclusion, you conclude saying: So these
words as Saint John (...)eth the^ Ioh. 3. 4.
are most true. Every sin is iniquity or transgression of the law, But as I
utter the^, you say they are false, to wit, that every iniquity or
transgression of the law, be it never so little, or done without either consent
or knowledge, or by a mad man or brute beast, should be properly a mortal
sin* Here you plainly conclude that n^ga^^u^ly, which Saint John him self
lays down affirmatively, saying afterward in the (...) Chapt. Every
iniquity (...). Ioh. 5. 17.
or transgression is sin: if sin, a mortal sin, as has been proved.
Thus the C^^surer has not added, nor altered alone, but plainly denied that,
to conde(...) me, which Saint John has word for word, to justify me. All
my places that you so condemn, being written and laid together, have I thank
God, no cause to make me blushe, but this alone has ^ause to move you to the
repentance and re^antation of this speech, so directly contrary to the words
of the holy Ghost. But the Lord remove all blindness from our eyes, and
ha^dnesse from our hearts, that we may not struggle against the truth, and
so fall into these gross denials of the manifest word of God. You that charge
me in this place with transposition, your self may be as worthily charged with
alteration of the text, putting one verb for an other, and two words for one:
both the Greek and the vulgar translation has, Every one that commits
sin, and you have against them both, Every one that sins. This you would
have made a ^olde part in me; but I am contented to g^aunt it is neither
boldness nor ignorance i^ you* (...) though the first may stand better* yet
your translation is (...)* You (...) perhaps to serve the Lord in your
(...)* and I: know I serve the Lord, his cause is to be had in high
estimation, and the examination thereof must be without such disgracing
quarrels, otherwise he will punish even him, that shall not use good means in
the handling of a good cause. But to conclude, you grant the question, though
(as you say) it comes not to be so heinous a blasphemy. For your usual
taunts of confounding and hudling, you may worthily receive them back again
with this va^^tage: that you have manifestly denied, that which the Apostle
does manifestly affirm: and so stand upon a contradiction, not only against
my words, but against the holy and perfect word of God.

In the second point the Iesui^es doctrine is thus reported: Concupiscence
remaining II
in the regenerate, although it be Cens. Col. 38. etc. Ca^^sin opere ^atech. 18
4.
against the law of God, yet is it not sin properly in it self, or of his
own nature. I am charged for mine author, that these words, although it be
against the law of God, are not found in the ^ensure o^ Colen* To what
purpose (...) the ca^ill against these words, which if they had not be^e
(...)* (...) never(...) of necessity (...) is of con^upiscense against the
law, and you so take it, and so defend it. Also by your own grant, the
Jesuits of Colen, express those words in effect saying: Albeit this
concupiscense do stir or move a man sometimes to do things which are
repugnant to the law of God: yet if no consent of heart be yielded unto it,
it reaches not to the nature of a mortal sin, worthy of eternal damnation.
That concupiscense which does stir or move a man to do things against the
law of GOD, is it not also it self against the law: As you thus grant the
words which before were denied, so vnderhande, or at unawares you grant the
matter wherewith you are charged. For, saying that concupiscense without
consent, reaches not to the nature of a mortal sin worthy of eternal
damnation, in some sort you give us to understand, that it is nevertheless
some kind of sin, which is to grant the question, or to load and disguise
the sentence with many waste words, that you may in so doing hide the error.
Moreover you and the Jesuits confess concupiscense to be sin, by Saint
Paul's manifest Romans 7. 7.
words, who as you grant, sometimes calls it sin. But as you wrangle
with me, so you misconster the Apostle, saying, he means not that it is a
sin properly, but by a figure. Wherefore his large disputation is shortly to
be laid down, that thereby it may appear, how corruptly you interpret his
meaning.

The Apostle having declared, that the Law does through our corruption work in
us the lusts and passions of sin, to meet with a doubt that might be made
against the law as if it were sin, because through our rebellion it stirs
us up thereunto: answers, saying, The Law is holy, and we sold under
sin: the Law spiritual Romans 7. 12. 14.
and we carnal. In which answer, it is diligently to be considered by the
way, that were it not holy, and the commandment holy and just, and good,
even the Law should seem to be sin, for occasion of sin that comes
thereby through our corruption. But this occasion is not given by the Law, but
altogether taken by our corruption rebelling against the commandment. So the
Law being of it self holy altogether and given against sin, is not to be
charged with our rebellion, which is sinful of it self, and provoked by such
restraint. If the Law, which has in it nosinne nor shadow of sin, come
notwithstanding to the question of sin, for the fruit of our corrupt (...)re
provoked and discovered thereby: what shall we say of concupiscence that is
it self unclean, and of it self makes sin exceedingly Ibidem. 1^.
sinful: S. Paul following the question, does open the nature of concupiscence
in his own person, comparing his estate before the knowledge of the tenth
commandment with his state afterward. Upon Ibidem verse. 7. and cap. 3. 20.
which comparison he declares, that he knew not sin, (...) he knew the
Law that says, Thou shall not covet. He knew other sins before by the Law
and light of nature, but he knew not concupiscence to be sin. So the very
Gentiles in their Plato deleg* lib. 6. Item lib. 8. contra adul. libro 9.
contra homicidi^. Leges XII. tab.
Laws condemned adultery, murder and other like sins: but the justice of
God condem^ing concupiscence, the Gentiles could not see, the Philosophers
could not find it, neither will the Papists acknowledge it, although they
know with the Apostle the Law which says, Thou shall not cover. Therefore
the Apostle has set before us by his own example, what we may learn by that
tenth commandment, which shows most clearly yt the Lord our God is a
spiritual Lawgiuer, binding our spirits, our very thoughts, and least
desires Mat. 5. 22. ^8.
to y^ obedience of his most holy most pure, and most perfect Law* If any of
these be beside the Law, it is against y^ holiness, wherein we were created,
and which is required of us by the Law, and so plainly and properly a sin,
howsoever the Jesuits distinguishe between sin properly so called, and not
properly called sin. Every sin is sin, and these sins which by the
Jesuits doctrine are so called, figuratively (except we find mercy) they
will bring no figurative condemnation, in yt day when y^ secrets of all
hearts shall be laid open, and we called to give an account of every idle
word. Matt. 12. 36.


Your similitude of the Latin tongue taken out of Austen, is doubtful, for
the tongue is the instrument of speech, August. de nup. et concup. lib. 1.
cap. 23.
and not such a cause. The natural knowledge of the latin speech, or the
knowledge thereof by art, is the cause. If the tongue were the proper cause,
whosoever had a tongue should speak latin, because where the cause is, the
effect follows. By which reason your own words again make concupiscense
to be sin, saying it is the affect of original s(...)* because such as: the
proper cause is (...) is also: the proper effect: the ^ause* sin and
sinful, the effect also sin and sinful. But you that make many demaundes to
me, let me ask you what you meant to bring in the example of Christ who is
called sin in th^^* chapter and ^ep^stle to the Cor^th. 2. Cor. 5. 21.
forwhich you falsely quote the 8. ^o the R^man* (...) you make the example
like? Shall (...) exp^^^de the former speech of Saint Paul, calling
concupiscense sin: Surely hereby you prove, that Paul calling concupiscense*
sin* meant notwithstanding that it was altogether no sin: for Christ is
altogether no sin. Again, how unlike are these examples, Christ is called
sin, because he was a sacrifice for sin, that is, to take away sin:
concupiscense is called sin, because it is the effect and fruit of original
sin, not taking it away, but increasing it continually? If you made
conscience of your speech, you would never miscon^^er the plain wo^rdes of the
Apostles, and bring nothing for your defense, but such impertinent similitudes.
For I appeal to your conscience, may you not as fitly by these similitudes
prove, that the Apostle calls fornication sin by a figure, or any other
sin never so great? Saint Auste^^ place, making it no sin in ye (...)rate
without con^^t, is expounded by himself afterward, saying, Concupiscence is
not so forgiven in Baptism that it is not sin, but that it is not imputed
Aug. lib. 1. de nup. et con^upi^^i^entia. cap. ^3. and 25.
as sin. For a clearer proof hereof, in another book he says plainly it
is (...). For when Julian objected that con^^piscence is wort^y praise, because
it is a punishment of sin: Austen took that away by an example of the wicked
devils, wh^ though they, in respect of Gods hand do^ justly punish, yet
themselves are unjust and sinful, whereupon this similitude fol(...)eth, to
prove concupiscence sin, even when there is no consent: As the blyndnesse
Aug. contra Iul. lib. 5. cap. 3. page ^30. Paris.
of the heart (which God remoueth, who alone does illuminate) is both sin,
whereby we believe not in God, and the punishment of sin, whereby a proud
heart is punished with worthy punishment, and the cause of sin, when any
evil is committed, by the error of a blind heart: so the concupiscense of the
flesh, against which the good spirit ^usteth, is both sin because there is in
it a disobedience against the regiment of the mind, and a punishment of sin,
because it is rendered to ye merits of the disobedient, and the cause of sin,
through the defect of that yt consents, or the con^agion of that that
springs. You were deceived in citing Austen twice, as having written but one
book De Nup. et Clem. Alexan. (...). lib. Paedago. cap. 6. Idem adhor. ad
gentes. page 38.
Concup. Clement has no such place: but against you he has these words in
the book of his exhortation to the Ge^ti^^s speaking of the seventh
commandment among others: (...). Thou shall not lust, for by concupiscense
alone thou have committed adultery. Which sentence shows what a sin bare
concupiscense is, that alone without consent comes so near a degree Amb.
lib. 1. devoe. Gent. cap. 5.
of actual adultery. You were also deceived in quoting Ambrose, for he has
no such place where you cite him. Nazianzen I think, has no such oration as
you dream of: such is your cause, and such are your testimonies. Wherefore it
is false, that all those good fathers are partakers with the Jesuits, of that
doctrine which blasphemously makes the breach of the tenth commandment no
sin. And because you so often press the word blasphemy, so seldom used by
me, you must understand, that such doctrines, especially now after so great
revelation of the truth, are the doctrines of devils, blasphemo^s against God
and his holy word, which teaches the contrary, as has and shall be further
declared.

But now follows the place of Gotuisus, brought to prove the contrary
doctrine: Whosoever shall see a woman to lust after her, he has already
committed (...) 5. 28.
adultery with her in his heart. The Censurer in this place to note my
ignorance, bewrays his own, confounding and hudling the first and last part
of the proposition, which in Schools are called subiectu, and praedicatum. For
the question sta(...)th in y^ former place, where Christ vset^ a word of
concupiscence, affirming, that (...) a man see a woman to lust, or in
concupis^en^e to desire her, where the force of sin works in the first
degree, it is with content of heart, brought to a further degree, and becomes
actual adultery before God, though it be not actual before men. Therefore
if I had (as you mi^con^^er,) alleged this place of Matthewe altogether in
respect of the effect, and as it is a breach of the seventh commandment, it
had not made against the doctrine of concupiscense without consent. But I cite
it for the former part of the proposition, which sufficiently proves bare
concupiscense to be sin. For if the consent of the heart make concupisce^se
to be adultery, the^ must concupiscense it self be also sin: because
otherwise the consent of the heart cannot make any lawful desire to be
adultery: but Matt. 12. 3^.
the fruit and the tree must be of the same nature. Saint James does moreover
prove this: who will not that a man should James. 1. 14.
say, God tempts him, and so charge the Lord with sin: but he turns upon
man the whole work and all the blame of sin, from the first sin of
tempting, to the ripe and full birth thereof. The Apostles words in this place
are full to make this proof, calling it a man's own lust, or lusting: adding
moreover that a man is tempted therewith, drawn away, and as with a bait
intited: which things can not be in bare concupis^ense, except it were sin,
and a sinful cause of sin, from the which James does carefully quite the
Lord. Also this concupifcense, because it has ^entation, violence and a bait
to sin, before c^nsent of heart be given, and before the secret adultery of
the heart be committed, it cannot be of faith: and therefore the Apostle gives
sentence that it is sin: for whatsoever is not of faith is sin, be it before
or after the consent of Romans 14. 23.
heart. Therefore out of these words of Christ, it is truly proved, by the
nature and effect of concupiscense, that it is sin of it self, seeing
presently with consent it is made a sin in so high a degree as is adultery.
Also herein, my alleging of Scripture is found to be according to the matter
and argument, without any error of doctrine, alteration of sense, or appiying
it otherwise, then it may be truly and profitably applied: wherefore you gave
to much liberty to your pen, in charging me with common misalleadging of
Scripture. But seeing you grant yt this second point of doctrine is also
maintained by the Jesuits, even in such sort as they are charged, all men may
see, It is hard to say whether you are more ready to defend their doctrine, or
to take a pretensed advantage of quarrel against my words.

In the third place, the Jesuits are charged to say, The first motions of
lust are III
without hurt of sin. This third doctrine Cens. col. ^ol. 54. ^9.
is granted by the Censurer as most true and plain: but yet I must not go
without ^ome accustamed taunt. He charge me that by clipping their words,
I make every thing to seem a Paradox. This is only says to accuse, without any
show of proof. For what* ^^nefit was there to me in leaving out these words:
If they come of natural in(...)only, without any cause given by us? or what
gain you by adding them, seeing they are superfluous: For I pray you, are not
all the first motions of lust merely natural, and evermore of some Mar. 7. 1^.
^1. James. 1. 14.
cause given by* us, and dwelling within us, namely the corruption of old Adam:
what shifts are they then which you use to help a weak cause? If to defend
this addition of waste words, you shall object the temptations of Satan
offered without any cause given by us: I answer you cannot properly call them
motions of lust, being but outward prouocations to lust and sin, wherewith
many times a mortified man is not provoked to lusting and sinning: by which
nevertheless, Satan would move, but is resisted by faith, he enters not in
to work those motions of lust which do affect us, and whereof our question is
moved. Your comparison bet(...)e these first motions of lust and the pulse,
making the one to be no more sin then the other, is without judgment. For
you can not conclude from that part of our natural soul, whereby we have life
and sense only, to that part wherein our reason and affections are placed,
because the former is not in the same sort corrupted as the second: neither
does sin so work in natural life and sense, as it does in the heart by
the corruptions and guiltiness of the soul. The necessary actions of life,
as* eating, drinking, sleep, breath, also the ^^cessarie actions of sense, as
smelling, seeing, hearing, feeling and the rest, they are of themselves al free
from sin, remaining as they were in man before his fall. But every
imagination and cogitation of ma^s heart is evil Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21.
evermore, as God testified to No^: much more the lusts and desires thereof,
Wherefore to compare the lusts of sin* to the pu^se which is merely
natural and without sin, was to bring the simple into a dangerous opinion
that the one is as lawful as the other. For a clear example of this
difference, it may be (...) that Christ had the working of the pulse, and other
natural opera(...) of life and ^ense, but he was far even from the least
concupiscense, I think in your own judgment. Therefore this your example of
the pulse to defend the first motions of lust, is neither in substance nor in
show to any purpose. Moreover you make the first motions of lust no sin,
because it lies not in our power to prohibit them: by which reason you
defend sin by the necessity thereof. But seeing this necessity comes of
our selves by our corruption and custom of sin, how can it be any excuse or
defense for the trespass: what will you say to original sin, shall it be no
sin because it lies not in us to resist it, no more then we can resist our
own conception, and is less in our power to resist then the pulse: Like to
the former comparison of the pulse is that which follows, making the first
motions of lust to be no more sin in us, the^ they are in beasts. But this
comparison proves no more the^ the other: for as there is no law given to
prohibit the pulse: so there is no law to restrain these motions in beasts:
but man is tied to a law for every action last or first, great or small, as is
proved by the great commandment: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with Deuteronomy.
6. 5. Mat. 22. 37.
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all
thy mind. So that what lust or thought soever swarueth from this entire and
absolute love of God, it is against this his commandment, and therefore a
sin against his most sovereign and most glorious Majesty, to whom we owe
all the service and holiness of all the heart, of all the mind, and of al our
powers whatsoever. Therefore to say we must not or can not pull in the raynes
of our first lusts, or that they are as lawful in us. as the pulse, or as
they are in brute beasts: is indeed to reach a beastly liberty and to lay
open the way to all uncleanness without controulement. If all your readers did
know how little proof is made by similitudes, they would all see the
insufficiency of your defense, that so often use them, and so unfitly, in
place of plain and sure arguments.

Now for the tenth commandment alleged as a contrary doctrine, yt Censurer
Exodus 20. 17.
says it is not any way repugnant to that the Jesuits teach. For proof
whereof as the Papists make of the tenth commandment two commandments, so
this fellow makes of two several breaches of two diverse commandments, but
one sin, and that against the seventh commandment only. But there can not
be a commandment, against the which there is no sin. Therefore (as it was
declared in the former article) there is a sinful desire first, which is
concupiscense against the tenth, the assent whereunto makes it adultery,
which is a sin of another degree, Matt. 5. 2^.
and against the seventh commandment. So the Censurer must by duty receive
home again his own ^aunt of hudling and confounding: for confounding the
sins of two diverse commandments. Furdermore y^ Censurer, being ca^ied away
into error by the old translation against the truth, and other faithful
translations, would prove that the law is in our power to do it, and that
therefore these first motions of lust are not forbidden by the tenth
commandment, because it is not in our power to resist them. That his argument
may appear, I will set it down to be more easily discovered. Whatsoever is
commanded, that is not above us, but in our power: to resist the first motions
of lust, is not in our power: therefore to resist the first motions of lust is
not commanded. The first proposition is false, and (as I said) a false
translation brought to prove it. For Moses says, The Law is not hidden from
us, and the Deuteronomy. 30. 11.
Censurer says, It is not above us: Moses shows, that it is revealed, the
Censurer would prove that it is in our power. Moses speaks chiefly of the
Gospel, and the Censurer refers it altogether unto the ten commandments.
But that the place, is both to be translated so, as I have said, and to be
applied to the revelation of the Gospel, it is evidently declared by the
plain text, and by the application thereof in the epistle to the Romans. Thus
the Romans 10 6.
first proposition is false, and drawn both against the words of the text,
and far from the sense thereof opened by the Apostle. The second proposition
is false also: for neither is it true, that all these first motions are
altogether out of our power, for the gift of continency and mortification Romans
6. 2, 4, 14. (...). 7. 4.
does more and more subdue them: neither does it follow, that we are not
subject to the Law for such offenses as we can not resist, the fault being
ours through corruption, why we can not resist them. Shall not a wholesome
law made for drunkardes, stand in force a(...) has so accustomed (...) self
to the (...), that now it is v(...) for him to (...) Shall we justify our
evil though(...) ^ause it is not in our (...) to (...) 2. Cor. 3. 5.
good thought: (...) fort justify the (...) and (...), you must condemn these
opinions. (...)* (...) you and your fellows bring th^^^ false and dangerous
propositions to (...) ^^clusions, and venture thus upon so (...)
(...)pretations, it will be easy for you, both to write at will, and to dispute
at ^arge. ^ustens opinion against lust, even before the consent, appears by
the places Aug. contr^ Iul. lib. 5. cap. 3. and lib. 1. de nup* and concup.
cap. 25.
alleged before, and in many other places: therefore his own answer serves
to ex^ounde this place. I doubt not but Au^^^n which forb^^deth the disease of
lusting, will much more forbid the consent and following of such sinful
steps. In these questions of co^cupisce^ce and the first motions of lust, a
little feeling of a good conscience would cut off all this contention of
speech. For if they that teach otherwise, would look into the Law, Thou
shall not covet, Exodus 20. 17.
with such eyes as Saint Paul did, and Romans 7. 7.
would also consider the corruption, the force and fruits of original sin,
and m(...)over regard the power of Gods en^^^^ Mat. 5. 19. Iam. 1. 10.
and perfect justice which is justly provoked with the least offense, because
he made us in the greatest perfection, they would then speak no more in
defense of the unclean concupiscence of an unclean heart: but would with.
Saint Paul confess, (...) the Law, Thou shall not covet, ^^od. ^0. 17. ^o^.
7. 7.
teaches ^s to know sin, not only that gr^sse sin known and punished
among in^^^els, but somewhat more, that flesh and blood cannot acknowledge,
even that all concupiscence and all unclean lust is sin, because God is a
spiritual Lawegiuer, who hindeth our sp(...)it, and brings all our desires
into obedience, restraining the least motions of unclean concupiscence Romans 7.
14. ^o^. (...). 26.
by this holy and straight commandment, Thou shall not covet.

In the fourth place it comes to be IIII
examined, how little authority the Jesuits give to the word of God, and how
much they attribute to unwritten belief. They are charged to say, The holy
scripture is Cens. Col. (...).
a doctrine imperfect, maimed, lame, not containing all things necessary to
faith and salvation, Wherein you censure me as being to shameless in setting
forth these for the Jesuits words. Howsoever Gotuisus report or misreport the
Jesuits, if I report him faithfully, it is no shame to me: but to you it is
some blame, still to charge me with that is none of mine. As for the question,
you handle it subtillie, reporting not your own judgment, but with some
corruption what Monhemius says, and again what the Jesuits answer, whereas
you are in the name of the Jesuits, either to grant that the scripture is
perfect, and conteyneth all things necessary to salvation, which is contrary
to the Council of Trent: or else plainly and without Se^^. 4. De(...) de Can.
scriptur.
perhaps to set down the things that are to be believed of necessity, and
yet not comprehended in the scripture, which is clearly to grant that which
before you denied: for the scripture is maimed and wants, if any substantial
doctrine of faith belonging to a Christian man, be left out. There follow
twelve particular points, which you make of one sort to be believed, and
affirm them, but with perhaps, to be deduced out of scripture: of the which
seven are, not by perhaps, but undoubtedly contained in the word: as that
there are two natures and wills in Christ: that Romans 1. 3. 4. Mat 26. 39. Ioh.
15. 25.
the holy Ghost proceeds from the father and the son without generation.
Thirdly (which you utter in words that are obscure and unsound) that the
word did take the nature of man to be one person and not the John 1. 14. Genesis
17. 12. Romans 4. 11. Apo^. 1. 10.
person: Fourthly, that infantes are to be bap^^sed: Fifthly, the change of the
Sabbath: So also we receive the four Gospels, and the epistse to the Romans,
as approved out of the word, by the inscription there expressing the names of
the writers thereof. For your dark words out of Thomas, How the father
vegate the son, I wish clear and perfect words in so high a mystery. We
believe by testimony of the word, that Jesus Christ is John 1. 1.
the only be gotten son of the Father, and God above all to be praised for
ever. Romans 9. 5.
That I may refrain other speath, I pray you examine your heart before the
Lord, you that dare teach that these most high mysteries of God the Son and
God the holy Ghost, are not revealed in y^ scriptures, so far as they
concern our faith, but stand upon the warraunt of men's traditions. The rest
of these twelve points, as they are not evidently contained in the word, so a
Christian is not absolutely bound to believe them: as that the common Creed
(the articles whereof notwithstanding we believe as grounded upon the
Apostolical doctrine) was made by the Apostles: the celebration of Easter day
upon a Sunday: the perpetual virgiuitie of the blessed Virgin. The Epistle to
the Laodiceans, although many make mention of it, Paul makes none: so that
either you ignorantly passed over the Greek, or wilfully addicted your self
to the old translation, being in this place plainly corrupted. For by the
original, Paul speaks of an epistle from Laodicea, and not written to the
Laodicenses, as you untruly affirm. Now what have you Col. 4. 16.
gained by all or any one of these twelve notes, seeing they are al either
proved by y^ Scriptures and the^ no warrant for your traditions and vnwritte^
ve(...) not necessary points of our faith, and therefore not of like authority
to the holy writings of the Apostles and Prophets? After this sort you may
easily publish A brief Censure, confounding and hudlyng together without
distinction, matters of our ^eleefe, with things which we are not bound to
believe: and articles plainly contained in Scripture, with points that are not
there at all.

The place follows, alleged to overthrow the former doctrine of the
Jesuits. All the Scripture is given by inspiration of (...)* Ti^. 3. 1^.
God, and is profitable to teach, to confute, to correct and to instruct in
justice, that the man of GOD may be perfect, and thoroughly instructed to every
good work. Here y^ Censurer has brought his cole to set his marks upon my
translation, which is never thelesse so faithful, that no one of y^ five words
by him so marked, as wickedly added, can well be wanting without some injury to
the text, or to the property of our language in expressing the same. In
translating, the property of every tongue is to be observed: for as tongues
differ in language, so they differ in their peculiar form and order of words.
That which may be well understood in one tongue, must needs be supplied in an
other. And to translate word for word, is to have the words English or
French, when yet the phrase shall remain Greek or Hebrewe, and be as little
understood. Yet this is that obscure and fruitelesse translation which the
Censurer exacteth at my hand. But let us see how justly. All scripture is not
so plain as All y^ scripture: and the Censurer afte^ says, the scripture. The
verb is must be supplied, whether you regard the English tongue or L^gicke:
for the copulative conjunction following in y^ Greek, does make the whole
proposition compound and not simple. Otherwise what sense or sentence* were it
to say: all scripture given by inspiration of God, and profitable to teach,
etc. The addition of this verb was so necessary, that the vulgar translation
adds it in the second place, but by no better reason, then why it should be
added in both. The first (and) was childishly and unlearnedly noted as
superfluous, being expressed in the Greek text* and corruptly left out by the
old translation, which deceived you. The words and thoroughly were added, the
one to join the sentence, and the other to express the force of the compound
word which Paul uses* signifying thoroughly or perfectly perfect. In this
signification is the compound vse^ in many other places also. Thus you see I
(...). Acts 21. 5. Matt. 21. Psalm. 8. 3. 1. These. 3. 1^.
misuse not the Scriptures in this place, for my translation is sufficiently
approved, and some faults be wraied in the old translation, and ignorance in
your Censure. Nevertheless* I must remember you, that it was your oversight to
leave out y^ note of a third (and) which might as well have been set upon your
score with the rest, and raised the number up to site. Also you that so exact a
straight translation of word for word, why did you not Censure me for adding
v. words at one clap in this sentence to express one Greek word: Paul has
(...) which is word for word, Godinspired: I have to express it used v.
words, given by inspiration of God. But your Censurers eye may without blame
pass over the sight of such small matters. I crave pardon of my Reader, that I
have been drawn on into so trifeling points. But he has been exercised in
sifting and shifting to find somewhat, y^ may serve his turn, and yet greatly
misseth of his purpose: if he were so searched, perhaps he would not easily
answer it. Now against my translation he uses words, that should be by a new
word called raileciue speech in me, saying, If I had used such audacitie in
translating Acsopes fables, it would have been tolerable, but in translating
the Scripture it is impious. Surely if the Censurer had been well censured, and
exercised in translating Acsopes fables, when (...) went to the Grammar
school, he would have been better acquainted with Greeks phrases, and the
translation of the new Testament. But it may be, he hates the kingdom and
skill of Grammarians. Thus much to answer my translation which you have so
unlearnedly marked, and so unjustly condemned. Now it follows to consider what
you bring against the alleging of that place to reprove the Jesuits
doctrine, and your unwritten verities.

Your first reason, y^ this place is not full enough to prove y^ sufficiency
of y^ Scripture, for which it is alleged, stands upon and word in y^ text,
where the Apostle says, the Scripture is profitable, and has not the word
sufficient. But you say these are two diverse things, to be sufficient for a
purpose, and to be profitable for it, as may appear in meat which is
profitable for our life, yet we cannot say it is sufficient, because it
alone, without natural heat, clothes and other means suffices not.
Whereupon you leave the reader to conclude that this place is too slender for
my purpose. The force of which your reason is of the difference of these two
words, affirming that profitable, is not so much as sufficient. Whereunto I
answer, that as sometimes it is true which you affirm, and as it appears in
your example: so of the other part it is true, that many times a thing may be
said profitable for a purpose, where profitable shall import sufficient and not
barely profitable: as for example, when some reason is adjoined why it should
be profitable and nothing else applied or serving to that effect. For proof
hereof when the Apostle writes that Godliness is profitable to all things
having the promises of (...). Tim. 4. 8.
this life and of the life to come: it can not be denied, but by profitable
here, he means it is sufficient for all things: that is for the obteyning of
all good things: which sense of this word is proved by that which follows
of the effect, having the promises of both lives. For if godliness bring all
good things of this life and of the life to come, it must needs follow that
the Apostle saying, it is profitable to all things, understood it was so fully
sufficient, that he which has it, needs not the supply of any thing else.
For like reason in this place, I say, the Apostle speaking of the Scripture, as
profitable for doctrine for confutation, for correction and reformation, by
profitable, understands sufficient. If your example were of the like, it
would prove the same. If as meat and drink are profitable to nourish, so
they were profitable also to cloth, to give rest and to make a man perfectly
healthie and strong to every good action: I would also conclude upon such
causes that it were both profitable and sufficient to mayntaine life. But you
stand in need of an other Censurer, to Censure your comparisons and examples
so often brought in, easily to dereyue the reader, that does not see how
unequally they are yoked, as like things to make like proof, being in deed
unlike and of unlike effects. To return unto the text, the sufficiency of
scripture is moreover proved by the words which got before and follow.
Before the Apostle had said that all the Scripture is inspired of God:
whereupon he infers, and is profitable to teach for doctrine and
confutation: as if he had said, it is profitable to teach the truth and
reprove error. The strength of which reason lies in this, that the light of
knowledge which sometime was in man by his creation, is damped and gone out: so
that now we have no means (except God by his holy Spirit does inspire us)
to discern between truth and untruth, or between good and evil. Now this
heavenly knowledge, which (as Saint Peter says) was uttered by the holy men
of 2. Pet. 1. 21.
God, inspired with the holy Ghost, is recorded in the books of holy
Scripture. Whereupon it follows that these books of the holy word, and no
other, being the authentical words of the heavenly knowledge, which God
inspired the holy Prophets and Apostles withal, are so said to be profitable
to teach the truth, as it notes this to be proper to the holy Scripture,
and not to agree to any other whatsoever. Therefore if these be the writings
which contain the wisdom, wherewith God has inspired his holy men, for such
use of the Church, as is here spoken of, it must needs follow, the knowledge
which God has revealed, being sufficient for us, that these holy Scriptures
containing the same knowledge, is likewise sufficient. Whereby it appears
that this cause here noted, (to wit of inspiration from God) being the proper
cause of the holy Scriptures, and not common to any other writings whatsoever,
does implie the effect also following in this place, of teaching, disprouing
and making perfect the man of God, to be likewise proper unto them: and (which
I undertook to prove) profitable in this place to signify as much as
sufficient.

To this I add an other reason out of the words which follow: wherein
because not some things only which may in part make a man perfect, are
attributed to the scriptures, and some other things left to be supplied by
other means: but all things whatsoever may be needful for us, are said to
be perfected by the Scriptures, it must needs follow, that the scripture alone
is sufficient. For that which is profitable to all the parts, which may be
required to perfection, cannot be but sufficient for the perfection of the
whole: but that the Scripture is profitable in such manner, the Apostle does
fully declare, both in rehearsing all the particular parts which are
necessary, and adding also after generally, that the man of God may be
perfect. To this purpose the Apostle has so set his words, as he could not
more effectually by any other speech. For he teaches, that it is profitable to
make perfect, which yet is (...).
made more full by the compound word adioined, the grace and force of which
composition (as was noted before) is to note perfection added to perfection,
and to signify thoroughly, or perfectly perfect, and that, as he adds, for
all good works. This is yet made more full and more weighty by that he
speaks not here of the common perfection of all men, but of the perfection of
the man of God, that is of the Minister. If the scripture contain knowledge to
make the Minister thoroughly perfect, for every part of his office, both in
doctrine soundly to teach the truth, and to confute and remove error: and in
life to reform and correct that which is amiss, and to instruct in that which
is righteous and holy, how much more is it sufficient for the common knowledge
of other men, in whom like perfection of understanding is not so much required.

To these two reasons, because the question is of importance, I will yet add
one other out of the verse next going before. There the Apostle uses an
argument to persuade Timothy to abide in y^ doctrine of the holy Scriptures,
for proof of which argument, this seue^teenth verse is immediately adjoined.
His argument is taken from the effect of these holy writings, wherein Timothy
had been brought up from a child. Which effect is this, that through faith in
2. Tim. (...). (...)*
Christ Jesus they are of ability or of power, or of sufficiency to make him
wise to salvation. For the Apostle says expressly, that the Scriptures are
able, or of power, or sufficiency (for all these speeches I take to be of one
signification) whereunto: to make him wise: how far: even to salvation, that
is to teach him all wisdom needeful to salvation. Whereupon, as I said, the
Apostle immediately brings in this sentence, that All the Scripture is given
by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, etc. Which must either
be said to be impertinent to the former matter of the power or sufficiency
of the Scripture to salvation (which I think no man of any reason will
affirm) or else it must be confessed, that the Apostle added it for greater
plainnes, or for an other proof. For whether of both it be brought in, it is
absurd to bring the less to set out, or prove the more. And seeing the
Apostle had spoken in the former verse of the sufficiency of Scripture, to
say now it brings but some profit to that purpose, were to say less then
he had said before. Wherefore he saying it is profitable, sets it out as
alone and sufficiently profitable, being inspired of God, and sanctified by his
promise and ordinance, to make perfect the man of God to al heavenly wisdom.
Finally, the Apostle having put into Tiniothies hand al complete, necessary
and sufficient furniture, speaks never a whit of your churchreuealed
verities, but only of the scripture inspired of God. Therefore either he
teaches and concludes insufficiently: or else the Scripture is sufficiently,
wholly, powerfully, and in truth only profitable.

For your second reason, I deny that the new Testament is therefore super
fluous, because the old was sufficient. For this bountiful addition, or
access of scripture by the New Testament, is not to impeach the perfection
and profitable sufficiency, or sufficient profitablenes of the old Testament,
seeing the Fathers were as well faued, as we are now under the Gospel, but for
a more full, evident, and clear reue^ation of that, which though to salvation
it was sufficient before, yet could not show the infinite riches of Gods
goodness toward us, so plainly and so fully as these do. Job had sufficient
in his greatest want, and no superfluity in his greatest abundance, A morning
light is sufficient for a man to do his work by, yet the brightness of the
sun is not therefore needelesse and superfluous: for it serves to give a
clearer, a more certain and more comfortable direction then the other. For
your by matter, that the words omnis and tota, differ in Greek and Latin,
for proof whereof you appeal to all Logicioners, I dare warrant you they will
all condemn your opinion. For omnis homo signifies every man, but omnis
populus (which is the Vulgar translation) does not signify every people: Luk
2^. 3^.
neither can you translate the words of Saint Luke concerning the taxing that
every earth, or every world should be taxed: Luke 2. 1.
in which places the Evangelist uses the same word, the use whereof in y^
greek you did not understand. Therefore if you can salve this matter of
manifest error, I will acknowledge my self to deal deceitfully as you charge
me. An other point follows like the rest already answered. But the Censurer
thus repeateth. Saint Paul must understand part of the scripture and not the
whole, because all was not then written: also now we can not take the
Apostles words as uttered of all, because much scripture is now wanting as he
does imagine. Should these be your plain arguments if you could obtain
disputation: Should this be the shorter way? I know not your name, but know I
pray you and teach your fellows to know, that the scripture has been in all
ages sufficient for the time wherein it was written: of all that which has by
several increases been written, nothing was at any time superfluous: and
whatsoever has been written and not come to our hands, nothing for all that
is now missing, that is necessary unto salvation. He that has not given us the
books of Nathan, Gad, Achia the Shilonite, and 1. Chro. 29. 29. 2. Chro. 9.
29. 1. Reg. 4. 31.
Iehdo (if they wrote any other then parts of the two books of Samuel after
his death, and of the first book of the Kings) also he that has not given us
the rest of Salomons Proverbs, (to pass by your oversight concerning the
epistle to the Laodiceans, already noted) therefore gave them not, because he
knew them not necessary or expedient for the posterity. John proves Lolu^.
21. 25.
this in the conclusion of his Gospel, and Christ teaches that they which had
Moses and the Prophets, even then had Luke 15. 20.
sufficient without miracles and traditions. And you have no sound opinion of
the wisdom and mercy of God, if you think his majesty to leave any age,
since he chose a peculiar people, void of scripture, profitable and sufficient
to the salvation of his Church. Thus the reader may see that I neither wrest
the former place against my self, neither can you do it, that would so feign.

In the fifth article the Jesuits are reported to say, The want of holy
scriptures V
must be supplied by peecing it out Cens. Col. 220.
by traditions. For the report of this doctrine, the Censurer bestows more of
his undeserved tauntes. If the Censure of Colen has no such words, Gotuisus
failed in citing their book, but failed not in charging them with their own
doctrine, which all Jesuits and Papists so uphold as Peter's chair, both to
maintain their false doctrines, and to underset their Antichristian tyraunie.
But although you would for the time dissemble the matter, traditions are not of
so small force, as to piece out the want of scripture. For, except the President
of ye Trent council have a forge to coin lies, traditions are a living Gospel:
and he utters it as a question that can not be denied. Hosius lib. 4. de.
trad. ^ol. 388.
This is most true (says Hosius) that if traditions be rejected, the very
Gospel also seems to be rejected: for what else are traditions, then a
certain living Gospel? In deed traditions make a quick court at the
Vaticane. Thus by your doctors opinion it is most true, y^ traditions are made
not a supply to any wants in y^ Gospel, but an other living Gospel, after a
sort to give life to that which in y^ true Gospel seems to be dead. And may
not a man without a lie call this doctrine vlasphemous: My uttering of ye
Commandment in the singular number is without addition or alteration of sense.
For Moses in the same Chapter, speaking of the same law and to the same men,
does change the plural number into the singular. The self same Law also is
recited in the singular number in the twelfth chapter of Deuteronomie, and by
Solomon, in the thirtieth chapter of his Deuteronomy. 12. 32.
Proverbs: and evermore that which is P^o. 30. 6.
said to al is also said to every one, and truly taken as uttered to every one.
Surely I cannot guess what you unagined at this change of the Lawgiuers
words, without change of the sense, being done by the example of the same
Lawgiuer in another place, and without any breach of his Law: and whereupon
your uttermost malice could infer none absurdity in sense, none injury to
the scripture, nor advantage to my cause, but a stinging guess insinuating
some cause moving me to this change, which whether you co^cealed as forbearing
me, or ashamed on your own behalf to bewraye, the indifferent reader judges.
Again, what made you add so heinous a slander, as if all things were
lawful for me: and to charge me, as blaming the Apostles and Evangelists for
adding the Gospel? Take heed you allow not your self such scope in these
suggestions manifestly against the truth and your own conscience, for you
know what that sentence implies, Blessed is he that condemns Romans 14. 22.
not himself in that thing which he allows. The Lord that adds grace to
grace, and light to light, he also has added to the law, the fullness and
satisfaction Romans 10. 4. 1. Tim. 3. 16.
thereof in Christ Jesus, which is published in his most holy and most perfect
Gospel. To expound Moses words, forbidding Deuteronomy. 4. 2.
to add or take away from the Law as spoken of the things he delivered by
word of mouth, and not of the law written, (...) is a doubtful speaking, and
may bear a harder conclusion, then I will charge you with. His commandment
respected the law either pronounced or written by him, (...) afterward to be
preached and written by the holy Prophets and Apostles in the spirit of God. I
dare appeal to your conscience, though it be delivered from your pen, you do
not think in your heart, that I would have no scriptures believed, besides
that which Moses set down. Wherefore your proof needed not in this matter. To
conclude, it is a great iniquirie to add traditions, or your unwritten ve(...)
to the written word of God, whereunto no man may add, because nothing is
wanting: from which no man can take, because nothing is superfluous: but to him
that Apoc. 22. 18.
adds, shall the curses written in the book be added for ever.

In the sixth place the Jesuits words VI Cens. Col. 117.
are thus reported: The holy Scripture is a nose of wax. At the true report of
this blasphemous doctrine, you fall into a storm, persuading that I have
therein sinned against God and abused the Iesuices, with other most bitter
words: as if I took the way to ouermatch both learning and truth. But how
wrongfully all these words are cast out against me, your own words bear
witness: for presently after the sentence of condemnation, you repeal it and
acquit me of the fault: granting, that as a nose of wax, may be formed what
way and to what form one list, so naughty men may wrest the Scriptures.
Notwithstanding, because you press the words against me, let them be
examined. First to prove that the Jesuits have them more plainly then you
will acknowledge, I appeal from your Censure, to Andradius plain confession.
He (as you know) defended the Jesuits in these points against Kemnitius,
which you defend against me: and has lent you no small furniture for this
service. This Andradius (as having more learning, and in his kind more true
dealing then you) in handling this article, does not at all cry out as you do,
but acknowledges and defends the matter without such needelesse scoffs. And
for the words he confesses saying: The fathers of Colen I grant, do say, in
the place which Kemnitius Paiuas Andrad. orth. expl. lib. 2. page 104.
cites, that the holy Scripture is as a nose of wax. The word (as) may
indifferently be put in, or left out, and the sense all one, as shall be
proved. Buclet us leave the words and follow the matter. Seeing it is now
clear that the I^suites say, the Scriptures are as a nose of wax, what shall
we say? Is this the Censur^es Censure, or the Iesuices doctrine'^ may the word
of God, may the word of power, the unchangeable word of God, may it (I say) be
compared to pliant, changeable and melting wax: Is it in the word so to
receive diverse and contrary fenses, as the wax receives in truth, and not by
misconstering or mistaking of the eyes; contrary forms, or printes from
contrary seals? shall Jesuits maintain this directly or indirectly in a
kingdom, where the Gospel is preached? I appeal herein to the conscience of
all that love the truth: though a naughty Jesuit for flattery of the Pope,
or other Heretic to deceive people, may wrest and pervert the scripture, yet
Saint Peter teaches, it shall be to his own destruction, 2. Pet. 3. 16.
and the Scripture notwithstanding shall remain perfect and undefiled. For the
word does not work it self, ^asely to receive and: hold every form as
wax d^^th* but the truth of the whole Scripture mainteineth the truth of
every branch, it taket^ away the ^^ampe, an^ r^sisteth the print of any f^rged
(...)ent interpretation. Every sentence in the word of God, is as the arm of a
mighty Oak that cannot be broken off, but if you bow it by force, the bowing
will appear, and the more you force it to come about to your ^ent, the
inightier it is to recover itself and return aganie to his own course and
grouth, and that with ^^rill to him, that offered such violence* I could not
pass from this place easily, because this blasphemous doctrine does in the
Church of Rome (I mea^e the Popish Church, for (...)wise I doubt not but God
has his Church in Rome, as he had in England, when all England seemed to be
Rome) because I say this intolerable abasing and abusing the power and all
sufficiency of the holy Scripture, does in the Popish Church, mainteyne the
my^^erie of ungodliness: it stops up the fountain Iere. 2. 1^.
of living waters, and prepares ^isternes and di^ches in place thereof: it
changes the milk and water of life mentioned in Esai. 55. 1.
Esaias, into the cup of fornications described Reave. 17 4.
in the Revelation: finally the traditions of man must ouerrule the truth of
God. But let us see what follows. The Censurer grants me and I grant him
again, that the words are spoken in a similitude, and I alleged them in no
other sense: yet he would enforce it upon me, and upon his reader to believe,
that I should absurdely make the Jesuits say, the Scripture is a nose of
wax, without regard of se^blance. But he cannot so much as make my words a
nose of wax, to receive this his counterfeited stamp and false
interpretation. And for his objection, it is waste, saying: Although Christ be
likened to a Serpent, yet he is no Serpent, and to a ^^uetous man, yet he is
none. For who does at all affirm that which he does con^u^e so carefully?
And touching the first objection, which is like the second, where is it said
that Christ is like a Serpent? True it is, the lifting up of the brazen Serpent
in the wilderness, is compared to the ^omb. 21. 9. (...). 3. 14.
lifting up of the son of man: which will not warrant the words of your
Censure. It is moreover one thing to ^o^pare that special sacrament and sign
of the brazen Serpent to Christ, and to compare Christ to a serpent generally.
Thus you have picked out an example, that in show seeme^h to make for you, but
is (...) deed against you: as I may also say of y^ second, touching yt
coue^ous man* But how many exa^p^^s are against you in this matter? Christ is
likened to a vine, and we may say Christ is a vine: he is likened to a
shepeheard, John 15. 1. John 10. 11.
and he is a shepherd: God is likened to a consuming fire, and ^her^upon it is
written, Heb. 12. ^9. Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
God is a consuming (...)* (...) against your example, Christ is likened to the
brazen serpen^, and we may say he is that brasent serpent lifted up from the
earth at his passion, to draw all to him self. But that John 3. 1^
you may not have h^te the va^^age of the letters, now I have given you your
liberty to say what you can, I will not yield that the word (as) is left out*
in the C^len Censure. For Payua, as loath as you to grant y^ truth, does yet
at last report the words altogether as I do^, adding the like out of Pighius,
your doctors word^s are: when the fathers of Colen, considered that there
Payuas Andrad. orth. explic. lib. (...) page 107.
were many* places in the holy Scriptures, whose true sense does not easily
app^are, but that every man may at his pleasure draw them into var^able and
diu^^s senses, in a most apt similitude they called it a nose of wax. And
Pighius. The leade^ rule of the Lesbian building. By these two places Payuas
Andradius has brought you into some worthy suspicion of charging me for my
author without cause in ^ther places as well as in this. But now wherein have I
abused the Jesuits learned or vnlear^ed* What have I here said, that one of
your doctors does not ^^owe* what have I done to ouermatch a truth, in
defending the unchangeable truth of the scriptures against your doctrine,
teaching that here^iques may command and (...) the word of truth, as wax is
commanded and framed to what form they list. Now^ comes somewhat to make
sport, if the granitie of the matter did not require fear and reverence. The
Censurer supposes me, to have had but one Bible, and that of the old
translation only, which has, The Law of the Lord is immaculata undefiled,
or as he Psalm. 19. 7.
translateth unspotted, void of filth and dishouestie. Whereupon the matter is
debated at large, what yt latin word immaculata does signify beyond sea
(where the Censurer would dissemblingly seem t^ be) and what it should
signify here in England. A solemn preparation to make show of a ^^^torie*
which the Censurer will have over his own imagination. I shall be convinced for
false translation of that I translated not, and for ill handling that I touched
not. I may as well be censured for the translation of Staphylus, or Lindan^
^launders, as for the translation of the word immaculata. The original has,
the Law of the Lord is perfect, and the best translations have so translated
it. Your old translation does g^ alone: the Lxx. follow the rest. Wherefore
this place out of David does show that the scripture is perfect, and
mainteineth her perfection against all corruptions, as a right line shows it
self, and bewrays that which is crooked. Thus you see I translate not your
old translation in this place with fraud or without ^^aude. Somewhat you
imagined in a ^^eame, and told it before you were awake.

In the seventh article the Iesui^es VII
are reported thus to teach: The reading of the holy Scripture, is not only not
profitable, Cen. Col. fol. 11^.
but many ways very hurtful to the Church. Here the ^ensurer would seem to
deny the doctrine, that in so doing he may both somewhat cover the
absu^di^ie, and accuse me for my author, as ^^stepor^ing the same. Yet after a
storm of needelesse words, he does in effect grant the matter. But his
manner is for some advantage to report their doctrines otherwise then they are
caught or brought into question. For the Papists do restrain the common
people from reading the Scriptures, using many reasons to prove them hurtful.
Besides other your books to this purpose, there is* one w^^thie of remembrance
Standishes book entitled, Adiscourse whether it be expedient that the
scriptu^^ should be in English.
written to ye Parliament in Queen Mary's time, where fifty reasons, such as
they be, are brought, not ^nely to keep the people from the Scriptures, but
for a more fure way, to keep the Scriptures from them, not suffering the
translation thereof in the English tongue. Whereupon the question we have in
hand is this: whether the reading of Scriptures be hurtful, and therefore to
be forbidden. Now the Censurer says the rash and inconsiderate reading is
forbidden, which is from the matter. We do not join issue in this, whether
the people should rashly read them, or without consideration: but whether you
may make men believe that the reading of holy scriptures is hurtful, and
therefore to be res^r^yned. There is no doubt but you hold both, and teach
both carefully, (...) appears by a late Iesnites book written of this
matter: yet in disputation you would Iacobus Ledesima de divine. scrip. quauis
ling. non Legend(...).
seem only to forbid the cash and unadui^ed reading, whereof we make no
question. But your reason is to be laid down: Whatsoever may hurt, though it
be in no fault, yet it is to be restrained: the word of God has done such
hurt: therefore it is to be restrained. So you may as well take away the food
of the body, that body and soul may perish together, because men may surfeit
by good meats, and fall into drunkenness by wholso^e wine. Here let me for the
scriptures fitly plead against you, your own rule pleaded in an other place
for Philosophy. It is say you, a gross ignorance, for an abuse that may be,
to^ (...) demne the things which be excellent gifts of God, and sparks of his
most high and infinite wisdom. If this he true; the^ is it a blasphemy for an
abuse not at all growing by the word, yet to forbid^^ (...) use thereof* and
to keep it in an unknown tongue, in a barbarous translation, (...) condemn,
not sparks of Gods most hig^ and infinite wisdom, but to conde(...) even
that high and infinite wisdom it self, by making such restraintes and taking
such sure ways to debar the children of God, from the most necessary
evidences of their heavenly inheritance. But in this question Psalm 18. 8, 10.
etc. and 119. 129.
again, Payua does deal more plainly to the purpose then the Censurer, who
borowing of Payua this place also, yet leaves out all that, which makes not
to his purpose, of covering and shielding the Jesuits from the truth that
fights against them. For Andradius plainly confesses, that this is the
first argument of the Jesuits, why the Scriptures should not be read, because
(as the Jesuits teach) they Paiuas Andrad. lib 2. orthodox. expl. page 117.
have given occasion to all heresies. A very strange assertion: but howsoever
unlearned and unstable men deal, yet the Scripture gives no occasion of
heresy, much less of all heresies, as these fellows do thus openly
maintain. Therefore the Jesuits, in teaching that such harm comes by
reading the word of God, accuse the scriptures as hurtful many ways, and not
profitable, which is as much as they are charged withal in the 7. place. The
Censurer commonly fails in leaving the question, and proving that which is
not called into doubt: as in this place be proves that the word is without
all fault, when men misconster it, or found heresies upon the misunderstanding
of it. This was not in question: yet it is well proved (...) fitly to
overthrow the former doctrine of Jesuits: for, if the scripture be in no
fault, testraine not the Scripture, but reform the wrangling and perverting
wit: if it be in no fault, it is neither the occasion of all heresies, nor a
nose of wax. Your example of Christ is easily and truly returned against you.
For as Christ is a ruin to none, but Psalm. 11 (...). 1. Pet. 2. 7. 2. Cor. 2.
(...).
to those that receive him not, and to those that believe not in him: so the
Scripture hurts not, but those that despise the reading, the hearing and the
practice thereof.

The contrary doctrine to alleged ^ut of Matthew; Ye err,, not knowing the
Mat. 22. 29.
Scriptures, nor the power of God. The Censurer would (...)we the application
of this place by two circumstances, one to prove the word(...)articular: the
^ther because (as he says) Christ spoke not to the ignorant people, but (...)
(...). Touching the first (...), although the Cen(...) does well lay (...) the
particular application of Christ, (...)spect of the present matters and
hearers, yet it will be found more then audaritie for any man, so to
restrain the doctrines of Christ delivered in particular, that they must reach
no further then the present circumstances of the matter, and of those disciples
or adversaries to whom he spaket for this is nothing else; but to make Christ
a Prophet for a time, and not a Prophet for ever. Also by that interpretation
his wondeful works, and most heavenly doctrines, shall be made to us nothing
else, but a bare and naked story, to tell us what Christ taught others, and not
what he has taught us: and to declare what he reprehended in them, not what
he reprehendeth in us. But the Censurer will answer^, he minds not to (...)
other doctrines to the particular circumstances. And why not any other sentence
as well as this to the Sadduces? for nothing can be more general then error,
nothing more universal then the ignorance of Scriptures; which is I think, in
y^ Censurers judgment the fountain of all error. How comes it then that he
will stop so generalle stream, restrayning that to a few, which apper^^^neth
to all: And for the Sadduces; they did not only err in the doctrine of y^
resurrection, but were otherwise enemies, and ignorant of Christ, not knowing
the Scriptures, Mat. 16. 6. Acts 5. 7.
nor the power of God to salvation in him. Wherefore Christ noted upon one
particular occasion, y^ fountain of al their blindness and infidelity, as
well as the cause of their ignorance, touching the resurrection, and their
foolish doubt of the seven brethren. Thus, notwithstanding y^ Censurers
judgment, it is plain, that the doctrine of this place has as well a general
use as a particular: and that Christ noted the fountain of all ignorance, and
not the ignorance of Sadduces touching resurrection alone.

To your second point, that Christ spoke not this to the people, but to y^
learned Sadduces, first I answer, If the learned err, not knowing the
scriptures: the unlearned are in more danger of error through the same want.
Secondly, if the want were not noted in all, the supply should not be made
and commanded to all: but all, even the people are commanded to search the
Scriptures, therefore John 5. 3^.
not to search them, or to be ignorant of them, is a fault in all, be they
learned or unlearned. Your argument that Christ should speak only to the
Sadduces, and of the resurrection because it is added, you know not the power
of God, is already answered: for it is a general fault, as well to be
ignorant of the power of God, as not to know the Scriptures. Therefore as the
ignorance of the one is condemned in all, so is the ignorance of the other, and
the remedy for both is found in the exercise and search of the holy
scriptures. Your similitude of words spoken as by my Lord Chauncellor to the
doctors of the Arches, is unlearned, for with an example of speech concerning a
special matter, you would overthrow that which was spoken by Christ, of a
general cause. But let your example stand: As the study of the civil law
is proper to all Lawyers: and therefore their law books to be read and
studied of all Lawyers: so the study of the spiritual and heavenly Law, is
the profession of all christians, Acts. 17. 1^.
and therefore the books of that law to be read and studied by all professors
of the same, because to err, not knowing the Scriptures, is a thing common to
all men, as was declared. An example of the like had been nothing for your
purpose: as if my Lord Chauncellor should say to some Jesuits, Ye run into
danger of treason, not knowing the Law against al those that withdraw the
Queens subjects from their natural obedience to her Majesty: this should be
a note not only to those Jesuits, but to al whatsoever they be, Jesuits, or
Seminaries or massepriestes, or what persons soever, y^ they must either know
and keep the law, or incur the punishment therein expressed against the
offenders. Use good words of your countrymen: clown them not, for though
they be simple, and not trained in the study of good letters, yet they have
souls to be fed with the word: and (howsoever you Hosius de aut. scrip. lib.
3. page 253. Iac. Noguer. de eccle. Christi lib. 1. page 69. Mat. 22. 29.
praise the Colliers faith, and would put it in execution) they are to take
heed they find not Christ's word verefied against the^ as well as against y^
Sadduces. Ye err, not knowing the Scriptures nor the power of God.

In the eight article the Jesuits are VIII
reported to say, That the righteous man lives by faith, he has it not in
Christ but Cens Col. 118.
by his own works. First in this question I am charged with untruth, for the
Jesuits have no such thing, as the Censurer affirms. For answer in this
behalf, I refer you to my author, whose words being truly reported, the
charge you lay upon me is causeless, and must return. But what is this,
still to deny the articles, to mayntaine quarrel: and yet to auowe the doctrine
to defend the Jesuits: Your own words teach that a man's works are
meritorious in Christ, and means to make him righteous with the second
righteousness, as you call it: which is plainly to grant the doctrine denied
before. For although you vsey^ name of Christ in this question, yet the Apostle
concludes, that you impute your salvation not to Christ, but to your own
works. I testify, says the Apostle, (speaking of them that did not exclude
Christ) that if ye be circumcised, Christ does nothing profit you: Gal. 5. 2.
teaching thereby, that whosoever will in any part be righteous in them
selves, can have no righteousness in Jesus Christ. Therefore there was no
cause of your impudent lies.

You come next to the place avouched for confutation of this error: If
righteousness Romans 11. 6.
come by our works, it is not now grace. This sentence you truly conster as
alleged by me to prove that no man: (...) can be ryghteous in this life:
which you say is both from the purpose and false. But if the words be full of
proof, to show there is no righteousness in man's works, if it be the
manifest doctrine of the Apostle, what could more fitly convince the
blasphemy, derogating from the righteousness which is by Christ, and
arrogating to our own works, then that place which shows, there is no
righteousness in our works, but in Christ alone, which is imputed to us by
grace only: Now let us see how false it is. This you would prove by a
distinction of a double righteousness, the first of being called from
infidelity to gayth in Christ, which you say is only of Gods mercy, and nor
by any merit of our works: the second righteousness is of such works as
proceed from men after the former calling, if they remain in grace. But if
this reed whereupon you lean, be broken, you must needs confess the former
proof against you to be both pertinent and true. For this Genesis 27. 38. Heb.
12. 16. Act. 4. 12.
purpose it is to be considered, that as there was but one blessing showed to
Isaac, so there is but one only righteousness, which is not found in any
person or subject, but in our Savior Christ Jesus alone. This righteousness
is accounted and imputed 1. Cor. 1. 30, Phil. 3. 9.
to all those that believe as their own. In which imputation it is needful
to consider the proportion between yt redeemer, and his redeemed, for it
gives great light to this questi^. As in Christ there was found no cause of
death at al, and yet he died only John 19. 4. 1. Cor. 15. 3. Romans 5. 6.
by imputation of our sin: so in us there is found no cause of life at al, and
yet we shall live only by imputation of his righteousness. The like proportion
is between the covenant in the law and the covenant of faith in Christ: for as
y^ law admits no transgression, if a man will live by it: so Christ
admits Psalm. 14. 1. Romans 3. 10. Gal. 3. 22. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal. 3. 10. Gal.
5. 3.
no satisfaction or merit to join (...) his perfect merits, if any man will
live by him: that y^ whole work of our salvation may be of ye grace of God in
Christ Jesus the au^thour and fynisher of our faith. Heb. 12. 2.
But to prove this righteousness one, there is a place to the Romans in the
which the righteousness whereby God saves the believers, is called the
righ^eousnes of Romans 1. 17.
God: and said to be that which is revealed in the Gospel. This is the
righteousness of faith, as the Apostle proves out of the Prophet, witnessing
that the righteous man Gal. 3. 11. Habac. 2. 4.
lives by faith which place proves there is but one righteousness of men,
not only because the Apostle speaks of it as one: but in naming it
expressly the righteousness of God, and giving to this faith both
righteousness and life. For if the righteousness of faith, be the
righteousness of God, that is, such as God accompteth for righteousness,
which may also stand before him, and make us holy in his sight, what second
righteousness can there be, or what can it do before God, that is not already
accomplished by that first righteousness* Moreover if this righteousness be
that which the Gospel teaches, and not the Gospel only, but, as the same
Apostle writes afterward, which is testified by the law and the Prophets,
whence have you brought Romans 3. 2^.
us a second righteousness, that neither the Law, nor the Prophets, nor the
Gospel, have reueiled unto us: The vanity of this your devise may further
appear, if we consider the justice of God, which can not allow for righteous
any thing, but yt which is absolutely perfect and holy in all respects, Mat. 5.
(...). Iac. 2. 10.
as the Law is most perfect and most holy. Wherefore both the satisfaction for
^ur sin committed, must be such as may fully endure whatsoever the Law has
threatened for sin, and the obedience so exact and precise as it fail not in
any point. But this righteousness is but one, and is in none but in our
savior Christ (none other being able to make that full satisfaction Act. 4. 12.
Matt. 26. 39. Heb. 5. 9.
for sin, nor perfectly to keep the Law but he alone) therefore there can
^ee but one righteousness, which is in Christ Jesus, and accounted unto those
which believe in him according to the Gospel. The holy Apostles teach that
after men be converted from infidelity to faith, they stand righteous and
live in the sight of God, not by means of their works, but by this faith
whereby they believed. Abraham's example makes this good, who after he was
called from idolatry to the service of God, is said to have believed, and that
his faith was reckoned to him for righteousness: not his works first or last,
least he might have Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4. 3. Gal. 3. 6.
wherein to rejoice and not in God. The Apostle to the Galathians, makes this
evident. We knowing, says he, that a man is not justified by the works of the
Law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ, we also have Gal. 2. 16.
believed in Jesus Christ, that we may be justified by the faith of Christ,
and not by works of the Law, because by the works of the Law no flesh shall be
justified. In which words the Apostle plainly makes salvation an effect of
faith, and not of any works, which we do after we have believed. Our savior
Christ confirms this in diverse places, as in Ioh: He that believes Ioh. 5.
24*
in him that has sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
conde^natio^, but is already passed from death to life: and, He that believes
in the son, has life everlasting. Idem. 3. 36.
An other place to the Galathians, makes all this yet more manifest: where the
Apostle speaking of himself long after his conversion says, That I now live,
I live by the faith of him that loved me, and Gal. 2. 2^.
gave him self for me. By these proofs it is evident, that there is but one
only righteousness, for which men are accounted righteous before him, which
is the righteousness of faith. To this may be added, that the only righteousness
of God is that, which gives all the glory of our salvation to God only in
Christ Jesus, and shuts out 1. Cor. 1. 31. 2. Cor. 10. 17
all vaunting and boasting of man: but the second righteousness, which you
imagine, does not so, but Ieaueth somewhat for man to glory of: therefore it is
no righteousness Iere. 9. 23. Romans 4. 2.
taught by the Apostle. Lastly, this also is against your second righteousness,
that our works done by faith, yet are not perfect, ^^a. 64. 6. Luke 17. 10.
Phil. 3. 8.
and therefore cannot make us righteous before God. These reasons may suffice
in this great question of our salvation, briefly to convince the blasphemy of
your devise invented of Satan, to deceive those that seeking salvation more or
less by their own works, fail of that righteousness Romans 10. 3.
which is by faith only in GOD through Christ Jesus our Lord. Now seeing the
folly of this absurd distinction of a first and of a second righteousness is
evidently co^uicted, it is also worthy of consideration how this Censurer, that
takes upon him so justly to divide and give every thing his own, does here
notwithstanding huddle and confound righteousness with regeneration, and
justification with sanctification. For that which he calls the second
righteousness, is that which the Scripture calls Ephesians. 4. 24. and 5. 9. Gal.
5. 22.
the New man, the fruits of the Spirit or regeneration. Further also where he
says, The first righteousness is of Gods mercy only, and no way of our
works, or by any merit of the same, it is to be noted that he is constrained
to acknowledge a righte^usnesse by faith only, without any de^^^^ of works:
whereupon it should be observed that the Censure^ him self seems t^ be
ashamed of ye merit of co^gruence, as the Schoolmen term it, while he so
^^atly and fully affirms our calling to be only of Gods grace without any
merit of ours.

Now to return to his Censure again, Thom. Aq* prim. secu^* quaest. 114. art.
2. Romans 11. 6.
he adds in the end a Censure upon the allegation of the text vouched out of
the Romans, for the disproofe of the former blasphemous opinion. This he
blames as impertinent and untrue: impertinent, because (in his construction)
it is against the righteousness of good works before our calling: and not
generally against the righteousness of all good works: wherein he seems
not to have regarded the reason of the Apostle, which is taken from the nature
of grace and works so contrary, that the one can never nor in any wise stand
with the other. Therefore the argument is strong to prove that our salvation
cannot ^e both deserved, and also freely given. N^^ther does this argument
hold in election only, but whatsoever is of grace, as ^^^^tion,
justification, sanctification, glory, all these are in no (...), or part, of
works. Thus the place is so forcible to the purpose it was alleged for, that
the Censurer is not able ^o escape the sentence thereof. He complains lastly
of words added, which are but to clear the sense, and taken out of the second
to the Galathians: where to like effect the Apostle faith, If righteousness be
Gal. 2. 21.
by the law, Christ dyed without cause. Thus, having satisfied all the
Censurers pretensed doubts, and convicted him of error, in the blasphemous
doctrine of a second righteousness, I may worthily leave the Iesuice to his
voluntary Whip, for reformation of his judgment: otherwise if he will not
learn to give all the honor and causes of salvation to God in Christ, but Romans
10. 3.
will, in establishing his own righteousness, abandon the righteousness of
God by faith, which must stand altogether of it self, then in so teaching he
will draw upon Phil. 3. 9. Romans 3. 22.
him self other Whippes even Scorpi^ns whose sting abide for ever. For
avoiding hereof I pray God (if it may make for his glory) that you Jesuits may
receive the love of the truth, and that you may seek and (...). These. 2. 12.
find salvation in the merits of Christ alone to life everlasting.

The ninth report of ^esui^e^ doctrine IX
is: Men do surely hope that everlasting C^^s. Col. fol. 10^.
life shall be given them, but they do not believe it: now hope often fails,
^^herwise it were no hope. This (...)cle (...) confessed without any
co^^radiction, that the wicked servant may be judged by his own Luke 19. (...).
mouth. But the ^^uching of the places for ^ontrarie d^^trine, is ^ensured for
unlearned huddling* up and confounding hope and faith as one thing: which note
of the Censure, I may truly say, came from no deep knowledge. A little
judgment might have served your Censureship to discern* that the two places
were not alleged to prove or disprove any thing of faith (the full certein^ie
whereof is proved against you by the certein^i^ of hope) but to overthrow that
which the Jesuits say in the latter part of the sentence, against which these
places serve plainly and expressly. For what may more cleare^y prove against
the Jesuits doctrine, that hope never fails, then the Apostles words,
calling (...) The Heb. 6. 19.
ancre of the soul. Where by he n^^eth our f^eedo^e from danger in all storms
of ^entations, ^idding out the time of this life wi(...) any (...) o^ fear,
and without any (...) touching (...) (...) heaven. To show the force of this
assurance, the Apostle uses very significatiue words, calling it a sure and
stable ancre: and yet to make it so full that no fear or doubt may remain, he
adds that it enters into the inward of the Veil, whereunto Christ is
entered, meaning thereby the heavens. Which imports as much as if he should
say, we that have cast this Ancre above in heaven, are so much more safe, then
they whose Ancre is cast down into the Sea, as the hold we have taken in
heaven by the Ancre of hope, is surer. Yea, the very Rocks shall sooner fail,
the^ our hold, settling upon the strength and truth of gods promise, which are
al Yea and Ame^ in Christ 2. Cor. 1. 20.
Jesus. This our shoot Ancre of hope, has taken hold of the mercy seat of
God, and of the throne of grace, which except some Heb. 4. 16.
storm be able to remove, we are in most joyful and steadfast safety.

The like is promised by ye other place out of ye fifth to the Romans: for, if
hope makes not ashamed, and shame comes Romans 5. 5.
when a man fails of that be hoped for: then hope can not fail. The Apostle
makes this more strong by that which foiloweth as a reason, The love of God is
abou^danly shead out into our hearts by the holy Ghost which is given unto us.
By which reason it appears, except the holy Ghost has given us a wrong
testimony of the love of God, the hope which we have conceived thereby cannot
deceive us. Thus you see these places so truly and fitly alleged, that al
your falsely named learning will not be able truly to answer the allegation
of them, which notwithstanding it pleases you to call unlearned. But let us
see what you call learning: forsooth the doctrine of Jesuits, touching the
doubtfulnes and fear which is in hope, that is true, learned and clear. This
is (as the prophet complains) to call good badde, and Esa. 5. 20.
sweet sower: whereunto you know what belongs.

For answer to these two places of hope, the Iesuite^ doctrine is declared at
large, the effect of all standing in two points: the first concerning faith,
the other of hope. Of faith they teach, that no man may believe that he in
particular shall be saved without a particular revelation from God. A faithless
doctrine of faith: and therefore not to be lightly passed over. You seem to
prove it by reasons, one drawn from yt object of faith, which is the word
written, or tradition, whereof neither as you say, does testify men's
salvation in particular: the second taken from the uncertainty of the things
believed: which (as the Censurer supposes) do depend upon such conditions as
possibly may not be performed. Both these great points, for want of scripture
he sets forth by examples, as minding rather to persuade then to prove. The
first is of the answerer: the second of the possibility to be damned, as did
fall out in Judas, and may fall out (a more Mat. 27. 5. Act. 1. 18.
fearful case then I would put of him. had be not put it of him self) in
the Censurer him self. Now let us consider, what great learning the Iesuices
have in this their opinion of faith, as the Censure^ does report them. To
judge, that without particular revelation by name, no man can be sure of his
salvation, is expressly against that the word of God ^eacheth in this great
question. Therefore, how lerane^ soever the Jesuits make them selves, yet in
deed as the Apostle speaks of the wise 1. Cor. 1. 20.
Gentiles, they become stark fools, not knowing true wisdom out of the
word, but bastard wisdom by their foolish distinctions. The Censurers word
of Tradition must be reserved for a fitter place. Touching the promise of the
Gospel, it is Mar. 16. 1^. John 3. 16.
general: whosoever believes shall be saved: and the Censurer confesses it.
This general promise has place, and is certainly verefied in every
particular yt believes. Every sensible man without further learning may easily
judge in this doctrine: whatsoever is true in ye general, must needs be true
in every particular. Now, if it be undoubtedly true, that every believer
shall be saved, it must needs be also, that Simeon and Lazarus believing in
Christ shall be saved. Therefore what needs any special revelation in the
word, for that which is sufficiently comprehended under the general: what
need is there by name to say from man to man by name, Lazarus shall be saved,
and Citus shall be saved, and (...)we shall be saved, and so infinitely? Or shall
we say that God in respect of persons does particularly assure some of their
certain salvation, leaving all the rest to be tossed and carried up and down
with fear and hope, as a ship in the sea carried hither and thither with
contrary winds? Moreover the very place Luke 10. 20.
cited by the Censurer as a particular revelation, was not particular, but
general to all the disciples, that believed by virtue of a more general
covenant made to all that believe whatsoever. For, to examine that place
nearer, all the disciples and all the Apostles, had not their names written in
the book of life: for Judas was excepted. And here by the way, the Censurers
oversight John 13. 18. Psalm. 108. 8.
must be noted, that draws the place of Luke as special and particular to
the Apostles, being spoken of the seventy disciples. He wanted special
knowledge herein, when he so boldly made it an argument Luke 10. 17.
of the Apostles special revelation.

Of the most certain and sure foundations of our particular faith and hope,
the Apostle writes in the eight to the Romans, Romans 8. 35.
saying that nothing was able to take from him the love which God bears to
him in Christ Jesus, which he sets out by naming such things as are most
like and mighty to strike a fear and doubt into his heart, as oppression,
anguish, persecution, famine, nakedness, and finally death it self: nay he
adds again, that neither life nor death, nor Angels, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height nor depth: that is, what so ever is in heaven
above, or in the earth beneath, or in the par^^ under the earth, finally that
no creature is able to separate him from the love of God, that is in Christ
Jesus. But in mayntenance of these errors you are wont to say, this was a
special p^etogatiue of the Apostle, which is easily taken away by that S.
Peter writes to this purpose: that the Saints had obtained like precious faith
with him: which was true not in the degree, but in the kind and substance of
faith: which should wholly differ, if the Apostles 2. Pet. 1. 1.
had a faith of their particular salvation, and we not. Again the certainty
of faith appears by these reasons which the Apostle alleges: Who shall
(...) the chosen of Romans 8. 33.
God? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn? It is Christ that has
died, nay rather who is raised up again; who is also at the right hand of
God; who makes into cession for us. These reasons of a most sure faith and
hope that wauereth Iam. 1. 6.
not, are of no particular revelation, but of the general doctrine of the
Gospel, and of the common salvation, as Jude calls it, Jude. verse. 3.
which of right apper(...) to every believer, as well as to Peter or to Paul.

The Consurers set onne reason is, that the faithful may fallaway from the
faith and from salvation: where as the things believed remain most certain.
The ground of this reason is to be denie^, for it is most untrue, that any man
who has had faith, can ever afterward finally fallaway. This may be proved
by evident testimonies of the scripture, beside those alleged above: as that
which Christ teaches of the believer, in the eight chapter of John, He shall
never see death: in the fourth, But the water John 8. 51. Idem 4. 14.
that I shall give him, shall be in him a spring of waters, flowing up to
everlasting life: in the tenth. The father is greater John 10. 29.
then all, and none is able to take them out of the fathers hand: Again of the
faithful it is true, which the Apostle unites, that God has justified and
glorified them. So Romans 8.
certain it is, as if it were already every way performed. But it were long
to repeat any ino^e. Notwithstanding there are places that mention a faith,
which seemed for a time to be faithful, but (...) as the fig tree was full of
leaves, but without Mar. 11. 13.
fruit. As for the examples of Iudan who has fallen, and of your self, who
((...) say) may likewise cast your self away, if you list: I can say of
Judas he never believed, because he was ye child of destruction. Psalm. 108.
8. John 17. 12. Act. 1. 18.
For your self, if you have been always of that mind you were of when you
wrote this, you never had any true faith, and therefore could never yet fall
away from it. What God may vouchsafe you hereafter I know not, but leave it
to his wisdom to dispose of his own as it shall please him: but if ever he
vouchsafe you this gift, I am sure the gates of hell shall never prevail
against Mart. 16. 18.
you.

Your second point is of hope, which in your doctrine has two respects, one
of Gods mercy, and in that regard it is full of confidence: the other in
respect of Gods justice, which has fear and doubt annexed with it. The places
alleged before of hope, you expaunde for the confidence thereof: which is
true, if you stayed there, not adding other respects to root out that which
you would seem to plant: for you should have made hopes^ firm and sure,
that it can not be deceived. But, as being of an other judgment, you say that
hope respects also the justice of God, and the fearful effects of his
feueritie, which you quote out of the Scriptures: concerning which effects I
will not dispute with you. Only in alleging the last, I note your wantes,
that without all regard or any warrant of the text, dare say, that those
reprobates Mat. 7. 22.
shall come confidently in the last day hoping to be saved. For besides that it
is impossible that their conscience can have any spark of confidence or hope
of salvation; there is not any mention of such confident hope in the text,
either expressly or by implication. If they had some hope, then also they must
have some faith, for they go together hand in hand. Although I thus link
them together, yet I do not confound Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4. 3. Galat. 5. 5. Tit.
2. 13.
them: but acknowledge this difference, that as faith is a full persuasion of
the promise: so hope is a patient expectation and looking for, of the things
which are believed. It is you therefore, that in deed huddle and confound hope
and a vain persuasion as one thing: where as hope is no less sure then faith,
being grounded upon the same foundation of the word, and has the same fulness
of persuasion. But this is ignorance Heb. 6. 11. 12. (...)
and confusion, which who so discrieth, may well marueyle. what cause you or
your friends find to host of your learning or order for disputation. Such
confusion must be in Babell, which leaving with you: I say further, that hope
never respects Gods justice, nor any thing else, but the things that are
believed: which are y^ most sweet and precious promises of his life, Luke 12.
32. Heb. 6. 12. Item. 11. (...).
kingdom, and glory. Therefore what causes should hope have to fear: True it
is that neither faith nor hope is so perfect in us, but that in these respects
you name, we often fear: but this fear is no work of hope, no more then
doubt is a work of faith. For to say that hope fears in some respects, is
as much as to say, faith in some respects doubts and is no faith. We do
both doubt and fear, such are our infirmities: but that we doubt, it is not of
faith, but of unbelief: neither do we fear, as you speak of fear, by any
effect of hope, but by the contrary work of desperation. But after so many and
sufficient reasons Iam. 1. 6, 7, 8 Mar. 19. 23. 24.
out of the word to prove this question of importance, the words of the
Censurer offer one not to be neglected. He affirms that hope in respect of
the goodness of God is full of confidence and assurance. Therefore although he
will needs against reason make confidence fearful, yet shall he never cast
any shadow of fear upon assurance, especially upon a full assurance such as
he confesses. Now for the places 1. Pet. 1. 17. Phil. 2. 12.
you allege, they concern not this fear now in question, but express a
godly care to live worthy our calling, which is not against the confidence of
hope, but a remedy against presumption and security. The place which you
allege out of the preacher, shows you to be a great clarke, Eccles. 9. 3.
able to read and cite a place, though you come not near the matter by many
degrees. The wise man there disputes of that a man may gather by prosperity
and adversity, and not what he knows by the word of God. For neither can
adversity nor prosperity show the love or hatred of God toward us: it was
the deceitful counsel of Jobs friends, to draw him into these arguments of
Gods purpose. But Job by faith could confess against all calamities and
extremities, saying, though he kill me, yet will I believe in him still. Job.
13. 15.
Thus the learned divinity of the Jesuits, may appear to them that will
behold it. How did you forgette the two milstones you are wont to allege for
teachers in this matter. When a man you say, does bebolde that he stands
upon, it makes him hold: but looking unto that over his head he is in fear.
Woe be unto them that teach such offensive and erroneous doctrines, deceitfully
confirming them with similitudes and distinctions so far from the truth, and
yet easy to be embraced, and deceive the ignorant. It were better for them
that a millstone were hanged about their neck, and they thrown into the
bottom of the sea, then thus to infeeble the faith and hope of Gods children,
by their faithles and fearful doctrines. Yet the Censurer and his fellows
(if you will believe him) reconcile all Scriptures together, maynteyning
confidence and fear in Christian hope, whereas we are said to confound and
huddle up matters: but hereto I answer, let him that offends herein, be^
both offend to which himself, and not reconciled to God, till he repent.

In the tenth article the Jesuits are X
reported to ^ayr, The Scripture in deed never teaches the invocation of
Saints, Cons. Col. (...)*
yet we must believe, receive and hold it. Here you Censure both the
alleging of the Jesuits opinion, and the text avouched to disprove the same.
You say it is false: that they grant, the invocation of Saints is no where
taught in the Scriptures. Nevertheless you grant afterward that Monhemius
charging them so, and therefore gathering that it ought not to be believed, they
make this answer, y^ many things are to be believed, which are not expressly
set down in the Scripture. To which purpose you your self add afterward,
that the invocation of Saints is deduced out of many and evident places of
Scripture: whereby it appears, that you all confess, that the Scriptures
expressly teach it not. Now, that praying to Saints is by necessary
consequence to be gathered out of many evident places of the Scriptures, and to
be proved by general Councils, Fathers, and the universal practice of all
Christen dome from the beginning, though you boldly affirm it, yet you vouch
not any one place of scripture, nor any one proof of so many: If you have so
good books to show, it stands upon your credit to bring them to light. For
where as your idolatrous praying to saints Romans 10. 14.
is detestable in every sort, both for the sin it self, and because you
commend it without any likely color of excuse: if you be not able to answer
to so grievous a crime as you are charged with herein, (being in deed high
treason against the heavenly Majesty of the eternal God) yet you may allege
somewhat by way of excuse, to find some favor, if so great authority, as
you pretend, have carried you away like simple people to rise up and rebel
against the Lord. You send us to your Catholic books touching this
question, which we have seen and read, but find not any warrant, which may
justify your doctrine.

Having hoasted of much and performed nothing, in your second Censure, of y^
place alleged against Saints invocation, you blame me for auouching but that
one text of scripture for the disproofe: yet your self have brought none for
your necessary defense. To overthrow the place, you bring two answers, but
tell us to which of them you will stand. The first is grounded in Limbo patrum,
that is to say, has no ground at al, as there was never any such Limbus, but
framed and settled in your imagination. The second, which you seem to rely
more upon, is in effect this assertion: not to know is not to allow. This if
I might grant you, it does not take away the force of the place. Out of y^
which, allowing you your own sense, I reason thus: Because GOD only is here
declared to be of fatherly love toward us, who also is ready to pardon us,
when Isa. 63. 16.
Abraham by your sense, would not know us but condenme us: therefore it is
both wisdom and duty to pray to God, and the contrary both vanity and
sin. But because you require other reasons and places for this purpose, take
these of a number. It is not lawful to give the worship of God to any other,
according as it is written. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and Deuteronomy. 6.
13. and 10. Mat. 4. 10. Esa. 42 8. John 16. 24.
him only shall thou serve. I will not give my glory to any other, nor my praise
to idols. But prayer is a special honor and service that God requires of us,
as it is said in the fiftieth Psalm. Call upon me in the day Psalm. 50. 16.
of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Whatsoever you
shall ask the father in my name, he will grant John 15. 15.
it unto you. Again, a man cannot pray to any but to those in whom he does
believe. Romans 10. How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed?
But it is Romans 10. 14.
not lawful to believe in any but in God alone: which is proved by the former
places, faith being a principal part of Gods service: Therefore it is not
lawful to pray to saints or to any creature whatsoever. I might here show
all promises made to prayer: all precepts and examples of prayer in all the
whole body of the Scriptures to be only of prayer to God: and no one precept,
promise, or approved example of prayer to any saint living or dead, or to any
other creature. But this place being clear and mighty against you: I will
conclude with the Prophet Jonas, They which observe lying vanities, let them
forsake the Jonah. 2. 8.
goodness showed unto them: but with the voice of thanksgiving will I sacrifice
unto the Lord, I will pay that which I have vowed, all manner of salvation is
of the Lord.

In the eleventh the Jesuits are charged XI
to teach that Christ never said to the lay men, Do this in remembrance of
me. Cens. Col. fol. 302.
Seeing you pretend, that notwithstanding you expound Do this, of the Ministers
only, yet you mean not so, but that the people are also commanded to
communicate at the Lords Supper as well as they. I can the more easily leave
you to follow your own sense: for the doctrine against lay men's consecration
or ministration, is not in controversy, but it is (except you fail) holden on
both, that none but called Ministers should minister the sacraments. But if, as
you have already committed the greatest sacrilege and churchrobbery that may
be in taking away from the people the Cup of the new Testament, and the
Communion of the precious blood of our Luke 22. 20. 2. Cor. 10. 16.
Savior Christ: so now by this exposition, you would leave the people at
liberty, to choose whether they will be partakers of this body too, or no, y^
you may drive them altogether from the table of the Lord, the sacrilege
shall be so made the more intolerable. If the Commandment, Do this Luke 22.
19. (...). Cor. 11. 24
in remembrance of me, bind not the people to come to the Lords table, how
shall the other words, Take ye, Eat ye, bind them? What moved you here to
cite your Clement, Ambrose, and Cyprian with others I know not, except it were
some meriment, to join with your similitude of singing: for in good earnest
you mind not by those places without matter in them, to prove that the words
of Christ, Do this in remembrance of me, were only said to the Ministers
touching Consecration, and not to the people also for their participation.

In the twelfth Article the Jesuits are reported to say, Traditions are of
equal XII
authority with the word of God: Cens. Col. Col. 2 30.
we must believe them though they be manifestly against the Scripture. Here
the report and the text vouched to disprove their doctrine are both censured.
The first for adding, we must believe them, though they be manifestly against
the Scripture, and for reporting the rest so generally and confusedly. Touching
y^ latter point, if my report of your doctrine be in these words: Traditions
are of equal authority with the word of God, meaning it of some only (for
who would think it of all, you having so many and so feeble?) why do you
charge me; as generally and confusedly saying, al traditions are equal with y^
scriptures? Was it I pray you, to deserve your own note of a sound lie for a
parting blow? which false mis(...) you have doubled to make it the sounder.
For answer to the former poyut, I do not only auow that I have faithfully
reported my authors words (which is always my just defense against your
unjust flaunder, laying them upon me* but I say further, that their practice
compared with their words will ^ustifie the report as truly laid down
against them. For proof whereof not to go further, the Censurer rehearses
amongst these traditions, which the Popish Church charge our faith withal,
the number of the books of Scripture, and the Lent fast. Of al other
traditions these two are taken out to stand for their own credit and for the
credit of the rest: let us therefore see what treasons there are against God in
these your traditions. First the Apocrypha books are not in the ancient Canon
or language of Canaan: the Esd. lib. 3. cap. 3. ver. 1. and 5. ver. vlt. and
lib. 4. cap. 1. ver. 2. Tob. 12. 15. Iudit. cap. 9. 2. Mac. 2. and 14. 4.
Council. Trident sess. 4. decret. de Cano^. script.
fathers have disauowed them, they are evidently repugnant to the doctrine of
the holy scriptures, and dis(...)eeing among them selves. Yet your Trent
conspirarie does add them to the number of the Canonical books, and bold
all men accursed, that hold them not for canonical scriptures. Therefore this
your tradition is manifestly against the word of God. Further also, what is
more manifest against the word of God then the doctrine of devils? The Lent
fast, as you command to keep it, for conscience sake, forbidding meats
created 1. Tim. 4. 1.
of God to be taken with thanksgiving, is plainly called a doctrine of
devils. Furthermore your opinion is plainly delivered to be with this
distinction: Ecclesiastical traditions are of no greater authority then the
writings and other decrees of the Church: and Apostles traditions are of no
less authority then if they had been written by them, or then are the other
things which they wrote: This is confusedly taught and needs yet more
plainness: for not all orders delivered by the Apostles, are to be kept
perpetually and unchangeably, of like authority with the doctrine of the
Gospel, which they preached. The Apostolic doctrine is perpetual, subject
to no variety of persons, of times or places: but some traditions, that is,
some orders are altered, as that in the acts, where they command to abstain
from strangled and from blood: for it appears Act. 15. 29.
that the Apostles commanded not this for a perpetual order, always
inuiolably to be observed, but only for a time to auoids offenses: which cause
ceasing, the order or tradition was no longer in force. Again, some orders
might be set down by them for comeliness, which yet were not to be believed as
necessary parts of salvation, nor yet to remain for ever in that form or
kind: and therefore can not be matched with the Apostolic doctrine of faith,
which is ever al one, and which whosoever believes not, cannot be saved, Now
1. Pet. 4. 17.
touching your pretensed Apostolical traditions, I utterly deny that there
are any such, beside those which are evidently showed, or by just consequence
fitly gathered out of the written word. For what so ever is necessary to
salvation, is in this sort to be Luke 16. 29. Ephesians. (...). 20. 2. Tim. 3. 15.
proved by the holy Scriptures. Therefore your Censureshippe did well to add,
If they be certainly descended from Christ and his Apostles. But how can this I
pray you be certaynely known, but by the holy writings: can any other custom
or testimony assure your consciences what came undoubtedly from Christ, or
what from his Apostles: Is there any one of your traditions that you can vouch
to descend from so sufficient authors, otherwise then by report of insufficient
witnesses: What is it then for you to boast of invincible arguments to prove
diverse doctrines not written, but left by word of mouth only, whereas you
bring nothing but counterfeyt Couneils, erring Fathers, fabulous stories, and
Apocrypha scriptures. This is right the bragging Apostle, and a show of the
vain chalenger. If a man could be feared with the guilte of your armor, or
with your plume of feathers, you would be a worthy champion, wounding more
with a vain fear; then with the force of your shrinking arm. In this
encounter of al your profes, you have sorted out two: the first is out of that
excellent chapter to the Thessalonians, containing a prophecy 2. These. 2. 15.
and revelation of Antichrist. For an answer to which place it is first to be
understood, that the word Tradition in the Apostles speech, comes as it
does in Latin, of a verb to deliver, so that whatsoever y^ Apostle delivered
to the Churches, those were the traditions he left with them. Therefore I
deny that Paul does in any place by tradition signify any unwritten verity,
but that as in other places, he understands the doctrine of the Gospel, which
in the sundry parts thereof he delivered. This appears apparauntly by the
place so cited for your purpose, without regard of any more then the word
Tradition. For in the verses next before, the Apostle makes mention of the
Thessalonians faith to the truth, saying, God has called you 2. These. 2. 13.
14.
thereunto by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
thereupon infers this conclusion: now therefore brethren stand fast, and
hold the tradition which you have learned, either by word or by our epistle.
Whereby it plainly appears, that the traditions or things delivered by him,
partly by word, and partly by writing, were the diverse parts of the Gospel
which he had taught them. Wherefore the written word affords you no proof
for unwritten verities. The second is of doctrines, which you say, we hold
not by record of writing, but by word of mouth from Christ and his Apostles: as
for example, baptism of infants, celebratio^ of Sunday, y^ number of y^ books
of scripture, and the fast of Lent. If this be not hudling and confounding of
things together of unlike sort, I know not what may be called confusion. For
what order is it (to repeat upon the Censurers occasion y^ which was noted in
the fourth article) to match the baptism of children with the fast of Lent:
The one being by plain argument gathered out of the word, as namely out of
the words of the conenant, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, and
Genesis 17. 7.
thy children after thee for ever. This covenant did appertain to both a
like, to Abraham and his seed: whereunto the seal and practice was adjoined
in circumcising infantes of eight days, as well as Abraham Ibidem. 17. 10.
of great age, and that by express commandment of God. Thus the doctrine is
so proved out of the written word, as that no doubt remains. Now
circumcision was the sacrament or seal of that Romans 4. 11.
righteousness which is by faith, as Saint Paul teaches: wherein it is equal
our baptism. But this is your great learning; when you are not able for your
ignorance, to prove a doctrine out of the written word, to say, we have it by
tradition, and by word of mouth from the Apostles. Now your Lent fast as you
use it, has not only no ground out of the word, but is against the word as
I proved before. If this be your method and discretion, I marvel not if
good order be huddling and confounding in your account. For the number of the
books, and for the Lords day, I might likewise make proof out of the word:
so that if you can bring us nothing by word of mouth from the Apostles, but
your Lent fast, your letters of credence will not serve you to be deleeued.

The second Censure is that the place alleged by me to confuce the
authority of traditions, should be impertinent. This the Censurer would
show by three differences between it and this purpose. First, of the diverse
cause of those traditions, which our Savior Christ inueyeth against, whereof
they had been authors to them selves, and of these which he affirms to
descend from Christ and his Apostles. But as in deed the difference would be
great if this were true, so being false and untrue as it is, it can make no
difference at all. Theirs were in deed such as they affirm, and though you
deny it, so are yours also. For which of all your traditions came either from
Christ or from his Apostles? when you prove them from either of them, your
difference shall be allowed. Secondly, you say Christ reprehendeth not al
observation of men's traditions, but the naughty observing of the^: which was,
as you affirm, in that y^ Pharisees esteemed them more then Gods word, and
brake it for the keeping of them, which you condemn. This also, if it were
true, were a sufficient difference: but it is untrue that our Savior Christ
reproved only the esteeming of them more then Gods commandments. It can not
be denied, but he reproved this in them in the same chapter before: but in
the words alleged, You worship me in vain, Matt. 15. 9. Mat. 7. 7.
teaching doctrines that are but traditions of men, (which are no words of
comparison) our Savior simply rebukes them for esteeming the keeping of men's
traditions to be any service of GOD: to which ^ude the sentence had been first
uttered by Esaias. 29. 1^.
the Prophet. The third note is double, first that these traditions were idle
and foolish: of which sort are yours, and whatsoever the idle brain of man
deuiseth to serve ^od withal: the second that some of them were impious,
direct contrary to the word of God, such as were certain corrupt expositions
of the law: where you are as like to them, as the son may be to the father.
For never were there more false gloses upon the word of God violently thrust,
and by little and little secretly conveyed into the Church, perverting the true
meaning of the Scriptures, and corrupting the simple worship of GOD, then
have been brought in by your Rabbines, that have obtained the highest seats,
and the most honorable names, more then ever did any among the Jews. You
speak of the Talmud as did bastard Denis of the orders in heaven: but this
flourish of your skill in those books because it hurts not the cause, let it
serve you and your friends, for as much credit as it may.

Lastly the Jesuits are reported to teach that we must worship ye image of
Christ, XIII
with like honor that we do the holy Cens. Col. 66.
books of the Gospel. In this article the doctrine is granted without any
word of contradiction: your Censure only touches ^. Cor. 6. 15.
the second to the Corinthes the sixth chapter, as not alleged to the purpose.
In deed if you list not to understand to what end it is vouched, you may well
complain against the alleging thereof as from the matter. You take it as
brought to prove, that we may worship the image of Christ with greater honor,
then the books of the Gospel: but you mistake the matter, and wilfully (as it
should seem) to have some what against the cause, for how could you think,
that he which detesteth al idols, would allege a place to prove that the
image of Christ is worthy honor more then Gospels: Or how may not any man
note you of open contradiction against the word of God, that being devoutly
mad upon idols, would for their love profane the temple of God, and
therefore dare to say there is more agreement between them (which yet the
Apostle makes most contrary) then there is between the place of Saint Paul,
and the matter which the same place does fitly disprooue: But if you li^^ to
understand, the place serves to prove that no image at all is to be
worshipped, for which the words are so pertinent and is strong, as all the
wisdom of your Censureship and of the rest, will never be able to answer
them. Therefore you lost your labor in framing arguments, to prove why the
material book of Gospels should be no less worshipped then the image of
Christ: for neither of bath are to be worshipped, nor any other creatures
whatsoever, according to that which was before alleged to this purpose: Thou
shall worship Mat. 4. 10. Exodus 10. 5.
the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. You can not escape, for
saying you give no divine honor unto them, for this bowing down before them
(which is one of the least devotions you use) is challenged as divine honor,
and expressly forbidden in any respect of religion or devotion Exodus 20. 5.
Leuit. ^6. 1. Deuteronomy. 11. 16.
to images, or any other creature, as has been often declared. But here
saying the honor done to the image of Christ and to the letter of the Bible is
not done to them selves, you dissemble your own idolatrous doctrine, which
allows the same honor to the image, that is due to the pattern, and namely
the same most honorable and divine worship of Latria to the Crucifix, which is
due to the Lord Jesus Christ himself. Your books that teach Pai(...)lib. 9.
orthodox, expl. page 705. Saunders de ^yp. honor (...) adorat. imag.
this, are many and not unknown. So in other questions it appears that
either you are ashamed of your own doctrine, or else you will not defend it in
such sort as you teach it, least the vantage should be even in your own
opinion, too open and too great against you. Also it comes to be noted how
you huddle the karuer of an image that is cursed, with a printer: and an image
that is an abomination, with the holy Bible: as if it were all one to make an
image of God, and print the word of God. Secondly (being herein contrary to
your self,) you undertake to prove that creatures may be worshipped, and, as if
the matter were out of doubt, you demand what we will say to the worship done
unto the Arc, unto the Cherubins, unto the Serpent of brass. For some show
of proof you allege the five and twentieth of Exodus, and the 45. Psalm, Exodus
25. 20. Psalm. 99. 5.
mistaken by you for the 99. In the place of Exodus there is no word leading
us to worship, but only a commandment of making the Arc, and the Cherubin
of such fashion as is there prescribed. If we condemned all use of grauing or
painting, this might have served your turn: but speaking only against your
worshipping of creatures, it makes nothing against us, or to justify your
idolatry. The place of David does not show what we must worship, but where we
must worship, even at the footestoole of the Lord with all humility, being
there prostrate upon the ground, and humbled before him. The other two places
of Numb. the 21. and John 3. are brought Number. 21. 9. John. 3. 14.
by you to prove the worship of the brazen serpent. In which places there is
no such matter, but a commandment as before, to make it and set it upon a
perch, that it might be the better seen: with a promise that they which had
been slung with fiery serpents, if they looked upon the brazen serpent,
should receive their health. Now, except to look upon a thing be to worship
it, here is no place at all to prove that you say. If you had cited the place
out of the kings, there is a clear testimony, that the brazen Serpent was
worshipped: but it made not for your purpose, seeing good Ezechias in the same
place did therefore break it down because it was worshipped. 2. Kin. 18. 4.
Thus you may see what we have to say out of the word against your false
suggestions, and against your mistaking and misconstruing the Scriptures. But
this place and that of John were answered in the sixth Article. The second to
the Philippians shows a great judgment and skill in you: it is there written
thus of Christ: God has exalted him, and given Phil. 2 9, 10.
him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, of things in heaven, of things on the earth, and things under the
earth. Hereupon you gather, first that the name of Jesus is to be worshipped,
so as at the hearing of it, we should bow our knees. Now, if this bowing be due
to y^ sound of a name, which is but a creature, then in your judgment some
creature is to be worshipped: and so consequently such as your Censureship
shall appoint. But as when you spoke of the Cherubines, you were not under the
wings of y^ Cherubines: nor being before y^ Arc, received any Oracle: so now
though you speak of the Lord Jesus, exalted to the right hand of his Father,
yet you are never a whit nearer drawn unto him, nor understand what his glory
means. The name of Jesus is here no creature to feed the ear, as an image
feeds the eye (which Lind. de fug. idol. page 121
is your distinction borrowed with the rest our of Lindane) but it signifies
the sovereign power and authority which Christ Mat. 28. 18. John 17. 2.
has received over all creatures both in heaven and in earth, as appears in
the same place, where it is said that God has given him a name above every
name: and Phil. 9. 10, 11.
in the eleventh where he speaks of confessing Jesus Christ to be the Lord.
The ^owing of the knee, is not that which these words in their proper
signification declare: for how should it agree to Angels and other creatures,
which have no knee^ as men have: but obedience and subjection is figuratively
noted by this outward sign of obedience used among men. The meaning therefore
of the Apostle is to show that our Savior Christ, when he had humbled, and as
it were emp^^ed him self for our sakes, and became as nothing, that was all,
was afterward exalted even as he was man above all creatures, having
sovereign power and authority given him over all, so that all creatures are
made subject to his commandment. This being the meaning of the Apostle (that
I may not return home your wilful and malicious terms) I leave to show what
good grace you had in alleging this text for your purpose. But, the Lord
reform it, thus you are constrained ignorantly, or wilfully to strain and
constrain the holy Scriptures, when you have once set down a resolution to
maintain error. Nevertheless as I noted, the Scripture is not commanded or
made to serve for every frame, as a leaden rule: it is not pliable to serve
every purpose, as a nose of war^, but freeth it self from all in^uries, and
con^^^ueth the same course to condemn all error, and justify the truth for
ever. As for Austens place, your notes dece^^ed you, for he is far from
allowing idol or Aug. lib. 3. (...) T^^. (...). 9. and 10.
image worship: neither can you find any such speech to maintain your
idol^^rie as is all^aged. Austen has some such words Aug. lib. 3. de doctr.
christia. cap. 8. and 9.
as you a^^eadge, but in an other book and to another purpose: for after a
disputation against images and idols, he speaks of the signs and sac(...)s
of the Church, which represent the Lord unto us, not as images, but as signs
and seals ordained of God to inform and strengthen our understanding in ye
faith. Further you give a Censure upon this, that I call the image of Christ an
Idol. I know in it self it is a creature, and an idol is nothing in the
world: 1. Cor. 8. 4.
but as the image imagined of God is an idol, and the worshippers thereof
idolaters, which is proved by the first to the Romans, Romans 1. 23.
so the Image of Christ worshipped by you is an idol of yours, and you are
idolaters for woorshipping of it. As for the curse of Lady Irenes Council
wherewith you threaten me, because it flees away like Council* Nicon. 2. Pro.
6. 2.*
a bird, I fear it not. But I heartily wish you to fear his curse, who has
threatened idolaters with that lake, that burns as you Apoc. 21. 8.
know, from which your ^uilet of Image and Idol, and of Dulia worship and
Latria worship will not be able to deliver you, but a true repentance only, and
conversion from the worship of idols to the service of the true and 1 Thessalonians.
(...). 9.
living God, which (notwithstanding all your tauntes and want of your promised
Christian charity) the Lord vouchsafe to work in you by his powerful word
and mighty spirit. I can not altogether content my self, thus to have fully
answered the chief matter of this article, but, you drawing me on with your
tauntes, I must answer to them also. For the difference of an Image and an
Idol you know my answer, and I acknowledge not your difference. Couching your
honors done to the creature and creator, I do not maliciously confound them:
but you do unlearnedly make a distinction in words, when in deed there is
none. When we teach yt al your worshippes are idolatrous, we offer you no
wrong, neither do we therein blind our hearers, or charge you with doctrines
which are not your own. For if any worship be greater then other, that you give
to the Thom. Aquin. tert. part summae. ouaest. 25. Saunderus de typic. hon. et
ador. imag. Payua orthodox. expl. lib. 9. page 706.
cross and image of Christ: and you can not deny this, being your plain
doctrine, (as I have declared) by Thomas, by Saunders, and by Andradius so
expressed, as we can not more express it against you. Therefore we do not
maintain matter of railing against the true Catholic Church, which has
always more detested all Idola^^^e, Exodus 20. 4. 1. John 5. 21.
then your Church does or can defend it. For your repeated words, God forgive
you I must conster them in the best part: but coming in the midst of other
scosses, they give me occasion to note, that many offend in the uttering of
them against God, whose name they take in vain, and against their neighbor,
whom they curse and tant with words that import a charitable prayer: which is
to be reformed in our speech, least such sinful use of good words, increase
the note of evil manners.

All these XIII articles are granted, yet your Censureshippe does cover the
grant most carefully, as one that knows well what shame it is, plainly and
openly to grant so foul absurdities. You might have provided better for your
own credit, and against mine, if you had directly denied but one of them, to
prove at the least one slanderous false report: for this alone would have
prevailed more against me, then all your naked vauntes and undeserved
sentences of disgrace. But no one being denied, what cause had you as fearing
no examination of your book, and without all regard of truth to say: Thus I
have answered briefly your slanderous false reports of the Iefuites
doctrine? In place of an answerer you have only showed your self a cauiller,
and passing by the matter, you have prop^unded to your self new propositions
from the purpose, such as you might more easily confute the^ those wherewith
you are charged. Therefore it appears, notwithstanding your Censure, that I
have with seemly and fit words charged the Jesuits, that they teach
blasphemies against God and his word, that they are the Popes procters in that
service, and bewraye the spirit of Antichrist. Let the record of your false
sentence, charging me with a lying spirit of Antichrist, with an ignorant and
railing spirit, remain with the placing of your name for mine, til you have
otherwise proved, that my speeches against the unclean doctrine and rebellious
practices of your Jesuits, are untrue or railing. And because so clear places
in 2. The. 2. 3. 4. Iren. lib. 5. cap. 20. 5. Aretas Andreas apud Areta^ page
955. 956.
the word of God, with the interpretation of the name and number of 666.
agreed of by ancient fathers, and found to accord with the Latin and Hebrewe
words, do make Antichrist to sit at Rome, in the city builded upon seven
hills, if they make it Apo^. 13. 18.
to be a Latin and Romish Church, let y^ record stand against the Pope yt he
is Antichrist, and against al other his instruments, for that they have the
spirit of Antichrist full of all corruption. Whereas you charge me that my
zeal ouerranne my wit, in reporting the former doctrines as blasphemous, it
is to speak without proof, and to slander without controlement. For I must
again say, that all your ignorant evil zeal, and al your wit knows not
how to deny any one of these XIII. articles, except you will willingly and
wittingly run into a curse of the Trent Council. Therefore your bitter taunt
was without cause in respect hereof, as also in respect of that yt follows
about a mass book. For in my conscience I am not priui^, yt I did at any tune
cry out, or at all utter these words. A bla^phemie, findyng the blessed
virgin named mother of God. Wherefore until you bring better proof of it, my
religious denial shall more then weigh down your hateful affirmation, and
convince you of breaking yt nienth commandment, by raising ^^ch infamous
reproaches in print against your neighbor, either upon light report of an
enemy, o^ upon your own imagination. I am not in this sort ouergreedie of
your discredit, to whom in that general love I owe to all men, I wish in the
Lord the riches and honor of true godliness, praying that you may receive
the love of 2. These. 2. 10.
the truth, and be blessed as I would be blessed. But this your cause of
teaching error, and laboring to root out the gospel, must more and more be
brought into discredit, either to draw you to a love of yt truth, or to make
you ashamed of such lies. If I did in deed any way hurt my cause, you love it
not so well as to admonish me thereof: but I trust, yt Lord would provide me
more faithful reme^brancers. For your next words of reproach, that we seem
to have made a compact between us every man to lie his part, how untrue are
they, and how full of reproach? To lie is a foul sin: but to lie with
consent and conspiracy that the lie may have the more force and greater
credit, it is double iniquity, and further from us by the grace of God, then
from any of you. If the force of truth ouerbeare you not, without Gods
extraordinary judgment, I look not to see you ouerborne. This thirtieth leaf
of your book will afford a scantlin of your brotherly love, if any man will
take the measure. Notwithstanding in the end you please me so well, that I
must thank you for your helping hand in a good work. And although you tell
the tale so, that I may seem to have a fellowshippe in the offense, yet being
free, I subscribe to your good a(...)tisement against imprinting lying (...),
as that from Rome. For it is so great a sin, to imprint lies and r^^ore for
^^^thy lucr^, and every where ^o empty men's purses and ^^ll their heads with
^ables, that for such an inquitie, every such Printer (...)ueth to carye a
print of his ungod(...) coueto^snesse, (...) dishonor offered to (...) so
excellent and so profitable (...). Touching the purpose of him, that to
persuade the all^wance, was like to aff(...) the (...)er (...) he were a
Papi^^, such as is (...) like (...) tell what is done at Rome, he had a (...)d
to sin hi(...) of purpose; that he (...)ht lay it (...): If it were* (...)
you (...), (...) would so (...)e yt Pope, (which cannot be gathered by any
word in all the (...)) it was in him a greater sin. For without lying news,
there is true matter ^^ough ag(...) Pope and against Rome. But if a former
copy imprinted at Strasbrough gave it credit here, it was a less offense, yet
a great oversight. Now what vantage do you take by that vain and lying
Pamphlet: will you have all the faithful charged with the fault of one or two
Printers: and for a fault so ordinary in all other like cities? your marginall
notes are like the words of a crafty seller, y^ promises more then the buyer
can find. For your marge^t in a disgrasing note, promises to lay open lying
for the game: and you have chosen two places to prove it against me. For the
first of Cardinal Pooles purpose, to reform some gross things at Popery, and
Steven Gardiners answer, I appeal to many which are witnesses to me of this
known and undoubted report. To prove the second lie, you do openly pervert
and falsify my plain words and meaning. For in my answer I say, Papists
yield in nothing, and prove it to be so. Nevertheless, I give a note that our
bastard Papists in England neither true to us, nor faithful to their own
side, (as since, Howlets author complayneth) would seem to b(...)ashamed of
images, pardons, pray(...)ints, and service in an unknown tongue: saying they
verily hold the^ as wicked things: Which I spoke to note their hypocrisy. But
you, to show a lie for the game, lay down my words as if I had not said they
would seem ashamed but as if I had directly affirmed that they confess the
same things to be wicked* Which if I had said of some, it had been no lie:
but I spoke only of their dissi(...)lation. Therefore what is it for you to
say, our resolution appears, which we have made to auonch any thing, be it
never so false, to blushe at nothing be it never so shameful, and to invent
whatsoever may serve for your purpose to intertaine and (...) the people? In
this short conclusion without all cause, you have crowded up together many
great words of reproach, against the greatest, and against the least of them
that love the Gospel. But I have proved, who they be that (...) the people
with such lles and intising erroutd. The Lord has in such sort put the fear
of his name, and the love of his truth into one heates, that we are free from
charging out adversaries untruly, having a strong(...) way to work by, then
to take away (...) by evil, and one lie with another. God has given us y^
light to chase away your darkness, and the truth of his Gospel to confute
^phe. 5. 13.
your errors with all your popish traditions, Jewish ceremonies, and damnable
superstitions whatsoever.

Now follow the other three parts dispatched for haste or want of matter, al
three in as little room, as half the first: wherein your order again may be
noted, that have filled twenty leaves of your book to Censure one leaf
handled by the way in mine: and again have made show of answer to fifty
leaves of mine with ten of yours. If you had kept on your proportion, of
twenty for one, your Censures would have stayed a longer time, and made a
larger volume.

Touching the Man.
Concerning Edmund Cam^ion although The 2. part.
you miss not your ordinary taunts against me in place of arguments for the
cause yet having spoken nothing against him but a truth, I ^ra^^ not your (...)
having dealt but with a seditio us Jesuit, you could not well accuse me of (...)
(...) think neither of his fatherhoode nor of his practice as you do* either
to reverence the one, or defend the other. Out of my answer, you have
gathered together diverse accusations laid down against him: but make nomention
of the reasons whereupon those accusations were grounded: which injury you have
also done me, in other places. But if the same reasons be briefly remembered,
it will easily appear; that whatsoever he says or does, it is to hinder the
course of the Gospel, and to trouble the peace of the land, and therefore to
be taken in most evil part. For, notwithstanding your defense, if he speak
humbly, having the work of pride in his heart and in his hand; he
dissembleth: If he yield commendation where he hates, it is dangerous
fla(...): If he show confidence in his weak arm, and against the Gospel that
so preuayleth every where, he only vaunteth: If he vnla^ fully offer a trial
of disputation denied by his fathers, and being him self in danger of an
other trial. he means no perfourmance: If he protest peace against his open
and known practice of commotion, he (...) dited: If he desire audienc^ to
open his mouth against the religion of God established, and to exalt the
authority of Antichrist, whose double banne by his two (...) and double curse
has bene^ openly denounced against this noble Realm. For answer hereunto, I
leave him to them that may admit and commit him to. But here the reader may
behold how little you have to say in your Captains defense, who allow him in
your book (...)more then iii. leaves of the which ii. are spent in proving a
question not denied, and making much against your cause. For, proving that
religion stands with obedience to magistrates, which you tall temporal
obedience, you must needs conclude that your Romish religion is no religion,
because it casts off this yoke of subjection laid upon us by the word, and
brings in a foreign supremacy to rule and ouerrule all by his Luke 20. 25.
Romans 13. 1. Tit. 3. 1.
usurped power and most ungodly practices. Therefore, taking in hand to
confute it, you have in deed confirmed my general conclusion: that Papists can
not teach or maintain the pretended Catholic religion, but they must be
traitors to GOD and enemies to the State. But because you bring evil
arguments to prove this good conclusion, I must examine them, and lay open
that error, which is secretly and sophistically conveyed under a show of
probable and true propositions. First, to prove my conclusion against God, he
affirms Popery to be the Catholic faith, which is to crave and beg the
cause, and to affirm the chiefest matter in question. Your arguments laid
down at large, will make this your order of disputation more plain, and the
error more sensible. Your former reason is this: whosoever calls him an
enemy to God, that mainteyneth Popery, utters the reproach of an unclean
mouth: All professors of the Gospel so hold and so call the maynteyners of
Popery, therefore all professors of the Gospel utter the reproach of an
unclean mouth. In this reason the first proposition is brought, against all
art, to prove and should it self be proved: it is placed first and should be
placed last for the conclusion: for if he could in a true argument prove and
conclude that which is only affirmed in the first assertion, the controversy
were at an end. Therefore you speak in a purpose to disgrace the truth, and
not with arguments to prove your cause. Your second argument is thus framed:
Whosoever speaks against those y^ would bring in a doctrine, contrary to the
Gospel established, condemns the former noble princes of England, y^ Answ*
speaks against them: therefore the Answ. condemns the former noble princes
of England. I grant the second proposition: but the first is full of untruth.
For I speak of the present estate and present practices among you: what is
that to former states and former proceedings? I speak of subjects, and the
Censurer does draw it to princes: I speak of them that dealt contrary to
the settled laws, and he does bring it as spoken against those, that made and
maintained their own laws then in force. This one proposition being so false,
ran make no argument, but sophistical for a show of truth, when there is
nothing in it but falshode. Also the Jesuits words have an argument intended
for him in this form: what religion former princes from the conversion of the
land unto our age, have maintained, that must not be condemned: but they have
maintained Popery: therefore Popery must not be condemned. The first
proposition is false, for we must live by the rule of Gods word, and not by
the example of men, that may deceive and Psalm. 119. 105. Ex. 23. 2. E^e. 20. 18
be deceived, as appears in the story of the kings of Israel and Judah. The
second proposition is false like the first. For since the conquest, as I have
partly showed in my answer, Edward the first, Edw. the third, Richard the
second, and others did set themselves, even so long ago against y^ tyranny of
Antichrist. And which is more, our Chronicles show that before Pseudoaustens
coming, our religion was free from many superstitions, which he brought in:
neither did the Pope challenge any preeminence of King Lucius, nor yet was it
yielded him long after. But while you plead the authority, and, as you
account it, the Catholic regiment of some of those princes against me, you
speak against your self secretly, opening your heart to discover what you
think of other Princes since, and namely of her Majesty's authority, and
laws establishing the Gospel. This is sufficient to discover the counterfeit
honor, and hearty hate to the present sovereignty. It follows that I
answer your objections to the second part of my conclusion: whether I make all
Papists traitors, because they are of contrary religion to that which now
stands in force by the grace of God, and under her Majesty's blessed
government. What may be said of all Papists generally, I leave it as a
question, which I have not undertaken: other men have, if you will look into
their reasons. But for all reconciled Papists employed with Saunders in
Irelande, or entered to withdraw the people in England: such as with Campion
and his fellows help forward some of the heinous attemptes that come to light
from day to day, if I would hold my peace, themselves will bewray and confess
treason against her Majesty and the estate: beside open contempt against the
Lord, and the free preaching of the Gospel. Neither does my zeal ouerrunne
my wit, in making mention of these matters, or my malice ouerlash all reason,
as you have tauntingly accused me without cause. My zeal I wish increased
according to knowledge, and against all your abominable superstitions: In
malice I have not dealt, but am careful to detest all corruption in the
service of God. Bishop Tunstall an authentical witness, shall acquit me of
this reproach, who for like Rome practices, uses more bitter and broad
speeches, even against your great Cardinal, Cardinal Poole. For having
charged the Pope with his pestilent malice, (so he speaks) and Poole as his
instrument, afterward he A sermon of Cuth. Bishop of Duresme printed. Anno
1539.
calls the Cardinal an arrant traitor, of a deuilish purpose to destroy
his native country, also that he ran headlongs into hell, and was (for this
Romish matter) incomparably worse then any Pagane. And will you call this hot
doctrine: But to proceed, you note that religion stands with temporal
obedience. It is truly said of true religion: but Popish religion does take
away from princes their supreme authority, making them the Popes vassalles
and their people his tributaries. It warranteth all men to renounce and leave
their obedience, it dispenses with all rebellion, and pardons any treason to
those that are reconciled for the day of execution. He that has an eye to see,
or an ear to hear, may hear and see this, and some fruits thereof, both in
the land and without. Your traiterous bulls, your actual rebellion in the
north, where D. Morton had the first bull, and where your Priests also said
mass in the tents: Stories traiterous shifte and choosing him an other king,
and pleading him self no subject to the Queen, whose subjection and
protection he unnaturally renounced, without any cause in the world given,
but abusing her Majesty's clemency: your second bull and second actual
rebellion under Saunders in Irelande: the alienating and moving of the people
by your open Masses in La^keshire and elsewhere: your other attemptes which came
so near the quick procured by your Jesuitical Saunders of the visible
monarch. in the 7. book page 334. 732. 736.
Masses of reconcileme^t: finally, Saunders book allowing and extolling these
rebellions and enterprises, canonizing the Captains thereof with the title of
notable Martyrdom: what are they but open and actual proofs, that there is
in you a resolution to do any thing you dare do, for the overthrow of the
present estate: It is openly laid to your charge that your malice is so great
to some alive, that you will be avenged of them, as you were in Cambridge of M.
Bucer and Paulus Fagius five years after their death. Your example of the
Apostles obedience to Magistrates of contrary religion, proves nothing for
you, that hold not that doctrine, neither yet follow their example. They and
the faithful in the primative Church, yielded obedience to princes that
believed not, and you do it not to them that believe and mayntaine the
Gospel, as it is proved against you. The like examples follow: for the
blessed Martyrs of late times did al patiently yield them selves to death,
according to the doctrine which they professed, and witnessed their obedience
as well to the Prince as to GOD in their grievous persecutions. In all my book
there is no such general question propounded as you charge me with, that every
one of a contrary religion, must needs be an enemy to the State. I have
already answered, that true religion teaches and yeldeth obedience to
magistrates: but your religion brings even Emperors under the subjection of
the Pope, to give their attendance at his gate, and at his stirrup, wherein you
withdraw from Caesar that that is Cesars, Matt. 22. 21.
as well as otherwise you withholde from God that that is Gods. The malici^us
report which follows against some of our chief Prelates (as you speak)
cannot be proved: nor your repeated taunt against our spirits, which if they
were as evil as you make them, being compared with your, there would be I
grant, no great difference. Touching those godly and learned men, Wickliffe,
Luther and Calvin, whom you charge with dangerous doctrine against Princes,
I answer that the light is no clearer at No^ue, then that they taught all
obedience to be due to Princes in the Lord, and that for conscience sake
without any rebellion: as in their writings it remains, witnessed to all the
world. Luther upon the fifth Commandment, notes for the sacred authority of
Magistrates, that this precept of obedience to them comes next to the
Commandment of obedience to God: adding that it teaches us how to behave our
selves toward Luth. in expos. decalogi Tom 7. page 1. 19.
all Magistrates, who are ordained and appointed of God. For Magistrates are
comprehended under the name of Parents, being the common Fathers of the common
wealth. M. Calvin beside many other singular places of purpose handled, to set
forth the soueraintie of Magistrates, has these words in his institutions:
God has not only testified that he approves and accepts of Magistrates
office: but Call. inst. lib. 4. cap. 20. sect. 4.
has moreover set out the dignity thereof with most honorable titles of
praise, marueilously commending the same. Whereupon he cites that, that God
calls them Gods: concluding y^ their authority is most lawful and holy, and
in all the life of man, a thing of all other most honest. Moreover, having
taught subjects their duty to obey Statutes, to pay tribute, to bear
public charge and office: he proves Psalm. 82. 1. 6. John 10. 25.
against al rebels, that if they rise against the Prince, they touch the
anointed of God. Thus the glory of the Prince, is the good estate of the
people: and the joy of the people, is the blessed prosperity of their Prince.
I might show the like doctrine out of Wickliffe, but it needs not, after so
sufficient proofs against you for M. Luther, and M. Calvin. If on the other
side they had words in the places barely quoted by you in the margent, to
prove that which you charge them with, I doubt not but you would have set them
down at large and in the best manner. But for the conscience, this liberty it
has, that when a law is made against God, such as your popish laws be, then
the rule of the Apostle takes place, It is better to obey God Act. 4. ^9.
then man, which rule notwithstanding allows no rebellion at all, but
teaches the subject to offer himself with all lowlines to the mercy of the
magistrate, either to keep a good conscience, or to witness the integrity
thereof to God, and his obedience 1. Pet. 4. 15.
to the Prince by a patient suffering. But, if we may believe your words, you
condemn y^ doctrine that teaches subjects not to obey the Prince for
conscience sake: wherein, if it be your opinion indeed, you give a sentence of
condemnation against your self, and against all the recusants in England or
fled beyond seas. But by this assertion every man may see you make no
conscience of a lie, which have uttered one manifestly against your own
doctrine, dispensing with rebellion by the Popes Bulls, which is also taught in
your books Saunders de v(...) mo^a^. lib. (...). Howlets book.
and from time to time discovered by your practices. Where shall we build upon
your words and not be deceived? when shall we think that you speak the
truth from your heart: How shall we look for constant dealing toward us,
when you are so inconstant coward your selves: But this is that I noted against
Campion: a double minded man is inconstant in all his Iam. 1. 8.
ways. For the commotions (as you call them) in other countries, by those of
the religion, it is well known that they have Edicts, Privileges, and
paciffcations to clear them from sedition: whereby also their good conscience
and lawful proceedings for the advancement of religion is sufficiently auowed.
Now you come to plead the innocence of the wolf, because he has sheep
clothing, or because it is not safe for him to break into the foulde watched
by diligent shepeheardes. You presume that we would not live so quietly, if the
state pressed us, as you say your Catholics are pressed. How unquietly you
have dealt I need not so osten to repeat: how quietly we would abide in such
times, our doctrine and former example of obedience does move a better
expectation th^^ you will conceive. You complain without cause, but it is high
time both by books and by preaching, to provoke the Prince in a zeal of Gods
house, to exercise justice against Psalm. ^9. 9. Isa. 49. 23. 2. King. 18. 40.
those, that will not be brought from their practices of rebellion to the love
of the truth, no not by her exceeding mercy and rare clemency. For seeing
mercy takes no more place with them, justice is necessary both in respect of
her own safety, and in respect of her people, that the blessed preaching of
the Gospel may continue established to us, and to our posterity for ever. I
that can not, as you say, blush for my self, blush notwithstanding for you
that are so full of blood and cruelty, and yet charge our spirit as cruel
and bloody. For one fire in the time of your persecution, consumed more then
have been executed for religion only, and not attainted of some traiterous or
fellonious intention in all the time of her Majesty's happy government,
notwithstanding so many offenders and so heinous offenses of capital
Idolatry. Therefore you had small cause to complain of the justice done in
examining two or three of your traitorous co^federates at the rack: for you
cannot allege one for a thousand of the torments, famines, cruel and
lingering deaths, wherewith our brethren have been consumed under yt Pope,
with no less outrage, then Ne^o, Domitian or Dioclesian used against y^
martyrs of Jesus Christ. What eyes has the Censurer, that can note so small
sufferings against his fellows, and will not detest so detestable and savage
cruelty practiced by the Popish inquisition where it can lay hold: concluded
also, and, when time serves, to be put in execution against this land by the
conspiracy of Trent: In this complaint I find, that the Censurer is ready
with a little help to break out even against the highest als^ (...) for he
that is privy to so infinite cruelties of the Pope, does nevertheless
exercise his style to enlarge a small matter against her Majesty's justice,
saying that all Christendom, did talk of the late racking and tormenting of
the Priests in the Tower. If this be true, you have swift and many Curriers,
that can give so general aduer^^sment in so small time as vi. or vii. weeks.
To aggreue this matter, be says they were virtuous priests: and that they
were tormented for their conscience, where as he knows that beside their own
cofession, other evidences proved them guilty of such attempts as deserved yt
their right ^oynt should have been racked. All this unjust complaint and
excuse of the priests, content him not, but he adds moreover a persuasion,
that the same justice in the Tower has cast men's hearts into a horror of
such strange and unwonted dealinges: whereas in very truth there was no one of
them so racked, but that, howsoever their minds seemed to yield to the fear
of pain, they were yet worse afraied the^ hurt. For the very next Sabbath day,
though to the Churchwarde they must be drawn or driven or carried between two
men like obstinate b^ares to a stake: yet could they after y^ sermon walk home
upon their own legs stoutely enough and strongly as other folks. This is
indeed to strain at a gnat and swallowe up a camel, to complain Matt. 23.
24.
of justice mercifully and necessaryly used to two or three, and your selves
with all horrible torments to destroy great cities, and attempt the desolation
of whole kingdoms. But to pass from this s^ causeless and foolish complaint,
which may worthily hurt your cause: I nothing fear any loss that can come to
our religion by so necessary justice. As for your last note of desperation,
which may come by these torcures, it is not to be feared: you are so resolved
(if we may believe Campions protestation for himself and his fellow Jesuits)
and have such a confidence in your cause, that there is no such fea^^: they are
prepapared by the whippe to endure greater things, especially in the cause you
esteem so great and so worthy your sufferings. This nevertheless I may
grant you, that your evil cause may more charge and rack yo^^ consciences to
desperation, then a thousand times more could d^^ to the godly mart^^s, who
have sound it a joyful Phil. 1. 29.
thing, not only to believe in Christ: but also to suffer for him.

The Censurer having used a large digression, returns to the man, and finding
his defense a barren matter, does only deny some things which in my answer
were proved against him, secondly adding a praise yt all the gold in England will
not gilt ^im: and that if he met with me in equal balance I should appear
too light: which naked assertions may be sufficiently answered with a bare
denial. Yet for a further answer, what is it to prove Campions quiet purpose
by his own naked words, when his open practices appear to the contrary? For
notwithstanding your scoff, a man seeing little into common wealths, might
easily see into these matters, and know both what the Ies^ites superiors
seek, and what their instruments would bring to pass in this kingdom. Let
any Nomb. 23. 8.
man judge: will not the Jesuits be as faithful to their superiors as Balam
the false Prophet was unto the Lord? Balam blessed where the Lord had blessed,
and cursed where the Lord had cursed. And shall the Pope discharge he Majesty's
subjects of their Liegeance, and will not Campion declare it? shall he denounce
the curse against her, and will not the Jesuits subscribe thereunto: But I
will not again prove yt which is already sufficiently proved. Your tales of
the Iaponian Jesuits, are neither of credit, being written by themselves in
their own praise: nor to the purpose if they be as quiet as they and you
report. For either they are in the Portingales Islandes and need not, or,
among the Heathenesse and dare not yet rebel. Secondly you will not seem to
understand a plain speech of your Golden day, so often by the goodness of
God adiourned, or as I hope, for ever disappoynted: but expound it as spoken
only of Campion and his love of gold, the least suspicion whereof never
entered into my thoughts. But you have here the second time delivered that
hard judgment against me, with other reproaches, which I let pass. I know
that notwithstanding any parrishes or Parsons opinion at the balances, yet the
judgment appertains Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
to the Lord.

Touching the matter.
NOw the Censurer is come to the matter, as appears by the title of the The
third part.
third part, which title shows that the rest has been from the matter, or
about circumstances not so material. This is the like art to that which has
been noted. For how absurd is it to have spent so many leaves either from the
chief purpose, or in things not so weighty, and now conclude that which he
calls the matter in (...) seely leaue^s and an half? But this is yet more
absurd, coming but now to the cause it self, and giving it so small
allowanc^ yet thereof to speak no one word dire(...) to the question: For he
was to prou^^ yt (...) is not inco^uement for the state to (...)te (...)
disputation against the^ (...)* against the laws, and against re(...)gion, a^
(...) ar(...) challenge of a seditious Iesuit^. (...) finding this hard to be
proved, and (...) reasons not very easy to be confuted, he (...)eth to the
general question, and proves that dis(...)tation may be sometimes granted,
which proposition was never denie^. Let us th(...)fore consider what he says
still front t^^ matter. I alleged the q(...) continuanc^ of religion two and
twenty years free from Jesuits, and from all such chalenges: this is not a
good reason utterly to ^eba^re all disputation, neither was it so all^adged,
but this settled peace makes it an inconuenie^t thing, to admitts men guilty
of rebellion, to dispute agayast the peace of the kingdom, and the authority
of religion. Your pretensed continuance of Popery a thousand years without
interruption, is clearly sound false, by many and great euidence^^ but if it
were true, what does it prove: If religion were reentred into Jerusalem, and
there established two and twenty years, would you think it ^onuenient that
Ma^^met should be admitted to dispute, because he also can plead many
hundred peers prescription as well as you: Passing over the reaso^^ you thought
good, as that of your o^^^inate purpose not to yield, which also saketh such
disputation as you (...)e, very inconvenient: You repea^e in the second place
my argument of a small victory over two or three last and least in the
quarrel. To this you say somewhat in (...), but it would prove nothing:
because it is not in your power to per^ourme, or in your purpose to do it. For
do you esteem your selves such pillars of Popery, that all the Catholics in
England and abroad, so long and deeply s^^led in their religion, will
presently yield, if you be overcome with demonstration of the truth. Do
they stand no longer then you prevail, or must they needs fall when you are
over thrown? If to show y^ truth with us, were the way to gain you, you had
been gained long ago, as many thousands have been. But some have (...) ^sa.
6. 1^.
to see and will not see, they have hearts to consider, and will not
understand. Ca(...)on in his challenge forgate that which you do* well advertise
him of, concerning hi^ fellows preast (...) ready to help him, if he should
come to the danger of his challenge. The third^ reason against your (...)
distinctions, is (...) all this third part: for I alledg^ that (...)
particular distinctions of (...) learned and p(...) and (...) question, di(...)
ly are profitable. If this (...) propound and ass^^le his (...) can obtain no
victory but (...) and I can be but a witness of it. (...) o^s I grant* are
generally (...) of the chiefest parts of a learned man consists in the
knowledge how to distinguish aright. But what is this to prove all distinctions
good, even those that Jesuits make only to avoid the power of truth? Simples
generally are good, serving for the health of man, but what is this to prove
those evil simples good, which have lost their virtue, and which an evil
Apothecarie may serve in place of good? for a trial of the Jesuits
distinctions you refer me to their disputation: but I may have a sufficient
trial of them and of their disputation before hand in this your book, if
there were no other proof to justify my report. As you would bring your
quilits into credit, so you labor to bring my arguments and interpretations
into discredit, as lying and false: but in a good conscience, and according to
the truth, I have auowed them true and good, as will easily appear to the
indifferent reader. You that before made me much inferior to Edmund Campion,
now make me inferior to thousands of the Jesuits scholars. Whatsoever I am
to the meanest of them, the Lord, I trust, will enable me to maintain his
truth, even against Campion your great champion; to say nothing of his
disciples. I confess your distinctions offend(...) as being full of (...)ltie,
and sometimes so dark and unlearned, that there appears neither good cause
nor good use of them: yet you take it to heart that I should account them
unlearned and peruish. As for the accusation of Jude against the despisers of
good (...)ses, it was corrupcly brought against me Jude 10.
for rejecting your sophistical devises against the truth: for proof whereof
I refer me to these your distinctions chosen out of many for your purpose,
which, one excepted, are all unlearned and peevish, serving to put darkness
for (...)ght, and ^^ol^trie in place of Gods service. For, as they that
distinguish not, where the word has distinguished, may soon fall into schism
and heresy: so also you in distinguishing where the word admits no
distinction, do offend in like ^or^, and with no less danger. There is you
lay, clear difference between an Idol and an image. Surely this is somewhat
that you say: for an idol is the image of the superstitious Gentiles, and an
image is the (...) and (...) named Christians* There is I grant, a clear
difference in the letters, but no difference at all in the word, no more then
is between Omnipotent and Almighty. For (to pass by Phauorine, Hesychius
Phauorine. Hesychius. Plutarch.
and some places in Plutarch, who all make these two words of one
signification) Plato makes the matter most evident, Plato in dialog. (...).
who moving a question what (...) should be, makes this answer, (...). It is
manifest we will make answer that those things are idols, which are seen in
water and in looking glasses, and those moreover that are painted or set out in
types or portratures, and other things of this sort whatsoever. By these words
of Plato the Censurer may learn that any image carved, painted, represented by
a glass or seen in water, is among the Grecians, where the word is in his
own country and proper use, called an Idol. Tullie moreover who could as well
judge of the Greek word, (...) and of the Latin word image as the Censurer,
be in his translation makes them one. Lastly Cicero in Phaenon. Arati.
to return to the holy Scriptures, God in the second Commandment, forbids
both the making and worshipping of an Image to represent the true God, or any
of the false Gods. Thus much to she we your unlearned and most untrue
distinction between an Image and an Idol, which you and your fellows repeat
so often and urge so much. You do it to uphold Idols under a more honest
title of Images (as you suppose) but as they differ not in name, so in nature
they are all one, even stumbling blocks of offense, the worshippers whereof
are open idolaters. I am taught by the word of GOD, that there were material
and are still spiritual Exodus 29. 38. Heb. 8. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 13. 15.
Heb. 9. 22.
sacrifices in the Church: but for sin I read y^ there is no sacrifice
without blood. So that your second distinction of bloody and unbloody
sacrifices is plainly against Abac. 2. 4. Romans 3. 28. Gal. 2. 15. 6. 1. Ioh. 2.
1. 1. Tim. 2. 5.
scripture: Justice by faith we acknowledge: but merit by works is proved to
be against the word. So the mediation of Christ is according to faith, but
your intercession of saints against the scripture. For who is more merciful
then the Lord that he may save: or who more ready to hear us, that he may be
the Lords remembrance^: faith that believes the promise, and Romans 4. 3. Heb.
4. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. Tit. 3. 7.
hope that patiently wayteth for the issue of faith we acknowledge, and the
distinction I have laid down in the ninth article. Your counterfeit
traditions of men and of the Apostles, are al without warrant in the causes
necessary to salvation. But why have you left out the distinction of the two
worshippings, Latria to God, and Dulia to images? Is it left out because we
condenine it, and you now allow no more of it: All these distinctions are most
dangerous, when you will with some distinction or change of a name, retain
still the same iniquity, forging such wicked devises of man, to disanull the
truth of God. Therefore they are but your untrue assertions and vain bragges,
that you distinguishe things into their proper natures, that you can prove each
part of your distinction consonant to the word of God: that when you have so
distinguished, we have no more to say: that we bewray our ignorance, and
finally that the truth is made manifest to every man's eyes. When any one of
these five definitive sentences is proved true, I will acknowledge the rest. I
much marvel that in such vanting speech, you would not set down one true
assertion of so many. But you care not what you say to reproach the godly,
making account that your own side will take it in good part, be it never so
untrue, never so reproachful. The fourth argument touching the liberty of your
pen, I have answered already: but I answer further, you may have it without
print: and if that will not content you, there are printes enough nearer hand
beyond seas where you are, if we may believe you so often affirming it. The
danger and persecution you speak of, is a fruit of your murmuring spirits,
complaining without a cause. For you go safely away with many matters: and as
much as you compain against us openly, as intercepting all your books and
other Popish stuff, I think you do much more brag among your selves of many
escapes. But if you had as many prints as you can set a work, what can you of
lesser gifts write, that the most learned of your side have not written long
ago, as Ecchius, Pighius, Hosius: and which now Turrianus, Andradius, doenot
furboish in a vain hope, at last to make an end of Sifyphus labor. What
issue all these have had of coursing and discoursing again, the questious
between you and us, we may consider it with great joy of heart, and you in
this kingdom and in our neighbor kingdoms may behold it with vexatio^ of
spirit. Therefore notwithstanding your bragges before you come to the trial,
and that you tell us, misusing the place, in the forehead of your book of the
fire in the mou^tame, Deuteronomy. 5. (...).
yet we fear no more to encountre with you then they that see their enemies
without armoure, or overthrown before they come to give them the charge.

Lastly you like not my opinion, that only the Scriptures should be admitted
for judges in disputation. But the opinion is good, and the practice needful,
seeing the holy scripture is the only touchstone to make trial, and the only
judge to give sentence in all questions apperteyning to the doctrine of faith
and salvation. How reverently I think of the chief councils of the fathers
and doctors, and what profit I acknowledge to come by their great labor, it
was declared in my answer. But you evermore omit that which makes not for
your purpose, where in you take an evil but yet a ready way to condemn a
good cause. Notwithstanding to determine controversies in judgment of
religion, I admit them no seat: but refuse them al not only with one breath,
but with this one short sentence: The rule is not ouerruled. You should have
proved that the doctors and councils have not places contrary one to another,
and sometimes contrary to themselves: If you had cleared them of this war
among themselves, you had made them somewhat fitter to make peace amongst us.
In affirming that I say some of the fathers are condemned of forgerie, you do
manifestly pervert my plain words: for I spoke of the places, and you draw
it to the persons. It is one thing to say some places in Austen are forged, and
an other to say Austen him self is forged. Now that places in Austen are
forged, and namely many of his short sermans to the brethren in the wilderness,
it appears by Aug. ad frat. in Eremo.
the judgment of Erasinus, and by the notes of bastardie set down in your
own editions. Cyprians places are also acknowledged by your selves, especially
that notorious book of the revelation of John Baptistes head, where Cyprian
makes Cypr. de revel. capitis John Bap.
mention of king Pipin that lived five hundred years after that Cyprian was
dead* But I need not to allege any more, you will not deny but there are
many. Now there follows a comparison, that you ground your belief only upon
the word of God, and make it the only object of faith more the^ we do. Your
reports here, and in the ninth place confirmed (...) an oath, can have no
credit against your known doctrine and dealinges to the contrary. For do you
not in this very question, plead the authority of men, as the warrant
whereby we receive the Scriptures? Do you not deny that we are saved by
faith only? How then do you build your belief only upon the word of God?
or make that the only object of faith, more then we do?

In the words following you keep on your course, proving that which is
granted, and affirming that which should be proved. I did grant that
Councils, Fathers and stories yield profitable helps to show the estate of
the Church from time to time, and also for the better understanding of the
word of God: yet this is that which you make y^ question as denied by me, and
to be proved by you. After this strange order of disputation, you might as
fitly in form, and more truly in matter, prove your doctrine blasphemous, and
your practices full of rebellion. If you would prove this, it were a true
proposition, but no confutation of that I say affirming the same. So in proving
that doctors bring great helps to learning, you prove a truth, but not in any
overthrow of my answer: For I have acknowledged as much. The question in
deed is, whether Councils and Fathers be judges to give sentence in
controversies, and rules to over rule interpretations: to the proof whereof
you should have tied your self: but without any further proof you affirm
it, as a clear matter and altogether out of dout. Is this that disputation
which you so boast of, to prove that is granted, and to leave that without
proof which is in question? I shall not escape the note of audacitie, If upon
your Censures false report, I shall be thought to deny that which I do most
manifestly anouch. But this note of audacious bouldnes cleaves to you, who
blush not to say, that the authority of Scriptures depends upon the
testimony and allowance of men: and that otherwise, we know not which is the
word of God and which not. As many as hold this opinion had never their ears
bored, nor their hearts opened by the Spirit of GOD, to hear and see more
then the bare letter, they never felt the life and spirit thereof, which is
the holy spirit of God, not only bearing witness with our spirit, that we
are the sounes of God, but also that the holy scriptures, are the word of God,
and his power to salvation: that they are also the rule which should Romans 8.
16. Esai. 53. 1. Romans 1. 16.
rule all, and not be ouerruled of any. Neither have those disciples of the
word, humbled them selves at the footestoole of the Lord, to behold his
absolute perfection in Romans 11. 34. Iere. 17. 9.
all his ways, especially in the full revelation of his will to the sons of
men by his holy scriptures: neither have they considered y^ vanity of
vanities, and y^ infinite hardness of heart and corruption of judgment which
is in all flesh. This humility would confirm them in the faith of that
saying, no man knows the things of God, but 1. Cor. 2. 11. John. 16. 13.
the spirit of God. This Spirit leads us into all truth, to know it and to
prove it, and to be comforted thereby, not in the judgment or after the sense
of man, but according to the work of God opening our hearts, and sanctifiyng
our understanding, Act. 16. 14.
so that the work and judgment is of the spirit according to the word of
God. Herein also stands an answer to your second assertion, that by the
fathers we know which is the right meaning of the word of God, for as the
authority of the word is confirmed by the spirit, so are the interpretations
thereof also. As man is not the author, so he is not the interpreter of the
word of God, otherwise then by the authority of the word it self. This saint
Peter proves, making it a reason why no Scripture is of a private
interpretation, because it came not from man: but the holy 2. Pet. 1. 20* 21.
men of God spoke as they were moved and carried with the holy Ghost: so that
the holy Ghost does deliver, and warrant, and interpret unto us the holy
word of God, expounding scripture by scriptures, and not leaving this high
office to men, otherwise then to ministers containing themselves within the
faithful service of their charge in their written and authentical commission.
And you dare not say (who dare say much) y^ an interpretation is true, because
an ancient father has it, but because he has it according to a truth, and
the truth according to the word. Hierome is a notable father of singular
gifts, but, to pass over other places, I verily think you would censure
him, for his interpretations Hieron. comment. in epist. ad Gal.
upon the eleventh verse, of the second chapter to the Galathians: and upon
the sixth verse of the third chapter, I write them not down because I am
desirous to cover such blemishes, among other excellent gifts. Whether the
visible Catholic Church may err or no, which must be considered in the
particular members and doctrine thereof, I will for a trial admit the
example of your Church, but not the present testimony. Their example does
testify y^ Apostasy, which their testimony will not acknowledge, though they
should do it to 2. These. 2. 3. (...). Tim. 4. 1. Apoc. cap. 13. and 14. etc.
justify the prophecies that were delivered of it before, and are now made so
clear as nothing may be more. To your manifold examples brought to prove that
heretics cleave to the scripture: I answer first, y^ heretics also cleave
to traditions and ordinances received by word of mouth, Ireneus lib. 3. cap. 11.
as appears by the complaint of Ireneus against them. Secondly the Scripture
is the word of God in his manifest sense and construction of truth and life,
and not according to the naked letter, whereunto, I grant the heretics did
peeuishly stick, as you also do, where it makes for your purpose. The
philosophical proofs which some have made, asyou say, for the wonderful
mystery of Christ's two natures and wills, prove not so much for philosophy,
as you would infer thereby: for without philosophy the scripture has
sufficient proofs for that necessary doctrine, as has been declared. But by
the way, where is your judgment in this assertion? debate the matter with your
self, and you shall find how impossible it is for natural philosophy to
determine the supernatural mysteries of the unity of God and man, and of two
natures and wills in one person Jesus Christ, which was a work of God as
great as the creation of the world. Notwithstanding I have acknowledged, that
philosophy being corrected and sanctified by the word, may also be some
help to heavenly wisdom, but without it the word is sufficient, to open
all the counsel of God which apperteyneth unto us.

Thus we take not away (as you charge us) y^ use of Couneils, Fathers, and
other like helps, because of an abuse y^ may be, but stand against them, y^
under some use thereof would bring in and confirm the (...). Therefore how
does the Censurer both accuse without conscience, and give sentence without
judgment? who does deprive you of these helps? Who does call you to the bare
letter? How often am I enforced to repeat one thing to answer the same
slander? As Councils and Doctors or Philosophy may help, we allow them and
use them: as Judges we admit them not: and although we answer you to them when
they are alleged, yet know, that it is of that measure that is pressed down
Luk, 6. 38.
and flows over, we are not bound unto it with any condition. But what
reasons are these that follow in the Censure? Each man may deny the Scripture
to be Scripture, or wrangle at pleasure upon the sense, therefore we must admit
Councils, Doctors, and Philosophy. This argument is very unlearned and
peremptori^ against the majesty of Gods word: A wicked man may wickedly take
exceptions against it, therefore it is not sufficient: he^ may deny or wrangle
upon the sense, therefore we must leave the certain touchstone of God, and be
tried by the uncertain conjectures of men. If the Jesuit had not abandoned
all worldly commodities, as not caring for the good blessings of God in this
behalf, I might easily confute this reason by one drawn from a less
assurance, and less importance. An enemy may deny the Censurers evidences of
land; or wrangle upon the sense of the words, therefore he must not stand upon
them, but seek other testimonies to maintain his title. But if these helps
or (as you mean) if the authority of men be taken away, it is as much as to
say, controversies in religion shall never be ended. Wherein again you make
this weak and wicked argument: if controversies in religion be ever ended, it
must not be by the Scriptures only, but by Councils, Doctors and Philosophy.
This is therefore the effect of your Censure and definitive sentence in this
matter: that which God cannot do by his word, men may by their writings: that
which God cannot determine by his truth, men may end and conclude by their
lies. And further to examine this your bold and dangerous conclusion, into
what a sea do you drowe us, calling us to pass by the examination and
judgment of so many, so large; so doubtful and so contrary writers? If the
word be dark, are not the Fathers darker? If the Scriptures be doubtful,
are not men's writings infinitely more doubtful? If any heretic or wicked man
dare wrest the holy scriptures of God, with not much more dare to pervert, to
deny, and to tread underfoot the writings of a mortal man? It came from the
deepest bottom of the Sea, to draw men from the certeintie and safety of Gods
word, to the danger and uncertainty of men's judgment. Concerning the heresies
you mention, as Trinitaries in Transiluania, Anabaptists in Poland, Adamites
in Germany, I pray God wheresoever these or any other heresies be taught,
that they may be utterly rooted out, together with all other weeds that grow
up of their own accord, wheresoever the Plowe is neglected. For Hu(...) (...)
me, for any thing I know in substance of Religion, also for Caluinistes in
France, I answer, they are no heretics, (...) rye these names, but by your
(...) speech, that, to bring the Gospel of God into contempt, would make it to
be thought the doctrine of those men, whom the Lord raised up as notable
instruments to publish it in their time, and as singular lights to chase away
the mist, which you had brought in, in all places of your dark and sinful
kingdom. How far we differ from Lutherans in some points, you are not the
fittest man to whom I may make complaint. But howsoever you have added your
mark in the margent, Note this, yet the Scripture is no cause of this
disagreement. Under the name of Caluanistes you charge the Estate of this land
with heresy: for albeit we receive not the name, neither build our faith upon
the doctrine of any man, yet the Estate maynteyneth the doctrine which under
that name you call heresy. But you would only seem to lay that reproach upon
France. In England you say there are Puritanes and the Family of love. What
an high and deep slander is this to all the godly in this kingdom from the
prince to the meanest person professing the religion: your Catholics excepted,
are all in England either to be charged with the odious name of Puritanes, or
with the most execrable abominations of the Family of love: What would not
this your spirit attempt in the abundance of your heart, if you durst as well
come to open action, as you dare cast out these open and intolerable flaunders
against all the godly (...) entered. We all hold the same doctrine of faith,
published and maintained according to the word of God: we come to the same
felloweship and communion in the exercises of religion, and join all in the
same defense of Gods holy Gospel, yea we all, though not in the same measure,
seek the reformation of that, that at the Lords time shall be reformed to a
further growth and beauty in the body of Jesus Christ, which is the Church.
Therefore notwithstanding Ephesians. 1. 23.
your slander, upon examination it will appear, that those in England, which
are slaundered with the name of detestable Heretics, are far from the
heresy, and most ready to condemn it, or whatsoever is contrary to the
public doctrine of faith, maintained by the present Laws of the land, which
doctrine is pure and holy, and agreeable to the most holy word of God, which
the Lord continue for his names sake with peace upon Israel. But to return to
the Censurer, he adds a manifest untruth, saying that all the former
heresies join against the Romish Church, in receiving the scripture only. To
wade no further, the family of love, which you cite, are against you, who have
their several Gospel of the kingdom, they build upon Euang. regni.
the cursed and thrice cursed books of H.N. also they scorn the scripture
learned, and in their love to you, acknowledge ye ministry of y^ word to come
from the Pope. Therefore they do neither cleave only to y^ scriptures, nor live
in such mislike of your superstitions. Now for the matter, if your argument be
good: Heretics cleave to the word only, therefore it is naught: you may
as well conclude, that we must not allege the Scriptures at all, because they
allege them: we must not dispute at all because they dispute: which
conclusions are all absurd. For heretics eat and drink, they clothe them
selves, all which are lawful for all men to do: therefore not whatsoever they
do, but whatsoever they do as heretics, that is a mark of heresy.
Furthermore to prove wantes in the word of God, you demand how it comes
to pass that the Scripture does not end controversies among heretics. I
answer they are in the fault, as you also like heretics are by resisting
the truth: the word is not to be charged with any want. But let me move the
like question, and have your Censure touching the doubt. You that have the
Scriptures, the Councils, the Fathers: you that have Philosophy moreover, and
stories, and which is most of all, the Popes breast and the fullness of the
spirit you brag off: how comes it to pass that you have not yet
compounded your trouble some and long controversy, whether the virgin Marie
was conceived without original sin or no: If the evidences you so stand
upon cannot in so long time end so small a matter, what will they be able to
prove in the great questions of salvation: Again hedemau^deth how such
heresies can be, if y^ truth be so clear. For trial of the truth and a
manifest proof what power there is in Gods word, there must be heresies and
schisms: and God has always suffered 2. Pet. 2. 1.
false prophets and teachers for a just punishment of those that love not the
truth: nevertheless the Scripture is clear and plain, where God gives an
ear to hear, and a heart to understand: if it be hidden, it is hidden to them
that are lost. But you 1. Cor. 4. 3.
that once or twice beat at me, as one whose zeal ran before his wit,
stay your self. Do you y^ make no conscience to diminish the authority of
the word of God, cry out against us, if we refuse the determination of men:
will you that have already in diverse plates pleaded against y^ sufficiency of
Scriptures, now plead for Philosophy, Doctors and Councils, as able to end
al controversies and ratify your title: If we call you only to the word, not
the bare word, but adorned and richly attired with all fulness of light and
truth, the cleerest interpreter of it self, do we in calling you hither,
deprive you of your evidences and witnesses, seeking thereby to set you
together by the ^ares for the title? I know no evidences but the word, no
witnesses but the holy Prophets and Apostles: if your kingdom can not justify
John. 5. 39.
it self by these evidences and witnesses, let her be condemned by them for
ever. Your beadroule of fathers naming heretics y^ abused y^ Scriptures, I
took not the tale of them, they are brought in as unnecessary witnesses of a
matter already answered, and not in question. Lastly you conclude, that we
draw in one line with the most cursed heretics, and you make them our
progenitors, because we appeal to the word of God, as the only teacher and
judge in causes of religion. If this be a fault, let it be required at our
hand: if it be your horrible slander against the word and against the Saints
of God, for giving due honor thereunto, y^ Lord require it at your hands in
the defense of his own glory.

Touching Christian Franken.
TOuching Christian Franken, which The fourth part.
is the last of your four parts, it appears he has used a true report
against the Jesuits, because (as he assured him self before hand) yet no
man has denied the idolatries, the superstitious and heathenish exercises,
wherewith he does so plainly charge them. As for the first part of your answer
hereunto, it stands altogether upon false arguments, as that, He departs
from the sect of Jesuits, therefore he is an apostata: He discovers their
wicked superstition, therefore he reuileth al catholic religion: Austen
confesses that he Aug. ep. 137.
knew none worse then they that fell in Monastical life, while he lived,
therefore Franke^ must be one of them. All these conclusions are barely affirmed
without proof: and therefore may be truly denied without any further answer.
Notwithstanding, it is to be noted, that again you find no fitter taunt
against M. Luther and John Bale, then to call them Friars: and therefore you
repeat the matter. True it is they were Friars, but forgive them that fault,
seeing they did cast away their habit, and kept a better course. An other
reproach follows in charging us plainly with coining the news of Rome, and
with suspicion to have coined Frankens Dialogue: whereunto I answer if we have
not coined, you have, And as for Auste^s place, it makes for him against whom
it is alleged, and against them in whose defense you bring it. For if in
Austens time with some good, this Monastical life brought forth others so
evil that none were worse, and has declined ever since, it was time for
Franken to come out from the midst of you. If so long ago, and in such
purity of the Church, as was in Austens time, the Monasteries did bring forth
y^ worst men of all others, what did y^ Cloisters foster afterward: Your
other place of Austen to prove it a great fault, to reproach many for one or
two, I grant to be true, but for your purpose falsely alleged, because it is
not one or two of you, or so few as one or two hundred which are accused of
superstition and hypocrisy, but y^ accusation is against you all, for you
apparel idolatry with the name of devotion, you nourish ambition under a
Friars weed, and seek an empire under a Priests gaberdine, you exercise a
Wolves ravening cruelty under Sheep clothing, Treason is conscience among
you, and a just execution is made a glorious martyrdom. Sander. de visib.
Monarch. lib. 7.
These are the diseases that have infected the heart, and spread them selves
as a leprosy, throughout all the body of your unholy orders and irreligious
men. So that we blame not many for a few, but cannot find a few to hope well
of, in so great and diverse swarms. This is not my complaint as you know, or
of this time alone, but the complaint of many and long ago. Therefore in
drawing Saint Austens words to condemn me as insulting against Christ and
his religion, for the fall of some one religious man, is to draw him against
his will, to condemn one for another, as was noted before.

Your second exception to Frankens dialogue is taken, because in your opinion,
he applies good things in the society to evil purposes, by which practice
you have well noted that any good thing in religion or policy may be depraved.
This practice you should have proved in Franken, so y^ exception had been
good: but you affirm it only, as a man whose word must be taken for a proof,
and his opinion for an oracle. What Franken has written you see, what he can
write to a further accusation of the Jesuits life I know not: I think it was
his mind to pass by personal matters, and to note only the corruptions and
superstitions of their orders and doctrine: for which cause also he was
alleged. Your bitter taunts against our ministry as loose, are accusations
reaching to him that will not be pacified for the sin, with all your unbloody
sacrifices. The ignorant and unfit ministers we defend not, or any that may
among so many be justly accused of loosenes: but the godly preachers receive
the testimony of learning and godly life, even their enemies being made
judges. Whereas you find a place in the dialogue to commend Jesuits for
great labor, divine meditations, chastising of the flesh and such like, I
answer there is an use and abuse in some of these actions: you are charged
with the abuse. The rest, as your whippe and voluntary abandoning of Gods
blessings, both are superstitions, as was noted before in a fitter place. You
remember who complayneth, that of all iniust men, they are most iniust, which
when they do most deceive, Cic. off. lib. 1.
and greatest harm, they do it notwithstanding that they may be esteemed good
men. Again, wherein you have a singular grace, you taunt us as that we can not
well be charged with such faults as you count virtues in the Jesuits. True
it is we wish not to be charged with the righteousness of Mat. 5. 20.
Scribes and Pharisees, but seek a righteousness that may exceed it, such as
stands in the synceritie of a good conscience 1. Tim. 1. 5. and 19.
according to godliness.

The third and last exception is against Frankens conversion, as not strong to
prove any thing, seeing you can press us with many examples for one, which is
your frank and bold assertion. But if you cannot truly allege a man for a
city, or a town for a kingdom, this is a note who it is that in deed dare
venture upon any assertion, though all the world see the vanity and untruth
thereof. In place of many, two examples are brought in with their pretended
reasons. But first you give sentence before the trial, that Franken departed
from us upon a fancy, and your fellows upon great reasons and invincible
proofs. For Franken I answer, though I know he be not throwly cleansed from
the dregs of Popery, but carries some corruption that has infected the
heart, (which you have not at all blamed him for) yet his reasons of departure
were such as enforced him thereunto, being otherwise superstitiously addicted
and desirous to continue. Of your two men I can say nothing, I know not what
root they had taken, that were so soon withered. But you that condemned me
without cause, as blaming al your Catholics for the fault of one, abusing a
sentence out of Austen against Aug. ep. 137.
me for that purpose, what is it that your self now bring in two runnagates
to the slander of all, that constantly remain in the truth: must it be no
fault in you that was made so heinous in me: There are belike some indulge^ces
from the pope, that what you do shall be no fault, and what you say shall be no lie.

To come to your two rumiagates Xilander and Flaschius, albeit you auowe their
proofs of running out, to be great and invincible: yet they are in deed so
insufficient, that they have plainly condemned the^ selves by y^ apology,
wherein they seek to be justified: and may soon find better arguments why to
return, if their true repentance did open a door for their reentrie.

1 For what reason is the first, that Xilander gives? The Catholics have
endured these fifteen hundred years in concord of one doctrine, and 16*
sects have sprung of Luther within these sixty years, therefore he departs
to you: First this reason stands upon two false, and often confuted
assumptions: For neither has the Popish Church endured so long, nor so many
sects so lately grown up of Luther. Secondly, though the assumptions were
true, yet the argument does not follow. For if antiquity might prove a
Church, the Jews would make a great claim to the title: If sects springing
up, prove no Church, what shall we say to the Churches of God at Corinth and in
Galatia: Xilander did but salute our religion as passing by, that had no better
reason of his falling away then this, so often and so many ways confuced.

His second reason that moved him to leave our religion for Popery, is
succession of Bishops in the Popish Church, from Christ till now, which some
Fathers make a great reason. Surely those fathers knew some good by the bishops
that had been before their time, but they could not judge of the Apostacy of
these that came after to occupy that Chair. Again those fathers esteemed not
so much a Succession of persons, as the succession of doctrine, which is far
from the bishops of Rome, that teach many things against the word, and against
the practice of the Primative and true Apostol(...) Church, as has been
declared. But (...) Xilander that makes this. S^ccession Plat. in vita Ioh.
14. etc. Onuph. Pan in Com.
a (...) able motive (as you speak) moving him to roca^^, did he consider the
xxvi. granted. Schisms when one Pope cursed and p^osecuted an other, to the
horrible sta^^ght^^ of all sorts of people in that City* Did he note your two
Popes, and two P(...)s together at (...) time, yea sometime three, sometime four
Popes, who (...) the Chatre sometime at Rome, sometime at (...), sometime in
other places. Did he ever consider, that they which (...) the story of these
men, can not agree either in the number, nor in the succession of these your
Popes: Any one of all these, or of many other matters written by your selves,
being well considered, might have been a weighty cause to keep him from that
fall. For these bishops, many of them succeeded with such wicked conditions,
and for so wicked purposes, that their succession may show out matter to prove
them rather the race of Antichrist, and the spirit of fornications, which long
ago began to work the mystery of iniquity: Hos. 4. 12. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
but has now made up all the measures thereof, so that the prophecy is
fulfilled, that Antichrist in the succession of his ministers exalts him
self against all that is called God, or is worshipped, and sits in the
Temple boasting him self that he i^ God. This is that succession of
Antichrist, which is glorious in the eyes of flesh and blood, and therefore
made Woodeman depart from Christ, whom whosoever will follow, Luke 9. 23.
must every day take up his Cross and follow him.

3 As for his third reason of miracles in the Popish Church, I leave it as
very false and insufficient. Notwithstanding some I grant will believe if a man
come from Luke 16. 30.
the dead which will not believe Moses and the Prophets. The kingdom and Church
of Christ was planted in the power of doctrine and miracles, and also by the
power of the holy Ghost, while Christ and his Apostles lived. Now it is against
faith, if any look for miracles to confirm the Gospel again, which is
already so confirmed, that an Angel from heaven or any miracle worker Gal. 1. 8.
persuading otherwise, must be accursed. By miracles it is an easy thing to
deceive and be deceived, seeing Satan to that purpose changes himself into
an Angel of light. Such were many of the lying miracles not only printed from
Rome, but received and registered at Rome, and thrust upon men's consciences to
believe, being matters that might easily draw them headlonges into all error
and idolatry, as was prophesied of this kingdom of Apoc. 13. 1^.
Antichrist, and has no we appeared by the lamentable effect. Therefore his
third reason was to weak to have drawn him from the Church of Christ, if he
had been tied to it but with one band of love, to the truth and power of
doctrine.

4 Xilanders fourth reason dath hu^^^e up and confound many reasons: As that he
was moved with the authority of the universal, of the visible, and of the
Catholic Church: where like a good plain dealer, he left out that which he
found not in the Romish Church, namely holiness. And what are all the rest
without this holiness: Again of those three notes that moved his falling off,
two are all one in word and sense. For the word universal, and the word
Catholic, are as these two words, Wodeman and Xilander, which do not
signify two, but one and the same thing. That the Church of God must always
have a visible and glorious Majesty upon the earth, is not yet proved. Also
that the Church of Rome was never Catholic or universal, as it pretends,
the Churches of y^ East, while they flourished, and the Greek Churches, such as
remain at this day, do make sufficient proof. Again we receive the
Scriptures from God, he by inspiration has given them, and has (...) Tim. 3.
16.
always kept them in his arc, and the Philistines could not keep the Arc
from (...). Sam. 5. 10.
us. The pretended victory over heresies must be proved, before it be admitted
for a reason. I grant the Romish Church has had a victory and a triumph in
outward show over many thousand Saints, most cruelly murdered for the truth.
But over heresies it tryumphed not, but in the time of her chastity before the
Lord had given her a bill of divorce: after which time she embrewed her self
in the blood of the Saints and became the mother of all fornications. Apoc.
17. 5.
With his other reasons he linketh Saint Augustines saying, so Aug. contra
(...)is it. funda^. Manichaei. cap. 5.
often misalleadged to prove the authority of the Church above the Scriptures:
that he would not believe the Gospel, but only upon the Churches authority.
By these words his mind was not to determine which had greater authority,
the Church or the Scriptures: but to declare against the Maniches, in his own
practice what brought him first to esteem the word at his conversion from
in^^de^tie. The authority and consent of the Church, may in such a case
persuade one to receive the word, which being received, is of it self found
to be greater then that which first per^^^ded. Thus of many reasons heaped up
together in y^ fourth place, there is not found one good. The Romish Church
was never universal or Catholic, but particular, and of ^ne ^erritorie though
by vsurpatio^it enlarged her self by little and little: and the visiblenes
thereof is nothing, for the true Church of the elect is in^isible. Moreover (as
I declared) it never triumphed over heretics, it has not any peculiar
custody of the Scriptures, neither dorth the authority of the Gospel depend
upon her ratification, being authentical of it self. Therefore al these
reasons and put them together, could not open the least door for his
departure, if he had ever been placed within the Church.

5 The fifth reason is that the Romish Church is the true Church, because many
that lived there, are now Saints in heaven, and namely Dominic and Frauncis,
as Xilander does imagine. I say as before, there was a time when Ephraim
spoke, and Hos. 13. (...).
there was trembling, he exalted him self in Israel, but he has sinned in
Baal and is dead. Nevertheless* seeing Xilander went so far for a fifth
reason, let us examine what he has brought. There is no doubt says he, but
Domini^, Fra^ncis, and others are Saints in heaven, therefore it cannot be
that they lived in error. Who has made it out of doubt to us that they are in
heaven, seeing there are writ(...) many (...)dent lies and blasphemies of
them* in the Legenda, and that most detestable Alcaron Ma^^vrolog. Vsuardi.
pride. Non. Aug.
called the book of confo(...)? who will believe that Dominic raised the dead
which you teach: Who can hear or read those your blasphemies in making Friar
Frauncis an other Jesus in type and figure, matching him with Christ from point to
point, and his miracles with Christ's Lib. Confor mitat. in i(...) tio.
miracles. If the Censurer had not men^ioned Frauncis the Friar among his
saints, it might have been hoped the Jesuits would refourme that book, or
rather condemn it to the pit of hell. But to return to Xilanders argument, it
is a very bad one, proving the lesser doubt by the greater. For it is not so
great a doubt, what those famous Friars taught, as whether they be in heaven.
Nevertheless if it were out of doubt they are in heaven, yet the argument
does not necessarily follow. For many are in heaven that have lived in
error, because the rich mercy of God does as well pardon error to him that
repents, as other iniquities. No man will take this for a good argument: one
^f the two that were crucified with Christ is now in heaven, therefore he was
no thief, therefore he lived not in error: yet such altogether is the fifth
motive that moved Xilander to go to Rome in hope perhaps to be a Saint.

6 To the sixth reason which makes the Papists reverent in their words, and
the other side railing, blasphemous and dishonest in their speeches and
writings, I answer with Salomons words: he that justifies the wicked, and
he that coudemueth Prou. 17. 15.
the innocent, are both an abomination before the Lord. This reason is
repeated in the next, and is there further answered.

7 The seventh reason has nothing in praise of the Papists as the former had:
but is altogether a repetition of that which was said against the godly, as
railing and misreporting their adversaries. Wherein for proof against this
slander, I appeal to the places of the Censure alleged against Martin
Luther, and charging him with most foul opinions, such as after his conversion
he never maintained in word or deed, which his practice proved while he yet
lived: and his writings do testify now after his death. Doctor Watson also
may make a trial of this matter against you, who in a sermon before Queen
Marie, D. Watson in the former of the 2. sermons printed anno. 1554.
charged no small men as he says, but our great bishops, to say that every man
and woman, might at the Lords table, take bread and bless it (which he
calls tonsecration) and speak the words of the institution, as well as the
minister. Notwithstanding here I am to advertise the reader, that Papists
misreport the^ selves now saying and at an other time denying the same, as
appeared in many of the XIII. articles by y^ Censurers own practice. For when
the Jesuits are truly charged, he will not grant that which is truly
avouched against them, but changing the question will seem to say less then
they teach. For one example they are charged to commit idolatry in worshipping
images: the Censurer will seem to deny this, saying, they give no worship to
the image but to God: this distinction is not good: and further more the
assertion is false. For it has been proved that they give worship to the very
image of Christ: and, which is more, that they give y^ greatest worship of
Christ him self to his picture. Therefore al men are to consider this both for
our defense, and to avoid the error that may come by their deceites. For in
the field, where they stand in fear of the adversary, and in their
persuasions, when they would win a proselyte, the pretended Catholics will
not lie open, but cloak a great part of their shameful doctrine: which is
their subtlety to draw away disciples, and to leave less advantage to their
enemies. Therefore to a man not acquainted with their double dealing we may
seem to report them otherwise, then they hold in disputation, when
notwithstanding we report them no other wise then they openly teach in their
kingdom, and publishe in their writings. Wherefore I may conclude that this
reason was grounded upon a manifest untruth: Xilander judged of Judas by the
kiss, not Luke. 22. 48.
by the treason.

8 Lastly for a reason we are falsely charged to esteem all our auncesters
damned: to break their wills, and convert to profane uses, that which they
gave to maintain idle Monks and Friars, and to redeem them by masses out of
purgatory. Whatsoever he thought in him self, or imagined in others, we
think not our ancesters damned: but leave judgment to Iam. 4. 12.
the Lord, to whom the judgment of life and death does belong: not searching
out his secret counsels which are unsearchable. As for the ornaments which they
bestowed, not upon the service of God, to the instruction of their souls, by
the preaching and ministry of the Gospel, but upon the great harlot and to
the enlargement of her kingdom, they are brought home again to better uses:
and I think many of your best friends will hold and enjoy them as better
bestowed.

Your second man, comes ready Sebastian Flaschius.
furnished to your hand out of the former book of Lindan. But because you
promise not to deliver the same reasons that were touched before, let us see
how faithfully you keep art and promise. Flaschius first reason is the same
that Xilanders seventh: where they say we report the papists to teach that they
teach not. Also his third is but a particular of that which the other man did
generally avouch in y^ sixth against ye godly as using dishonest speech.

To speak of them particularly, Flaschius his first reason is, that your
Catholics teach clean contrary to that which we report of them. We report
them to teach, that the Pope is supreme head of the Church, do they teach the
clean contrary? we charge them to ascribe some merit to works, do they teach
clean contrary? Again we charge them that they auowe transubstantiation, do
they teach no such thing: We moreover challenge them for giving worship to
images, do they teach the contrary doctrine? we accuse them for denying the
sufficiency of scriptures, do they make them sufficient? (...) I might bring
infinite such examples, but these may be sufficient to show how Flaschius
stu^bled at his first going out at the gace.

2 The second reason is drawn from Luthers mind in writing against yt Romish
Church, of en^y, as the ru^nagate does suppose. How is this proved out of any
place quoted for a show of proof: Again, if it were proved that envy made
M. Luther write against Popery, how does the runnagates reason follow: The
preacher preaches of envy, therefore his doctrine is to be forsaken: The
Physician uses his art for covetousness, therefore his counsel is to be
despised. If Flaschius had learned what the place of S. Paul meant where he
says, he was glad and rejoiced that Christ was preached, either upon envy or
contention, either Phil. 1. 1^.
for fashion sake, or in synceritie howsoever, it might have bin a
counterpoyson, against y^ disease of this second imagination.

3 His third reason against M. Luther for great dishonestie and scurrilitie of
speech in his writings, is another ^launder in effect all one with the second,
and there answered. You say this bad fellow was a ^reacher, surely the^ he
came in by a wrong way, and went out by a right door, yt never had any sound
knowledge of the truth, or if he had any, he first put back a good conscience,
and the^ made ship wrack of faith and knowledge. 1. Tim. 19. 1.


4 Fourthly, it is but ^lau^derously laid to our charge yt we do easily reject
any book or piece of Scripture: for we admit as the word of God, all y^ books
and parts contained in yt ancient and autenticall Canon of y^ Jews, and with
our adversaries all the new Testament, neither do we use or suffer the least
corruption of yt Scripture, knowing what a curse is pronounced against such
blasphemous Apoc. 22. 19.
auda^ity. But you have added the Apocrypha books, although they neither agree
in some points with y^ scripture, nor yet one with another as has been
declared. Touching Fathers and Councils, it is too foul an accusation to
charge us, y^ we esteem no more of them the^ of y^ Turks Alcoran. Flaschi^s
appears to be some corrupt hypocrite, who measured other men, by y^ vanity
and wickedness of his own heart. So far do we honor the councils as they
can well ask, or do deserve honor. For (that I may be suffered to repeat
with the Censurer) we receive from them joyfully and with reverence whatsoever
they deliver unto us with sufficient warrant out of the word of God:
acknowledging them not only to have brought great profit to the church in their
time, but also to their posterity. This honor we give not to the deuilish
Alcaron: what the Apostata did or will do, I can not report.

5 The fifth reason is a slander against y^ truth, blasphemously cast out
against it and the professers thereof. It is that our new opinions (as
Flaschius and our enemies will needs call them) are old heresies, condemned by
name in the primitive Church. Whereunto I answer, that if Saunders most
traitorous book quoted for proof in the margent, or Lindane with his roll of
heresies, or the runnagate by any good trial can prove, that either we pull
old heresies out of the grave, or breed new that should be buried, though it
be no good reason why Sebastian should fly to them, yet we will grant it a
full sufficient reason, why he should take the wings of the morning and fly
from us. But if this runnagate in the malice and error of his heart, has
spoken good of evil, Esa. 5. 20.
and evil of good; if he have forsaken darkness for light, and light for
darkness, then he has escaped a blessing, and made haste to find a curse.

6. 7. The next two reasons are of y^ same forge with all the rest, they prove
nothing but the malice and blindness of your convert. The sixth charge Luther
with contrariety of doctrine, the seventh with a speech of intolerable
in^quitie against faith in God. But his godly writings do sufficiently
justify him against these open slander(...)as was declared before against y^
Censurers like slau^derous reports. Out of his large volumes of talk at
tables, we know not so much what Luther said, or upon what causes, as what
those men remembered or added, which did collect the books.

8 The last reason of Flaschius, was cunningly chosen out to make a fit
conclusion of your tau^ting and slanderous Censure, having nothing but the
venim of the aspe, that lay under the runnagates tongue. It stands upon many
points shuffeled together: as that we are partial, that we exaggerate every
little fault in our adversaries, and live our selves most vitiously in
fornication, and change of wives, according to Luthers doctrine: the proof
whereof is alleged in one preacher upon the runnagates credit, with other
things that this shameless man is ashamed to utter. What an heap of
reproaches is this without any proof? Against this I have proved that M. Luther
taught no liberty offornicatio^, but the contrary, as appears at large by
many his learned and godly treatises, Als^ the known doctrine and discipline
of our Church free us from the slander, who seek a sharper punishment for
such enormities, then your petie penance. If Flaschius ever met with a mate
like him self, that would have made a match with him in changing of wives, he
was to blame, except the most fault was in himself, that he did not bring it
before the Magistrate: upon complaint and proofs it would have appeared, that
y^ religion suffers no such wickedness to go unpunished. This may be a
particular slander like the rest, but if it were true in Flaschius and one of
his companions, both fit to have been thrust out of the Church before either
departed, what is this to all:

These are your two false witnesses, well able to discredit even a true matter
coming from their report, as they themselves are discredited by the
testimonies they have given in against the Gospel, being reports so full of
manifest reproach and untruth. It is very like they omitted the true reason of
their departure. Perhaps they went out because they would not or could not
any longer abide within, as it fell out with Demas 2. Tim. 4. 12.
and Alexander. Now for a recompense 1. Tim. 1. 2^*
of your two runnagates, the present example not of a stranger unknowen, but
of one home borne, touches the quick. He in your faces rendered good reasons
of his conversion from among them, where wickedness of life, and abomination
of doctrine strive, which may call down the greatest vengeance. But this
needs not my repetition, and I labor not to press you with examples or
corruptions of men: it is beside the question we have in hand. My prayer and
labor is for the defense of his truth, from the which we receive life, and 1.
Cor. 9. 16.
are to strive for it unto death. The Lord requires this service at our hands,
and he will at his good time bless it with manifold blessings, the fruit
whereof it may be some of us shall not see, but our posterity shall behold it,
notwithstanding all the wisdom Pro. 21. 30.
and power and counsel of man to the contrary. For the Lord has revealed the
man of sin by the preaching of the word, and has shaken his chair with a
mighty arm, he will not withdraw his hand, til he has utterly consumed
Antichrist with the spirit of his 2 Thessalonians. (...)
mouth, and abolished him with the brightness of his coming. In the mean time
his little ^locke may be somewhat scattered for a time of trial, but they shall
be gathered together again and increased to show the Lords power and mercy:
they may s^w (...) tears, Psalm. 106. 6.
but they shall reap with gladness. This is the hardest account the godly can
make. But it may be that the Lord will himself Ier. 10. 24.
correct us in mercy, and not deliver us into the hands of our enemies to be
punished by them: It may be the mother of Sisera shall Judge. 5. 28.
look out at the window, and cry out at the casement, why is his chariot so
long a coming? why tarry the wheels of his charet? So let thine enemies perish
O Lord, but let them that love thee and thy truth, continue as the Sun when
he rises in Psalm. 32. 10.
his might, and as Olive plants in the house of God that flourish for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.


