(...). THE SHADOVV OF NIGHT: CONTAINING TWO POETICAL HYMNS, Devised by G. C.
Gent.

Versus mei habebunt aliquantum Noctis. Antilo. AT LONDON, Printed by R. F. for
William Ponsonby. 1594.

TO MY DEAR AND MOST WORTHY FRIEND MASTER MATTHEW ROYDON.
IT is an exceeding rapture of delight in the deep search of knowledge, (none
knows better then thy self sweet Matthew) that makes men manfully endure
th'extremes incident to that Herculean labor: from flints must the Gorgonean
fount be smitten. Men must be shod by Mercury, girt with Saturnes Adamant^e
sword, take the shield from Pallas, the helm from Pluto, and have the eyes of
Gr^a (as Hesiodus arms Perseus against Medusa) before they can cut of the
viperous head of benumming ignorance, or subdue their monstrous affections to
most beautiful judgment.

How then may a man stay his maruailing to see passion-driuen me^, reading but
to curtoll a tedious hour, and altogether hidebownd with affection to great
men's fancies, take upon them as killing censures as if they were judgments
Butchers, or as if the life of truth lay tottering in their verdits.

Now what a supererogation in wit this is, to think skill so mightily pierst
with their loves, that she should prosti^utely show the^ her secrets, when she
will scarcely be looked upon by others but with invocation, fasting, watching;
yea not without having drops of their souls like an heavenly familiar. Why
then should our Intonsi Catones with their profit-rauisht gravity esteem her
true favors such questionless vanities, as with what part soever thereof they
seem to be something delighted, they queimishlie commend it for a pretty toy.
Good Lord how serious and eternal are their Idolatrous platts for riches! no
marvel sure they here do so much good with them. And heaven no doubt will
grouill on the earth (as they do) to embrace them. But I st^y this spleen when
I remember my good A^a^. how joyfully oftentimes you reported unto me, that
most ingenious Darbie, deep searching Northumberland, and skill embracing
heir of Hunsdon had most profitably entertained learning in themselves, to the
vital warmth of freezing science, and to the admirable luster of their true
Nobility, whose high deserving virtues may cause me hereafter strike that fire
out of darkness, which the brightest Day shall envy for beauty. I should
write more, but my hasting out of town takes me from the paper, so preferring
thy allowance in this poor and strange trifle, to the pasport of a whole
City of others. I rest as resolute as Seneca, satisfying my self if but a
few, if one, or if none like it.

By the true admirour of thy virtues and perfectly vowed friend. G. CHAPMAN.

Hymnus in Noctem.
GReat Goddess to w^ose throne in HE calls these Cynthi^ fires of Cynthius or
the Sun. In whose beams the fumes and vapors of the earth ar^ exhald. The
earth being as an a^lter, and those fumes as s^crificing smokes, because they
seem pleasing to her in resembling her. That the earth is called an altar,
Aratus in Astronimicis testifies in these verses: (...) etc.
Nox antiqua suo curru conuoluitur Ar^^
Hanc circum, qua^ signa dedit certissima ^a^tis
Commiserata vir^m metue^dos vndique cas^s.
In which verses the substance of the first four verses is expressed.


Cynthian fires,
This earthly Alter endless fumes exspires,
Therefore, in fumes of sighs and fires of grief,
To fearful chances thou sendst bold relief,
Happy, thrice happy Type, and Night is called the nurse or mother of death by
Hesiodus in Theogonia, in these verses repeating her other issue: Nox peperit
fatumque malum, Parcamque nigrantem
Et mortem and somnum, diuersaque so^nia: natos
Hos peperit, nulli dea nox coniuncta marito.



nurse of death,
Who breathless, seeds on nothing but our breath,
In whom must virtue and her issue live,
Or dye for ever, now let humor give
Seas to mine eyes, that I may quickly weep
The shipwreck of the world: or let soft sleep
(Binding my senses) lose my working soul,
That in her highest pitch, she may control
The court of skill, compact of mystery,
VVanting but franchisement Plat^ says dicere is nothing else but reminisci.
and memory
To reach all secrets: then in blisfull trance,
Raise her (dear Night to that perseverance,
That in my torture, she all earths may sing,
And force to tremble in her trumpeting
Heavens crystal The heavenly abodes are often called, celestial temples by
Homer and alijs.
temples: in her powrs implant
Skill of my griefs, and she can nothing want.
Then like fierce bolts, well rammd with heat and cold
In Jove's Artillery, my words unfold,
To break the labyrinth of every ear,
And make each frighted soul come forth and hear,
Let them break hearts, as well as yielding air,
That all men's bosoms (pierst with no affairs,
But gain of riches) may be lanced wide,
And with the thr^ates of virtue terrified.
Sorrows dear sovereign, and the queen of rest,
That when vnlight some, vast, and indigest
The formelesse matter of this world did lie,
Fildst every place with thy Divinity,
Why did thy absolute and endless sway,
License heavens torch, the scepter of the Day,
Distinguished intercession to thy throne,
That long before, all matchless rusde alone?
Why letst thou order, orderlesse disperse,
The fighting parents of this universe?
When earth, the air, and sea, in fire remaind,
When fire, the sea, and earth, the air containd,
When air, the earth, and fire, the sea enclosde,
When sea, fire, air, in earth were indisposde,
Nothing, as now, remainde so out of kind,
All things in gross, were finer then refinde,
Substance was sound within, and had no being,
Now form gives being; all our essence seeming,
Chaos had sou^e without a body then,
Now bodies live without the souls of men,
Lumps being digested; monsters, in our pride.
And as a wealthy fount, that hills did hide,
Let forth by labor of industrious hands,
Powers out her treasure through the fruitef^ll strands,
Seemly divided to a hunderd streams,
Whose bewties shed such profitable beams,
And make such Orphean Music in their courses,
That Cities follow their enchanting forces,
Who running far, at length each powers her heart
Into the bosom of the gulfie desert,
As much confounded there, and indigest,
As in the chaos of the hills comprest:
So all things now (extract out of the prime)
Are turned to chaos, and confound the time.
A stepdame Night of mind about us cli^gs,
Who broodes beneath her hell obscuring wings,
Worlds of confusion, where the soul defamde,
The body had been better never framde,
Beneath thy soft, and peace-full covert then,
(Most sacred mother both of Gods and men)
Treasures unknown, and more vnprisde did dwell;
But in the blind borne shadow of this hell,
This horrid stepdame, blindness of the mind,
Naught worth the sight, no sight, but worse then blind,
A Gorgon that with brass, and snakie brows,
(Most harlot-like) her naked secrets shows:
For in th'expansure, and distinct attire,
Of light, and darcknesse, of the sea, and fire,
Of air, and earth, and all, all these create,
First set and ruled, in most harmonious state,
Disjunction shows, in all things now amiss,
By that first order, what conf^sion is:
Religious curb, that manadgd men in bounds,
Of public welfare; lothing priu^te grounds,
(Now cast away, by self lou's para^ores)
All are transformd to Calydonian bores,
That kill our bleeding vines, displow our fields,
Rend groves in pieces* all things nature yields
Supplan^ing: tumbling up in hills of dearth,
The fruitful disposition of the earth,
Ruin creates men: all to slaughter bent,
Like envy, fed with others famishment.
And what makes men without the parts of men,
Or in their manhoods, less then childeren,
But manlesse natures? all this world was namde
A world of him, for whom it first was framde,
(Who (like ^ tender Cheurill,) shruncke with fire)
Of base ambition, and of selfe-desire,
His arms into his sho^lders crept for fear
Bounty should use them; and fierce rape forbear,
His legs into his greedy belly run,
The charge of hospitality to shun)
In him the world is to a lump reuerst,
That shruncke from form, that was by form dispersed,
And in naught more then thanklesse avarice,
Not rendering virtue her deserved price:
Kind Amalth^a was transferd by Jove,
Into his sparckling pauement, for her love,
Though but a Goat, and giving him her milk,
Baseness is flintie; gentry soft as silk,
In heavens she lives, and rules a living sign
In humane bodies: yet not so divine,
That she can work her kindness in our hearts.
The senseless Argiue ship, for her deserts,
Bearing to Colchos, and for bringing back,
The hardy Argonauts, secure of wrack,
The fautor and the God of gratitude,
Would not from number of the stars exclude.
A thousand such examples could I cite,
To damn stone-pesants, that like Typhons fight
Against their Maker, and contend to be
Of kings, the abject slaves of d^^dgerie.
Proud of that thraldom: love the kindest lest,
And hate, not to be hated of the best.
If then we frame man's figure by his mind,
And that at first, his fashion was assignd,
^rection in suc^ God-like excellence
F^r his souls sake, and her intelligence:
She so degenerate, and grown deprest,
Content to share affections with a beast,
The shape wherewith he should be now ^nd^de,
Must bear no sign of man's similitude,
Therefore ^e calls them Promethe^n Poets in this high conceit, by a figurat^ue
compari^on betwixt the^, that as (...). with fire ^etcht from heaven, made men:
so Poets with the fire of their souls are said to create those Harp^es, and
Cen^aures, and thereof he calls their souls Geniale.
Promethean Poets with the coals
Of their most geniale, more-then-humane souls
In living verse, created men like these,
With shapes of Centaurs, Harpie, Lapithes,
That they in prime of erudition,
When almost savage vulgar men were grown,
Seeing them selves in those Pierean founts,
Might mend their minds, ashamed of such accounts.
So when ye hear, the Call^ope is called the sweetest Muses, her name being by
signification, Cautus suauitas, vel mod^l^^io.
sweetest Muses son,
With heavenly rapture of his Music, won
Rocks, ^orrests, floods, and winds to leave their cou^^
In his attendance: it bewrayes the force
His wisdom had, to draw men grown so rude
To civil love of Art, and Fortitude,
And not for teaching others Insolence is here taken for rareness or
vnwontednesse.
insolence,
Had he his date-exceeding excellence
With sovereign Poets, but for use applied,
And in his proper acts exemplified.
And that in calming the infernal kind,
To wit, the perturbations of his mind,
And bringing his Eurydice from hell,
(Which Justice signifies) is proved well.
But if in rights observance any man
Look back, with boldness less then Orphean,
Soon falls he to the hell from whence he rose:
The fiction then would temprature dispose,
In all the tender motives of the mind,
To make man worthy his hel-danting kind.
The golden chain of Homers high device
Ambition is, or cursed a^arice,
Which all Gods haling being tied to Jove,
Him from his settled height could never move:
Intending this, that though that powrefull chain
Of most Herculean vigor to constrain
Men from true virtue, or their pristine states
Attempt a man that manlesse changes hates,
And is enobled with a deathlesse love
Of things eternal, dignified above:
Nothing shall stir him from adorning still
This shape with virtue, and his power with will.
But as rude painters that contend to show
Be^sts, fowls or fish, all artlesse to bestow
O^ ^^ery side his native counterfeit,
Above his head, his name had need to set:
So men that will be men, in more then face,
(As in their foreheads) should in actions place
More perfect characters, to prove they be
No mockers of their first nobility:
Else may they easly pass for beasts or fowls:
Souls praise our shapes, and not our shapes our souls.
And as when Chloris paints th'ennamild meads,
A flock of shepherds to the bagpipe treads
Rude rural dances with their country loves:
Some a far off observing their remoues,
Turns, and returns, quick footing, sudden stands,
Reelings aside, od actions with their hands;
Now back, now forwards, now locked arm in arm,
Not hearing music, think it is a charm,
That like loose froes at Bacchanalean feasts,
Makes them seem frantic in their barraine iestes.
And being clusterd in a shapelesse croude,
With much less admiration are allowd.
So our first excellence, so much abusd,
And we (without the harmony was vsd,
When Saturnes golden scepter stroke the strings
Of Civil government) make all our doings
Savor of rudeness, and obscurity,
And in our forms show more deformity,
Then if we still were wrapped, and smoothered
In that confusion, out of which we fled.
And as when hosts of stars attend thy flight,
(Day of deep students, most co^tentfull night)
The morning (mounted on the Muses Lycophron in Alexandra, affirms the morning
uses to ride upon Pegasus in his verses: Aurora montem Phagium aduoluerat
V^locis altum nuper alis Pegasi.



stead)
Vshers the son from Vulcan is said by Natalis Comes in his Mythologie, to
have made a golden bed for the Sun, wherein he swum sleeping till the morning.
Vulcans golden bed,
And then from forth their sundry roofes of rest,
All sorts of men, to sorted taskes addressed,
Spread this inferior element: and yield
Labor his due: the soldier to the field,
Statesmen to counsel, Judges to their pleas,
Merchants to commerce, mariners to seas:
All beasts, and birds, the groves and forests range,
To fill all corners of this round Exchange,
Till thou (dear Night, o goddess of most worth)
Letst thy sweet seas of golden humor forth
And Eagle like do with thy starrie wings,
Quae lucem pellis sub terras: Orpheus.
Beat in the fowls, and beasts to Somnus lodgings,
And haughty Day to the infernal deep,
Proclaiming scilence study, ease, and sleep.
All things before thy f^rces put in rout,
Retiring where the morning fired them out.
So to the chaos of our first descent,
(All days of honor, and of virtue spent)
We basely make retrait, and are no less
Then huge impolisht heaps of filthiness.
Men's faces glitter, and their hearts are black,
But thou (great Mistress of heavens gloomie rack)
Art black in face, and glitterst in thy heart.
There is thy glory, riches, force, and Art;
Opposed earth, beats black and blewe thy face,
And often does thy heart it self deface,
For spite that to thy vertue-famed train,
All the choice worthies that did ever reign
In eldest age, were still preferred by Jove,
Esteeming that due honor to his love.
There shine they: not to seamen guides alone,
But sacred presidents to every one.
There fixed for ever, where the Day is driven,
Almost four hundred times a year from heaven.
In hell then let her sit, and never rise,
Till Morns leave blushing at her cruelties.
Mean while, accept, as followers of thy train,
(Our better parts aspiring to thy reign)
Virtues obscured, and banished the day,
With all the glories of this spongie sway,
^risond in flesh, and that poor flesh in bands
Of stone, and steel, chief flowrs of virtues Garlands.
O then most tender fortress of our woes,
That bleeding lie in virtues ouerthroes,
Hating the whoredom of this painted light:
Raise thy chaste daughters, ministers of right,
The dreadful and the just Eumenides,
And let them wreake the wrongs of our disease,
Drowning the world in blood, and stain the skies
With their spilt souls, made drunk with tyrannies.
Fall Hercules from heaven in tempests hurld,
And cleanse this beastly stable of the world:
Here he alludes to the fiction of Hercules, that in his labor at Tartessus
fetching away the oxen, being (more the^ he liked) heat with the beams of the
Sun, he bent his bow against him, etc. Vt ait Pherecides in 3. lib.
Historiarum.
Or bend thy brazen bow against the Sun,
As in Tartessus, when thou had begun
Thy task of oxen: heat in more extremes
Then thou would suffer, with his envious beams.
Now make him leave the world to Night and dreams.
Never were virtues labors so enuy'd
As in this light: shoot, shoot, and stoop his pride:
Suffer no more his lustful rays to get
The Earth with issue: let him still be set
In Somnus thickets: bound about the brows,
With pitchie vapors, and with Ebone bows.
This P^riphrasis of the Night he uses, because in her the blessed, (by whom he
inte^ds the virtuous) living obscurelie are relieved and quieted, according to
those verses before of Aratus, Commiserata virum metuendos vndique casus.
Rich-tapird sanctuary of the blessed,
Palace of Ruth, made all of tears, and rest,
To thy black shades and desolation,
I consecrate my life; and living moan,
Where furies shall for ever fighting be,
And adders hiss the world for hating me,
Foxes shall bark, and Night-rauens belch in groans,
And owls shall hollow my confusions:
There will I furnish up my funeral bed,
Strewed with the bones and relickes of the dead.
Atlas shall let th'Olimpick burden fall,
To cover my vntombed face withal.
And when as well, the matter of our kind,
As the material sul stance of the mind,
Shall cease their reuolutions, in abode
Of such impure and ugly period,
As the old essence, and insensiue prime:
Then shall the ruins of the fourefold time,
Turned to that lump (as rapting Torrents ri^e)
For ever murmr forth my miseries.
Ye living spirits then, if any li^e,
Whom like extremes, do like affections give,
Shun, shun this cruel light, and end your thrall,
In these soft shades of sable funeral:
From whence with ghosts, who^ vengeance holds from rest,
Dog-fiends and monsters hanting the distressed,
As men whose parents tyranny has slain,
Whose sisters rape, and bondage do sustain.
Bu^ you that nere had birth, nor ever proved,
How dear a blessing it is to be beloved,
Whose friends idolatrous desire of gold,
To scorn, and ruin have your freedom sold:
Whose virtues feel all this, and show your eyes,
Men made of Tartar, and of villainies.
Aspire th'extraction, and the quintessence
Of all the joys in earths circumference:
With ghosts, fiends, monsters: as men robbed and rackt,
Murtherd in life: from shades with shadows blackt:
Thunder your wrongs, your miseries and hells,
And with the dismal accents of your knells,
Revive the dead, and make the living dye
In ruth, and terror of your torturie:
Still all the power of Art into your groans,
Scorning your triuiall and remissiue mones,
Compact of fiction, and hyperboles,
(Like wanton mourners, cl^yd with too much ease)
Should leave the glasses of the hearers eyes
Unbroken, cou^ting all but vanities.
But paint, or else create in serious tr^th,
A body figured to your virtues ruth,
That to the sense may show what damned sin,
For your extremes this Chaos tumbles in.
But woe is wretched me, without a name:
Virtue feeds scor^e, and noblest honor, shame:
Pride bathes in tears of poor submission,
And makes his soul, the purple he puts on.
Kneel then with me, fall worme-like on the ground,
And from the infectious d^nghill of this Round,
From men's brass wits, and golden foolerie,
Weep, weep your souls, into felicity:
Come to this house of mourning, serve the night,
To whom pale day (with whoredom soked quite)
Is but a drudge, selling her beauties use
To rapes, adultries, and to all abuse.
Her labors feast imperial Night with sports,
Where Loves are Christmast, with all pleasures sorts:
And whom her fugitive, and far-shot rays
Disi^yne, and drive into ten thousand ways,
Nights glorious mantle wraps in safe abodes,
And frees their necks from servile labors lodes:
Her trusty shadows, succor men dismayed,
Whom Days deceiptfull malice has betrayed:
From the silk vapors of her Iueryport,
Sweet Protean dreams she sends of every sort:
Some taking forms of Princes, to persuade
Of men deiect, we are their equals made,
Some clad in habit o^ deceased fri^nds,
For whom we mournd, and now have wished a^^nds,
And some (dear favor) Lady-like attyrd,
With pride of Bea^ties full Meridian fir^d:
Who pity our contempts, revive our hearts:
For wisest Ladies love the inward parts.
If these be dreams, even so are all things else,
That walk this round by heavenly sentinels:
But from Nights port of horn she greets our eyes
With grauer dreams inspired with prophesies,
Which o^t presage to us succeeding chances,
We proouing that awake, they show in trances.
If these seem likewise vain, or nothing are
V^ine things, or nothing come to virtues share:
For nothing more then dreams, with us sh^e finds:
Then since all pleasures vanish like the winds,
And that most serious actions not resp^cting
The second night, are worth but the neglecting,
Since day, or light, in any quality,
For earthly uses do but serve the eye.
And since the eyes most quick and dangerous use,
Enflames the heart, and learnes the soul abuse,
Since mournings are preferred to banquettings,
And they reach heaven, bred under sorrows wings.
Since Night brings terror to our frailties still,
And shameless Day, does marble us in ill.
All you possessed with indepressed spirits,
Indu'd with nimble, and aspiring wits,
Come consecrate with me, to sacred Night
Your whole endeavors, and detest the light.
Sweet Peaces richest crown is made of stars,
Most certain g^ides of ho^^rd Mari^ars,
No pen can any thing eternal wright,
That is not ^^eept i^ h^m^r of the Night.
Hence beasts, and birds ^o caves and b^shes then,
And welcome Night, ye noblest heirs of men,
Hence Phoebus to thy glassie str^^pets bed,
And never more let The^^^ d^^ghters spread, Themis daughters are the three
hours, viz. Dice, Ire^e, and E^^omia, begotten by Jupiter. They are said to
make ready the horse and chariot of the Sun every morning. vt Orph. Et louis
and Themidis Horae de se^ine (...), etc.



Thy golden harness (...) thy rosy horse,
But in close thickets (...) thy oblique c^^rse.
See now asce^ds, the glorio^^ ^ride of Brides,
N^ptials, and triumphs, glittring by her sides,
Juno and Hymen do her train adorn,
Ten thousand torches ro^^d about them bor^e:
Dumb Silence (...) on the Cyprian star,
With becks, reb^kes the winds before his carre,
Where she (...); beats down with clo^die ^ace,
The feeble light to black Saturnius palace:
Behind her, with a brase Cynthia or the Moon, is said to be drawn by two
white hindes, vt ait Cali^ach^^: A^rea nam d^mitrix Tityi sunt arma Diana
Cuncta tibi and zona, and fuga qua^ cer^icibus a^rea
Cer^arum imponis currum c^^ d^cis ad a^re^^.



of silver Hynds,
In Iuorie chariot, swifter then the winds,
In great Hesiodus in Theogonia calls her the daughter of Hyperion, and Thya, in
his versibus. Thia parit Sole^ (...)
Auroram quaefert luce^ mortalibus (...)
C^elicolisque Deis cunctis, Hyperionis al^^
Semine concepit, namque illos Thia d^cora


So is she said to wear partie-coloured garments: the rest intimates her
Magic authority.


Hyperions horned daughter drawn
Enchantresse-like, decked in disparent lawne,
Circkled with charms, and incantations,
That ride h^ge spirits, and outrageous passions:
Music, and mood, she lo^es, but love she hates,
(As curious Ladies do, their public cates)
This train, with ^eteors, comets, lightenings,
The dreadful presence of our Empress sings:
Which grant for ever (^ eternal Night)
Till virtue flourish in the light of light.
Explicit Hymnus.
Gloss
1 HE calls these Cynthi^ fires of Cynthius or the Sun. In whose beams the
fumes and vapors of the earth ar^ exhald. The earth being as an a^lter, and
those fumes as s^crificing smokes, because they seem pleasing to her in
resembling her. That the earth is called an altar, Aratus in Astronimicis
testifies in these verses: (...) etc.
Nox antiqua suo curru conuoluitur Ar^^
Hanc circum, qua^ signa dedit certissima ^a^tis
Commiserata vir^m metue^dos vndique cas^s.
In which verses the substance of the first four verses is expressed.

2 Night is called the nurse or mother of death by Hesiodus in Theogonia, in
these verses repeating her other issue: Nox peperit fatumque malum, Parcamque
nigrantem
Et mortem and somnum, diuersaque so^nia: natos
Hos peperit, nulli dea nox coniuncta marito.


3 Plat^ says dicere is nothing else but reminisci.

4 The heavenly abodes are often called, celestial temples by Homer and alijs.

5 Insolence is here taken for rareness or vnwontednesse.

6 Lycophron in Alexandra, affirms the morning uses to ride upon Pegasus in
his verses: Aurora montem Phagium aduoluerat
V^locis altum nuper alis Pegasi.


7 Vulcan is said by Natalis Comes in his Mythologie, to have made a golden bed
for the Sun, wherein he swum sleeping till the morning.

8 Quae lucem pellis sub terras: Orpheus.

9 Here he alludes to the fiction of Hercules, that in his labor at Tartessus
fetching away the oxen, being (more the^ he liked) heat with the beams of the
Sun, he bent his bow against him, etc. Vt ait Pherecides in 3. lib.
Historiarum.

10 This P^riphrasis of the Night he uses, because in her the blessed, (by whom
he inte^ds the virtuous) living obscurelie are relieved and quieted, according
to those verses before of Aratus, Commiserata virum metuendos vndique casus.

11 Themis daughters are the three hours, viz. Dice, Ire^e, and E^^omia,
begotten by Jupiter. They are said to make ready the horse and chariot of the
Sun every morning. vt Orph. Et louis and Themidis Horae de se^ine (...), etc.

12 Cynthia or the Moon, is said to be drawn by two white hindes, vt ait
Cali^ach^^: A^rea nam d^mitrix Tityi sunt arma Diana
Cuncta tibi and zona, and fuga qua^ cer^icibus a^rea
Cer^arum imponis currum c^^ d^cis ad a^re^^.


13 Hesiodus in Theogonia calls her the daughter of Hyperion, and Thya, in his
versibus. Thia parit Sole^ (...)
Auroram quaefert luce^ mortalibus (...)
C^elicolisque Deis cunctis, Hyperionis al^^
Semine concepit, namque illos Thia d^cora


So is she said to wear partie-coloured garments: the rest intimates her
Magic authority.

FINIS.
For the rest of his own invention, figures and ^^^iles, touching their
aptness and novelty he has not labored to justify them, because he hopes
they will be proud enough to justify themselves, and prove sufficiently
authentical to such as understand them; for the rest, God help them, I can
not (do as others), make day seem a lighter woman the^ she is, by painting her.



Hymnus in Cynthiam.
HE gives her that Periphrasis, viz. Natures bright eye sight, because that by
her store of humors, issue is given to all birth: and thereof is she called
Lucina, and Ilythyia, quia praeest parturientibus cum inuocaretur, and gives
them help: which Orpheus in a Hymn of her praise expresses, and calls her
besides Prothyrea, vt sequitur. (...) etc. Audi m^ veneranda Dea, cui nomina
multa:
Prag^antum adi^^rix, patientum dulce (...)
Sola puellarum sernatrix* solaque prudens:
Auxilium velox te^^ris Prothyrea puelli^^.
And a little after, he shows her plainly to be Diana, Ilythyia, and
Prothyrea, in these verses: Solam anim^ requiem te clamant par^^ ru^tes.
Sola potes dir^^ partus placare labores
Diana, Ilythyia grauis, sumus and Prothyrea.



NAtures bright eyesight, and the Nights fair soul, He calls her the soul of
the Night, since she is the purest part of her according to common conceit.

Orpheus in these verses, in Argonauticis says she is three headed, as she is
Heccate, Luna, and Diana, vt sequitur. Cumque illis Hecate, properans horre^da
cucurrit,
Cui trinum caput est, ge^^is quam Tartarus olim.


The rest above will not be denied.


That with thy triple forehead do control
Earth, seas, and hell: and art in dignity
The greatest, and swiftest Planet in the sky:
Peaceful, and warlike, and the That she is called the power of fate, read
Hesiodus in Theogonia when he gives her more then this commendation* in these
verses: Jupiter ingentes illi largitur honores,
Muneraque imperium terr^que marisque profundi:
Cunctoru^que simul, quae coelum amplectitur altum,
Admittitque preces facilis Dea, pro^pta, benigna:
Diuitias pr^bet, quid ei concessa potest^^,
Imperat haec cunctis, qui sunt e ^emi^e nati:
Et terrae and Coeli, cunctorum fata gube^^^t.



power of fate,
In perfect circle of whose sacred state,
The circles of our hopes are compassed:
All wisdom, beauty, majesty and dread,
Wrought in the speaking pourtrait of thy face.
Great Cynthia, rise out of thy In Latmos she is supposed to sleep with
Endymion, vt Catullus. Vt tr^^iam furtim sub L^^mia saxa ^elegans,
Dulcis amor Gyro de^oce^ A^ri^.



Latmian palace,
Homer with a maruailous Poetical sweetness, says she washes her before she
apparells her self in th'Atlantick sea. And then shows her apparel, as in
th^se verses. In Ocean^ Lauacri. Rursus Atlant^is, in lymphis membra lauata,
Vestibus indut^^, and ^^^idis Dea Luna micantes:
Curru iunxit equos celeres, quibus ardua colla.



VVash thy bright body, in th'Atlanticke streams,
Put on those robes that are most rich in beams:
And in thy All-ill-purging purity,
(As if the shadie Cytheron, as Menander says was a most fair boy, and
beloved of Tisiphone, who since she could not obtain his love, she tears from
her head a Serpent, and threw it at him, which stinging him to death, the Gods
in pity turned him to a hill of that name, first called A^t^rius, full of woods
wherein all Poets have affirmed wild beasts live, and use it often to express
their haunts, or store of woods, whereupon he inuokes Cynthia, to rise in such
brightness, as if it were all on fire.
Cytheron did fry
In sightfull fury of a solemn fire)
Ascend thy chariot, and make earth admire
Thy old swist changes, made a young fixed prime,
O let thy beauty scorch the wings of time,
That fluttering he may fall before thine eyes,
And beat him self to death before he rise:
And as heavens This is expounded as follows by Gyraldus Lil^^s. The
application most (...) made by this author.
Geniall parts were cut away
By Saturnes hands, with adamantine Harp should be written thus, not with a y,
yet here he uses it, lest some, not knowing what it means, read it for a
Harp, having found this grossness in some scholars. It was the sword Perseus
used to cut of Medusas head.
Harpey,
Only to show, that since it was composd
Of universal matter: it enclosd
No power to procreate another heaven.
So since that adama^tine power is gi^en
To thy chaste hands, to cut of all desire
Of fleshly sports, and quench to ^upids fire:
Let it approve: no change shall take thee hence,
Nor thy throne bear another inference:
For if the eu^ious forehead of the earth
Lowre on thy age, and claim thee as her birth.
Tapers, nor torches, nor the forests b^rning,
Soule-winging music, nor teare-stilling mourning,
(Vsd of old Romans and rude Maced^ns
In thy most sad, and black discessions)
We know can nothing further thy recall,
When Nights dark r^bes (whose objects blind us all)
Shall celebrate thy changes f^nerall.
But as in that thrice dreadful fo^ghten ^field
Of ruthless^ Cannas, when sweet Rule did yield,
Her beauties strongest proofs, and h^gest love:
When men as many as the lamps above,
Armd Earth in steel, and made her like the skies,
That two Auroraes did in one day rise.
Then with the terror of the tr^^pets call,
The battles joined as if the world did fall:
Continewd long in life-disdaining fight,
Jove's thundering Eagles featherd like the night,
Ho^'ring above them with i^different wings,
Till Bloods stern daughter, cruel Fortune is called Tyc^^, (...) witnesses
Pausanias in Messeniacis, who affirms her to b^ one of the daughters likewise
of Ocea^^^, which was playing with Pr^serpine, when Dis ravished her. Vna omnes
vario per prata co^^ntia ^^ore,
Candida L^ucipp^, Ph^^^que, El^ctraque ^ant ^e.


Melobosisque Tych^, Ocyrh^e pr^^gnis oc^llis. And Orpheus in a Hymn to
Fortuna, says she is the daughter of blood, vt in his, sanguine prognat^^, Vi
and inexpugnabile numen.


Tyc^e ^^ings
The chief of one side, to the blushing gro^^d,
And then his men (whom griefs, and fears c^nfo^nd)
Turned all their cheerful hopes to grimme despair,
Some casting of their souls into the air,
Some taken prisners, some extremely mai^d,
And all (as men accursed) on fate exclaimd.
So (gracious Cy^thia) in that sable day,
When interposed earth takes thee away,
(Our sacred chief and sovereign general,
As chrimsine a retrait, and sleep a fall
We fear to suffer from this peace, and height,
Whose thancklesse sweet now cloies us with receipt.
Plutarch writes thus of the Romans, and Macedons, in Paulus Ae^ilius.
The Romans set sweet M^sicke to her charms,
To raise thy stoopings, with her ^yrie arms:
Used loud resoundings with ^^spicious brass:
Held torches up to heaven, and flaming glass,
Made a whole forest but a burning eye,
T^ admire thy mournful partings with the sky.
The Macedonians were so stricken dead,
With skillesse horror of thy changes dread:
They wanted hearts, to lift up sounds, or fires,
Or eyes to heaven; but vsd their funeral tyres,
Trembld, and wept; assured some mischiefs fury
Would follow that afflicting Augurie.
Nor shall our wisdoms be more arrogant
(O sacred Cynthia) but believe thy want
Has cause to make us now as much afraid:
Nor shall Democrates who first is said,
To read in natures brows, thy cha^nges cause,
Persuade our sorrows to a vain applause.
Times motion, being like the reeling sun^es,
Or as the sea reciprocallie ru^nes,
Has brought us now to their opinions;
As in our garments, ancient fashions
Are newly worn; and as sweet poesy
Will not be clad in her supremacy
With those strange garments (Romes Hexa^^ters)
As she is English: but in right prefers
Our nati^e robes, (put on with skillful hands
English heroicks) to those antic garlands,
Accounting it no meede but mockery,
When her steep brows already prop the sky,
To put on startups, and yet let it fall.
No otherwise (O Queen celestial)
Can we believe Ephesias state will be
But spoil with foreign grace, and change with thee
These ar^ commonly known to be the properties of Cynthia.
The pureness of thy neuer-tainted life,
Scorning the s^biect title of a ^ife,
Thy body not composed in thy birth,
Of such condensed matter as the earth,
Thy sh^nning faithless men's society,
Betaking thee to hounds, and Archerie
To deserts, and inaccessible hills,
Abhorring pleasure in earths common ills,
Commit most willing rapes on all o^r hearts:
And make us tremble, lest thy so^eraigne parts
(The whole preseruers of our happiness)
Should yield to change, Eclips, or hea^inesse.
And as thy changes happen by the site,
Near, or far distance, of thy (...) Phe^isses, calls her the daughter not
sister of the Sun, O (...) etc.
fathers light,
Who (set in absolute remotion) re^ues
Thy face of light, and thee all darkened leaves:
So for thy absence, to the shade of death
Our souls fly mourning, winged with our breath.
Then set thy Crystal, and Imperial throne,
(Girt in thy chaste, and neuer-loosing This Zone is said to be the girdle of
Cynthia. And thereof when maids lost their maidenheads, amongst the Athenia^s,
they used to p^t of their girdles. And ^^ter, custom^ made it a phrase (...),
to lose their maidenheades, vt Apol^. lib. 1. (...)



zone)
Against Europs Sun directly opposite,
And give him darkness, that does threat thy light.
O how accursed are they thy favor scorn? These are the verses of (...)
translated to effect. O miseri, quib^^ ipsa (...) etc.

Diseases pine their flocks, tares spoil their corn^:
Old men are blind of iss^e, and young wi^es
Bring forth abortiue fruit, that never thriues.
B^t then how blessed are they thy fa^o^r grace^,
Peace in their hearts, and youth reigns in their faces:
Health strengths their bodies, to subdue the seas,
And dare the Sun, like Thebane Hercules
To calm the furies, and to q^ench the fire:
As at thy altars, in thy Persicke Empire,
This Strabo testifies (...)
Thy holy women walked with naked soles
Harmless, and confiden^, on burning coals:
The vertue-temperd mind, ever preserues,
Oils, and exp^lsatorie Balm that serves
To quench lusts fire, in all things it annoints,
And steeles our feet to march on needles points:
And among her arms, has armor to repel
The canon, and the fiery darts of hell:
She is the great enchantresse that commands
Spirits of every region, seas, and lands,
Round heaven it self, and all his seuen-fold heights,
Are bound to serve the strength of her conceits:
A perfect type of thy Almighty state,
That holdst the thread, and rul'st the sword of fate.
Then you that exercise the virgin Court
Of peaceful Thespya, my muse consort,
Making her drunkes with Pegasus is called (...) since Po^ts feign, that when
Pers^^^ smote of Medusas head, (...) ^^ew from the wou^d: and therefore the
Muses (...) wh^^h he made with his hoof, is called G^rg^^^.
Gorgonean Dews,
And therewith, all your Ecstasies infuse,
That she may reach the top-lesse starrie brows
Of steep Olympus, crowned with freshest bows
Of Daphnean Laurel, and the praises sing
Of mighty Cynthia: truly figuring,
(As she is Heccate) her sovereign kind,
And in her force, the forces of the mind:
An argument to ravish and refine
An earthly soul, and make it ^eere divine.
Sing then withal, her Palace brightness bright,
The dasle-sunne perfections of her light,
Circkling her face with glories, sing the walks,
Where in her heavenly Magic mood she stalks.
Her arbours, thickets, and her wondrous game,
(A huntesse, being never matched in fame)
Presume not then ye flesh confounded souls,
That cannot bear the full Castalian bowls,
Which sever mounting spirits from the senses,
To look in this deep fount for thy pretenses:
The juice more clear then day, yet shadows night,
Where humor challenges no drop of right:
But judgment shall displaie, to purest eyes
With ease, the bowels of these mysteries.
Se^ then this Planet of our lines descended
To rich Ortigia is the country where she was brought up.
Ortigia, gloriously attended,
Not with her fifty Ocean Nimphs: nor yet
Her twenty forresters: but does beget
By powrefull charms, delight some seruitors
Of flowrs, and shadows, mists, and meteors:
Her rare Elisian Palace she did build
With studied wishes, which sweet hope did guild
With sunnie foil, that lasted but a day:
For night must needs, importune her away.
The shapes of every wholesome flower and tree
She gave those types of her felicity.
And Form her self, she mightelie coniurd
Their priselesse values, might not be obscurd,
With disposition baser then divine,
But make that blissull court of hers to shine
With all accomplishment of Architect,
That not the eye of Phoebus ^^^ld detect.
Form then, twixt two superior pillars framd
This tender building, Pax Imperij named,
Which cast a shadow, like a Pyramid
Whose basis, in the plain or back part is
Of that queint work: the top so high extended,
That it the region of the Moon transcended:
Without, within it, every corner filled
By bewtious form, as her great mistress wild.
These are the verses of (...) before.
Here as she sits, the thunder-louing Jove
In honors past all others shows his love,
Proclaiming her in complete Emperie,
Of what soever the Olympic sky
With tender circumuecture does embrace
The chiefest Planet, that does heaven enchace:
Dear Goddess, prompt, benign, and bounteous,
That hears all prayers, from the least of us
Large riches gives, since she is largely given,
And all that spring from seed of earth and heaven
She does command: and rules the fates of all,
Old Hesiod sings her thus celestial:
And now to take the pleasures of the day,
Because her night star soon will call away,
She frames of matter intimate before,
(^o wit, a bright, and daseling meteor)
A goodly Nymph, whose beauty, beauty stains
Heavens with her jewels; gives all the raines
Of wished pleasance; frames her golden wings,
But them she binds up close with purple strings,
Because she now will have her run alone,
And bid the base, to all affection.
And Euthimya is her sacred name,
Since she the cares and toils of earth must tame:
Then straight the flowrs, the shadows and the mists,
(Fit matter for most pliant humorists)
She hunters makes: and of that substance hounds
Whose mouths deaf heaven, and furrow earth with wounds,
And marvel not a Nimphe so rich in grace
To hounds rude pursutes should be given in chase:
For she could turn her self to every shape
Of swiftest beasts, and at her pleasure escape,
Wealth faunes on fools; virtues are meat for vices,
Wisdom conformes her self to all earths guises,
Good gifts are often given to men past good,
And Noblesse stoops sometimes beneath his blood.
The hounds that she created, vast, and fleet
Were grimme Melampus, with th'Ethiops feet,
White Leucon, all eating Pamphagus,
Sharp-sighted Dorceus, wild Oribasus
Storme-breathing Lelaps, and the savage Thereon,
VVingd-footed Pterelas, and Hinde-like Ladon,
Greedy Harpyia, and the painted Styct^,
Fierce Trigis, and the thicket-searcher Agree,
The black Melaneus, and the bristled Lachne,
Lean lustful Cyprius and big chested Aloe.
These and such other now the forest ranged,
And Euthimya to a Panther changd,
Holds them sweet chase; their mouths they freely spead,
As if the earth in sunder they would rend.
Which change of Music likt the Goddess so,
That she before her foremost Nimphe would go,
And not a huntsman there was eagrer seen
In that sports love, (yet all were wondrous keen)
Then was their swift, and windie-footed queen.
But now this spotted game did thicke^ take,
Where not a hound could hungered passage make:
Such proof the couret was, all armd in thorn,
With which in their attempts, the dogs were torn,
And fell to howling in their happiness:
As when a flock of school boys, whom their mistress
(Held closely to their books) gets leave to sport,
And then like toyle-freed dear, in headlong sort
With shoutes, and shrieks, they hurrey from the school.
Some strew the woods, some swim the silver poole:
All as they list to several pastimes fall,
To feed their famisht wantonness with all.
When strait, within the woods some wolf or bear,
The heedlesse lyms of one does peecemeale tear,
Affrighteth other, sends some bleeding back,
And some in greedy whirle pitts suffer wrack.
So did the bristled covert check with wounds
The licorous have of these game greedy hounds.
In this vast thicket, (whose descriptions task
The penns of furies, and of feends would ask:
So more then humane thoughted horrible)
The souls of such as lived implausible,
In happy Empire of this Goddess glories,
And scornd to crown her Phanes with sacrifice
Did ceaselesse walk; exspiring fearful groans,
Curses, and threats for their confusions.
Her darts, and arrows, some of them had slain,
Others her dogs eat, painting her disdain,
After she had transformd them into beasts:
Others her monsters carried to their nests,
Rent them in pieces, and their spirits sent
To this blind shade, to wail their banishment.
The huntsmen hearing (since they could not hear)
Their hounds at fault; in eager chase drew near,
Mounted on Lions, Unicorns, and Bores,
And saw their hounds lie licking of their sores,
Some yerning at the shroud, as if they chid
Her stinging toungs, that did their chase forbid:
By which they knew the game was that way gone.
Then each man forced the beast he rode upon,
T'assault the thicket; whose repulsiue thorns
So gald the Lions, Bores and Unicorns,
Dragons, and wolves; that half their courages
Were spent in rores, and sounds of heaviness:
Yet being the Princeliest, and hardiest beasts,
That gave chief fame to those Ortygian forests,
And all their riders furious of their sport,
A fresh assault they gave, in desperate sort:
And with their falchions made their ways in wounds:
The thicket opend, and let in the hounds.
But from her bosom cast prodigious cries,
VVrapt in her Stigian fumes of miseries:
Which yet the breaths of those courageous steads
Did still drink up, and cleerd their ventrous heads:
As when the fiery coursers of the sun,
Up to the palace of the morning run,
And from their nosthrills blow the spiteful day:
So yet those foggie vapors, made them way.
But preasing further, saw such cursed sights,
Such Aetnas filld with strange tormented sprites,
That now the vaprous object of the eye
Out-pierst the intellect in faculty.
Baseness vas Nobler then Nobility:
For ruth (first shaken from the brain of Love,
And love the soul of virtue) now did move,
Not in their souls (spheres mean enough for such)
But in their eyes: and thence did conscience touch
Their hearts with pity: where her proper throne,
Is in the mind, and there should first have shone:
Eyes should guide bodies and our souls our eyes,
But now the world consistes on contraries:
So sense brought terror, where the minds presight
Had sa^t that fear, and done but pity right,
But servile fear, now forgd a wood of darts
Within their eyes, and cast them through their hearts:
Then turned they bridle, then half slain with fear,
Each did the other backwardes ouerbeare,
As when The Italian Duke, a troop of horse
Sent out in have against some English force,
From stately sited sconce-torne Nimigan,
Under whose walls the The Wall is ^ most excellent river, in the Low
countries parting with another river, called the Ma^e, near a town in Holland,
called Gurckham, and runs up to Guelderland under the walls of Nimigen. And
these like S^^iles, in my opinion drawn from the honorable deeds of our noble
countrymen, clad in comely habit of Poesy, would become a Poem as well as
further-fetcht grounds, if such as be Poets now a days would use them.
wall most Cynthian,
Stretches her silver limms loded with wealth,
Hearing our horse were marching down by stealth.
(Who looking for them) wars quick Artizan
Fame-thriuing Vere, that in those Countries wan
More fame then guerdon; ambus^ados laid
Of certain foot, and made full well appaide
The hopeful enemy, in sending those
The lo^g-expected subjects of their blows
To move their charge; which strait they give amain,
When we retiring to our strength again,
The foe pursewes assured of our lives,
And us within our ambuscado drives,
Who straight with thunder of the drums and shot,
Tempest their wraths on them that wist it not.
Then (turning headlong) some escapt us so,
Some left to ransom, some to overthrow,
In such confusion did this troop retire,
And thought them cursed in that games desire:
Out flew the hounds, that there could nothing find,
Of the slye Panther, that did beard the wind,
Running into it full, to clog the chase,
And tire her followers with too much solace.
And but the superficies of the shade,
Did only sprinckle with the sent she made,
As when the sun beams on high billows fall,
And make their shadows dance upon a wall,
That is the subject of his fair reflectings: Sim^le ad ^andem explicat.

Or else; as when a man in summer euenings,
Something before sunneset, when shadows be
Rackt with his stooping, to the highest degree,
His shadow ^lymes the trees, and skales a hill,
While he goes on the beaten passage still,
So slightly touched the Panther with her sent,
This irksome covert, and away she went,
Down to a fruitful Island sited by,
Full of all wealth, delight, and Emperie,
Ever with child of curious Architect,
Yet still deliuerd: pa^'d with Dames select,
On whom rich feet, in fowlest boots might tread,
And never foul them: for kind Cupid spread^,
Such perfect colors, on their pleasing faces,
That their reflects clad fowlest weeds with graces,
Beauty strikes fancy blind; pyed show deceau's us,
Sweet banquets tempt our healths, when temper leaves us
Inchastitie, is ever prostitute,
Whose trees we loath, when we have plucked their fruit.
Hith^r this Panther fled, now turned a Bore
More huge then that the Aetolians plagud so sore,
And led the chase through noblest mansions,
Gardens and groves, exempt from Parragons,
In all things ruinous, and slaughter some,
As was that scourge to the Aetolian kingdom:
After as if a whirlewind drove them one,
Full cry, and close, as if they all were one
The hounds pursew, and fright the earth with sound,
Making her tremble*, as when winds are bound
In her cold bosom, fighting for event:
With whose fierce Ague all the world is rent.
But days arm (tired to hold her torch to them)
Now let it fall within the Ocean stream,
The Goddess blew retrait, and with her blast,
Her morns creation did like vapors wast:
The winds made wing, into the upper light,
And blew abroad the sparckles of the night.
Then ^swift as thought) the bright Titanides
Guide and great sovereign of the marble seas,
With milkwhite Herffers, mounts into her Sphere,
And leaves us miserable creatures here,
Thus nights, fair days: thus griefs do joys supplant:
Thus glories graven in steel and Adamant
Never supposd to wast, but grow by wasting,
(Like snow in rivers fallen) consume by lasting.
O then thou great The Philosophers stone, or Philosophica Medicina is called the
great Elixer to which he here alludes.
Elixer of all treasures,
From whom we multiply our world of pleasures,
Dis^end again, ah never leave the earth,
But This of our birth, is explaned before.
as thy plenteous humors gave us birth,
So let them drown the world in night, and death
Before this air, leave breaking with thy breath.
Come Goddess come, The double-fathered son is Orion, so called since he was
the sun of Jove and Appollo, borne of their ^eede enclosed in a Bulls hide,
which abhors not from Philosophy (according to Poets intentions) that one
son should have two fathers* for in the generation of elements it is true,
since omnia sint in omnibus. He offering violence, was stong of a Scorpion to
death, for which: the Scorpions figure was made a sign in heaven, as Nicander
in Theriacis affirms. Grandine signatum Titanis at inde p^ella,
Scorpion immisit qui cuspide surgat acuta:
B^oto vt meditata n^cem fuit Orioni,
Impuris ausus manibus q^ia prendere peplum:
Ille D^^ est* (...) percussit Scorpi^s illi,
Sub paruo lap^^e occul^^^ vestigia propter.



the double fatherd son,
Shall dare no more amongst thy train to run,
Nor with poluted hands to touch thy veil:
His death was darted from the Scorpions tail,
For which her form to endless memory,
With other lamps, does lend the heavens an eye,
And he that showed such great presumption,
Is hidden now, beneath a little sto^e.
If proud Alpheus taken with the love of Cynthia* not answered with many
repuls^^ pursued her to her company of virgins, who mocking him, cast mire in
his face, and drove him away. Some affirm him to be a flood, some the son of
Parthenia, some the waggo^e^ of Pelops, etc.
Alpheus offer force again,
Because he could not once thy love obtain,
Thou and thy Nimphs shall stop his mouth with mire,
And mock the fondling, for his mad aspire.
Thy glorious temple Lucifera is her titl^* and Ignif^ra: given by Euripides,
in Iphige^d in Ta^ris.
(great Lucifera)
That was the study of all Asia,
Two hunderd twenty summers to erect,
Built by Chersiphrone thy Architect,
In which two hundred, twenty columns stood,
Built by two hunderd twenty kings of blood,
Of curious beauty, and admired height,
Pictures and statues, of as praysefull slight,
Convenient for so chaste a Goddess phane,
(Burnt by Herostratus) shall now again,
Be reexstruct, and this Ephesia be
Thy countries happy name, come here with thee,
As it was there so shall it now be framde,
And thy fair virgine-chamber ever namde:
And as in reconstruction of it there,
There Ladies did no more their jewels wear,
But franckly contribute them all to raise,
A work of such a chaste Religious praise:
So will our Ladies; for in them it lies,
To spare so much as would that work suffice:
Our Dames well set their jewels in their minds,
In-sight illustrates; outward bravery blindes,
The mind has in her self a Deity,
And in the stretching circle of her eye
All things are compast, all things present still,
Will framd to power, does make us what we will,
But keep your jewels, make ye brauer yet,
Elisian Ladies; and (in riches set,
Upon your foreheads), let us see your hearts:
Build Cynthiaes Temple in your virtuous parts,
Let every jewel be a virtues glass:
And no Herostratus shall ever race,
Those holy monuments: but pillars stand,
Where every Grace, and Muse shall hang her garland.
The mind in that we like, rules every lim^e,
Gives hands to bodies, makes them make them trim:
Why then in that the body does dislike,
Should not The beauty of the (...) being sig^^fied in Ganemede, h^ here by
Pros^p^p^ia, gi^^s a man's shape unto it.
his sword as great a vennie strike?
The bit, and spur that Monarcke rules still,
To further good things, and to curb the ill,
He is the Ganemede, the bird of Jove,
Rapt to her sovereigns bosom for his love,
His beauty was it, not the bodies pride,
That made him great Aquarius stellified:
And that mind most is bewtifull and hye,
And nearest comes to a Divinity,
That furthest is from spot of earths delight,
Pleasures that lose their substance with their sight,
Such one, Saturnius rauisheth to love,
And fills the cup of all content to Jove.
If wisdom be the minds true beauty then,
And that such beauty shines in virtuous men,
If those sweet Ganemedes shall only find,
Love of Olimpius, are those wizerds wise,
That naught but gold, and his dyiections prise^
This beauty has a fire vp^^ her brow,
That dimmes the Sun of base desires in y^^,
And as the cloudie bosom of the tree,
Whose branches will not let the s^^mer see,
His solemn shadows; but do entertain,
Eternal winter: so thy sacred train,
Thrice mighty Cy^thia should be frozen dead,
To all the lawless flames of Cupids Godhead,
To this end let thy beams di^inities,
For ever shine upon their sparckling eyes,
And be as quench to those pestiferent fires,
That through their eyes, impoison their desires,
Thou never yet would stoop to base assa^lt,
Therefore those Poets did most highly fault,
That fainde thee Pausamas in Eliacis, affirms it: others that she had but
three, viz. P^^n, which Homer calls the Gods Phisitio^, Epeus, and Aetolus, etc.
Cicero says she had none, but only for his love to the study of Astrology,
gave him chaste kisses.
fifty children by (...)
And they that write thou had but three alone,
Thou never any had, but did affect,
Endimion for his studio^^ intellect.
Thy soule-chast kisses were for vert^es sake,
And since his eyes were euerm^re awake,
To search for knowledge of thy excellence,
And all Astrology: no negligence,
Or female softness feed his learned trance,
Nor was thy veil once touched with dalliance,
Wise Poets feign thy Godhead properly,
The thresholds of men's doors did fortify,
And therefore built they thankful alters there,
Serving thy power, in most religious fear.
Dear precident for us to imitate,
Whose doors thou guardst against Imperious fate,
Keeping our peaceful households safe from sack,
And free'st our ships, when others suffer wrack.
Her temple in Ephesus was called her virgin chamber.
Thy virgin chamber then that sacred is,
No more let hold, an idle Salmacis,
Nor let more sleights, Cydippe injury:
Nor let black Jove possessed in Scicilie,
Ravish more maids, but maids subdue his might,
With well-steeld lances of thy watchful sight.
All these are proper to her as she is Heccate.
Then in thy clear, and Isie Pentacle,
Now execute a Magic miracle:
Slip every sort of poisoned herbs, and plants,
And bring thy rabid mastifs to these hants.
Look with thy fierce aspect, be terror-strong;
Assume thy wondrous shape of half a furlong:
Put on thy feet of Serpents, viperous hayres,
And act the fearefulst part of thy affairs:
Convert the violent courses of thy floods,
Remove whole fields of corn, and hugest woods,
Cast hills into the sea, and make the stars,
Drop out of heaven, and lose thy Mariners.
So shall the wonders of thy power be seen,
And thou for ever live the Planets Queen.
Explicit Hymnus.
Omnis vt vmbra.
Gloss.
1 HE gives her that Periphrasis, viz. Natures bright eye sight, because that
by her store of humors, issue is given to all birth: and thereof is she called
Lucina, and Ilythyia, quia praeest parturientibus cum inuocaretur, and gives
them help: which Orpheus in a Hymn of her praise expresses, and calls her
besides Prothyrea, vt sequitur. (...) etc. Audi m^ veneranda Dea, cui nomina
multa:
Prag^antum adi^^rix, patientum dulce (...)
Sola puellarum sernatrix* solaque prudens:
Auxilium velox te^^ris Prothyrea puelli^^.
And a little after, he shows her plainly to be Diana, Ilythyia, and
Prothyrea, in these verses: Solam anim^ requiem te clamant par^^ ru^tes.
Sola potes dir^^ partus placare labores
Diana, Ilythyia grauis, sumus and Prothyrea.


2 He calls her the soul of the Night, since she is the purest part of her
according to common conceit.

3 Orpheus in these verses, in Argonauticis says she is three headed, as she
is Heccate, Luna, and Diana, vt sequitur. Cumque illis Hecate, properans
horre^da cucurrit,
Cui trinum caput est, ge^^is quam Tartarus olim.


The rest above will not be denied.

4 That she is called the power of fate, read Hesiodus in Theogonia when he gives
her more then this commendation* in these verses: Jupiter ingentes illi
largitur honores,
Muneraque imperium terr^que marisque profundi:
Cunctoru^que simul, quae coelum amplectitur altum,
Admittitque preces facilis Dea, pro^pta, benigna:
Diuitias pr^bet, quid ei concessa potest^^,
Imperat haec cunctis, qui sunt e ^emi^e nati:
Et terrae and Coeli, cunctorum fata gube^^^t.


5 In Latmos she is supposed to sleep with Endymion, vt Catullus. Vt tr^^iam
furtim sub L^^mia saxa ^elegans,
Dulcis amor Gyro de^oce^ A^ri^.


6 Homer with a maruailous Poetical sweetness, says she washes her before
she apparells her self in th'Atlantick sea. And then shows her apparel, as
in th^se verses. In Ocean^ Lauacri. Rursus Atlant^is, in lymphis membra lauata,
Vestibus indut^^, and ^^^idis Dea Luna micantes:
Curru iunxit equos celeres, quibus ardua colla.


7 Cytheron, as Menander says was a most fair boy, and beloved of Tisiphone,
who since she could not obtain his love, she tears from her head a Serpent,
and threw it at him, which stinging him to death, the Gods in pity turned him
to a hill of that name, first called A^t^rius, full of woods wherein all Poets
have affirmed wild beasts live, and use it often to express their haunts, or
store of woods, whereupon he inuokes Cynthia, to rise in such brightness, as
if it were all on fire.

8 This is expounded as follows by Gyraldus Lil^^s. The application most
(...) made by this author.

9 Harp should be written thus, not with a y, yet here he uses it, lest some,
not knowing what it means, read it for a Harp, having found this grossness
in some scholars. It was the sword Perseus used to cut of Medusas head.

10 Fortune is called Tyc^^, (...) witnesses Pausanias in Messeniacis, who
affirms her to b^ one of the daughters likewise of Ocea^^^, which was playing
with Pr^serpine, when Dis ravished her. Vna omnes vario per prata co^^ntia ^^ore,
Candida L^ucipp^, Ph^^^que, El^ctraque ^ant ^e.


Melobosisque Tych^, Ocyrh^e pr^^gnis oc^llis. And Orpheus in a Hymn to
Fortuna, says she is the daughter of blood, vt in his, sanguine prognat^^, Vi
and inexpugnabile numen.

11 Plutarch writes thus of the Romans, and Macedons, in Paulus Ae^ilius.

12 These ar^ commonly known to be the properties of Cynthia.

13 This Zone is said to be the girdle of Cynthia. And thereof when maids lost
their maidenheads, amongst the Athenia^s, they used to p^t of their girdles.
And ^^ter, custom^ made it a phrase (...), to lose their maidenheades, vt
Apol^. lib. 1. (...)


14 These are the verses of (...) translated to effect. O miseri, quib^^ ipsa
(...) etc.

15 This Strabo testifies (...)

16 Pegasus is called (...) since Po^ts feign, that when Pers^^^ smote of Medusas
head, (...) ^^ew from the wou^d: and therefore the Muses (...) wh^^h he made
with his hoof, is called G^rg^^^.

17 Ortigia is the country where she was brought up.

18 These are the verses of (...) before.

19 The Wall is ^ most excellent river, in the Low countries parting with
another river, called the Ma^e, near a town in Holland, called Gurckham, and
runs up to Guelderland under the walls of Nimigen. And these like S^^iles, in
my opinion drawn from the honorable deeds of our noble countrymen, clad in
comely habit of Poesy, would become a Poem as well as further-fetcht grounds,
if such as be Poets now a days would use them.

20 The Philosophers stone, or Philosophica Medicina is called the great Elixer
to which he here alludes.

21 This of our birth, is explaned before.

22 The double-fathered son is Orion, so called since he was the sun of Jove
and Appollo, borne of their ^eede enclosed in a Bulls hide, which abhors not
from Philosophy (according to Poets intentions) that one son should have two
fathers* for in the generation of elements it is true, since omnia sint in
omnibus. He offering violence, was stong of a Scorpion to death, for which: the
Scorpions figure was made a sign in heaven, as Nicander in Theriacis affirms.
Grandine signatum Titanis at inde p^ella,
Scorpion immisit qui cuspide surgat acuta:
B^oto vt meditata n^cem fuit Orioni,
Impuris ausus manibus q^ia prendere peplum:
Ille D^^ est* (...) percussit Scorpi^s illi,
Sub paruo lap^^e occul^^^ vestigia propter.


23 Alpheus taken with the love of Cynthia* not answered with many repuls^^
pursued her to her company of virgins, who mocking him, cast mire in his face,
and drove him away. Some affirm him to be a flood, some the son of
Parthenia, some the waggo^e^ of Pelops, etc.

24 Lucifera is her titl^* and Ignif^ra: given by Euripides, in Iphige^d in
Ta^ris.

25 The beauty of the (...) being sig^^fied in Ganemede, h^ here by
Pros^p^p^ia, gi^^s a man's shape unto it.

26 Pausamas in Eliacis, affirms it: others that she had but three, viz. P^^n,
which Homer calls the Gods Phisitio^, Epeus, and Aetolus, etc. Cicero says she
had none, but only for his love to the study of Astrology, gave him chaste
kisses.

27 Her temple in Ephesus was called her virgin chamber.

28 All these are proper to her as she is Heccate.

Explicit Coment.
FINIS.

