A Justification OF A STRANGE ACTION OF NERO; In burying with a solemn
FUNERAL One of the cast HAYRES of his Mistress POPPAEA.

Also a just reproof of a Roman smellFeast, being the fifth Satyr of
IVVENALL.

Translated by George Chapman.

Imprinted at London by THO. HARPER. M.DC.XXIX.

TO THE RIGHT VIRTVOVS AND WORthily honored Gentleman RICHARD HVBERT, Esquire.
SIR, Great works get little regard; little and light are most affected with
height: Omne levesursum; grave deorsum, you know; For which, and because
Custom or Fashion, is another Nature, and that it is now the fashion to
justify Strange Actions; I (utterly against mine own fashion) followed the
vulgar, and assaid what might be said, for justification of a Strange Action
of Nero; in burying with a solemn Funeral one of the cast hayres of his
Mistress Poppea. And not to make little labors altogether unworthy the sight
of the great; I say with the great defender of little labors, In tenui labor
est, at tenuis non gloria. Howsoever; As Seamen seeing the aproches of Whales
cast out empty vessels, to serve their harmeful pleasures, and divert them
from euerting their maine adventure; (for in the vast and immane power of any
thing, no thing is distinguished; great and precious things, basest and vilest
serve alike their wild and unwieldy swinges) so my self having yet once more
some worthier work then this Oration, and following Translation, to pass this
sea of the land; expose to the land and vulgar Leuiathan, these slight
adventures. The rather, because the Translation containing in two or three
instances, a preparation to the justification of my ensuing intended
Translations, lest some should account them, as they have my former conuersions
in some places; licenses, bold ones, and utterly redundant. Though your
judicial self (as I have heard) has taken those liberal redundances, rather
as the necessary ouerflowings of Nilus; then rude or harmefull torrents swollen
with headstrong showers. To whose judgment and merit, submits these and all
his other services,

GEORGE CHAPMAN.

To the Reader.
BEcause in most opinions of translation, a most asinine error has gotten ear
and head, that men must attempt it as a mastery in rendering any original into
other language, to do it in as few words, and the like order; I thought it not
amiss in this pore portion of translation; to pick out (like the rotten out of
Apples if you please so to repute it) apoore instance or two that endeavor to
demonstrate a right in the contrary. And the rather I take this course
ocularily to present you with example of what I esteem fit to save the liberty
and dialect of mine own language; because there are many valetudinaries, that
never know the goodness of their stomach till they see meat before them.

Where therefore the most worthy Satyrist, describes the differences of pages
that attend the Lord and the guest at the table, and expresses the disdain of
the Lords page to attend his guest; he speaks for his pride thus; -- sed forma
sed aetas
digna supercilio -- Which I take out with this bold one:
And to say truth, his form and prime beside May well allow him some few grains
of pride. To speak truth, is too much, you say; I confess it, in policy; but
not in free and honest poesy. In the other, the words are utterly altered; it
should be so, to avoid verbal servitude. But the sense, I might wish my
betters could render no worse. It follows: where he sets down the difference
betwixt the Lords bread and the guests; where he has played upon the
coursenesse and mustinesse of the guests pantry; he differences his Lords thus;
Sed tener and niveus, mollique siligine factus,
Servatur domino. Which I thus;
But for his bread, the pride of appetite,
Tenderly soft, incomparably white,
The first flower of fine meal subdued in paste
That Is a peculiar for my Lords own taste.


O this you will say is a bold one; which I am too bashful to answer
otherwise then thus, that here the purest bread affects a full description;
which I amplifying no more then is needful for the full facture of it; if I be
ouerflowing, my Author is arid; but who would not greedily here have fallen upon
snowy? it lying so fair for him, put soft faithfully in his proper place, and
would ever have dreamed of subdued in paste? because it was not put in his
mouth. And I hope it will seem no ouer-broad bold one, to enter where the
purest bread out of industry, should make his expected appearance. A number more
out of this of no number, I could instance, that would trouble men made of
greatest number to imitate. But all mastery has his end, to get great men to
commend. It is the outward not the inward virtue that preuailes. The
candlestick more then the candle, is the learning with which blind fortune
uses to prefer her favorites. And who but the spawnes of candlesticks (men
of most lucubration for name) win the day from such Dormise as wake sleeping;
and rest only in those unprofitable and abhord knowledges, that no man either
praises or acknowledges.

Me dulcis saturet q^ies. Leni pefruar ocio. Ignotus omnibus. Cognitus egomet
mihi. Quite opposite to your admir'de and known learned man: Qui notus nimis
omnibus, Ignotus moritur sibi. And so shall know nothing either in life or
death when every truly-learned man's knowledge especially begins.

Your servant.

THE FUNERAL ORATION made at the burial of one of POPPAEAS hayres.
THis solemn Pageant graced with so glorious a Presence as your Highness
self, and others, as you see, that mourn in their gowns and laugh in their
sleeves; may perhaps breed a wonder in those that know not the cause, and
laughter in those that know it. To see the mighty Emperor of Rome march in a
mourning habit, and after him all the state of the Empire either present or
presented; The Peers in person though with dry eyes, yet God knows their
hearts; Others in their Ranks; One representing the state of a Courtier (as I
judge by his leg;) another of a Citizen (as I judge by his head;) another of
a Soldier, (as I judge by his look;) another the state Poetical (as I judge
by his clothes;) for the state Physical, it has no place here; for who ever
saw a Physician follow a Funeral? To see, I say, all this Assembly masking in
this Funeral pomp; could he that saw it imagine any less Funeral subject
would follow, then the Hearse of your dear Mother Agrippina? or your beloved
wife Octauia? or else of her whom you prefer to them both, your divine
Poppaea? At least who would imagine, that a poor hair broken loose from his
fellows; or shaken off, like a windfall from the golden tree before his time;
should have the honor of this Imperial solemnity: And be able to glory like
the fly in the Cart; good heaven what a troop of fools have I gathered
together?

It is fatal to all honorable actions to fall under the scourge of detracting
tongues, and for the most part to be condemned before they come to trial. In
regard whereof, I will borrow so much of your patience, as that I may in a word
or two examine the whole ground of this spectacle: Not doubting but that I
shall make it appear to all upright ears, that it is an action most worthy
your wisdom (my gracious Sovereign) and that this silly, this base, this
contemptible hair on this Hearse supported, receives no thought of honor, but
what it well deserves. Etiam capillus unus habet umbram suam, was the saying
of your master Seneca; and may not your Highness go one step further, and
say, Etiam capillus unus habet urnam suam? To enter into the common place of
women's hair, I list not; though it would afford scope enough for my pen to
play in; that Theme has been already canvast, and worn half threedbare by
Poets and their fellows. My meaning is not to exceed the compass of this
hair, which we have here in hand. This sacred beam fallen from that sun of
beauty Poppaea; whose very name is able to give it honor, though otherwise
base. And albeit hair were of it self the most abject excrement that were,
yet should Poppaeas hair be reputed honorable. I am not ignorant that hair
is noted by many as an excrement, a fleeting commodity, subject to spring, and
fall; and he whose whole head last day was not worth one hair, it shall be in
as good estate the next day as it was ever before: And such as last year had
as fair a crop of hair as ever fruitful head afforded; if there come but a
hot summer; it shall be so smooth that a man may slur a Dye on it. An
excrement, it is, I deny not; and yet are not all excrements to be vilified as
things of no value: for Mask, Ciuet, Amber, are they not all excrements? yet
what more pleasing to the daintiest sense we have? Nature gives many things
with the left hand, which Art receives with the right: Sublimate and other
drugges are by nature poison: yet Art turns them to wholesome medicines; so
hair though by nature given us as an excrement, yet by Art it is made our
capital ornament. For whereas the head is accounted the chief member of the
body, hair is given us as the chief ornament of the head; I mean of women's
heads; for men have other ornaments belonging to their heads, as shall
hereafter appear more largely. And howsoever hair falls within the name of
excrement; yet it is evermore the argument of a rank or rich soil where it
grows, and of a barren where it fails; for I dare bouldly pronounce in
despite of all paltry proverbs, that a man's wit is ever rankest, when his
hair is at the fullest. I say not his wit is best, but ranckest; for I am not
ignorant, that the ranckest flesh is not always the soundest, as the ranckest
breath is not always the sweetest. And thus much more I will add for the
general commendation of hair, that nature in no part has expressed such
curious and subtle skill as in this (as we term it) excrement; for what more
excellent point of Art can there be, then to indurate and harden a thin vapor
into a dry and solid substance? And this whole bush of hair, has both his
being and his nour^shment from those sweet vapors, which breathe and steame
from the quintessence of the brain, through those subtle pores of the head in
which they are fashioned and spunne by natures finger into so slender and
delicate a thread; as if she intended to do like the painter that came to see
Apelles, drew that subtle line for a masterpeece of his workmanship. And
besides the highest place given to the hair, and singularity of workmanship
expressed in it, Nature has endowed it with this special privilege, and left
therein so great an impression of her self, as it is the most certain mark
by which we may aim at the complexion and condition of every man; as red hair
on a man is a sign of treachery, what it is in a woman, let the sweet music of
rhyme inspire us; a soft hair chicken-hearted; a harsh hair churlish natured;
a flaxen hair foolish brained; what a black-hayr'd man is ask the proverb;
if ye believe not that, ask your wives; if they will not tell you, look in
your glasses, and ye shall see it written on your foreheads. So that nature
having honored hair with so great a privilege of her favor, why should we
not think it worthy all honor in it self without any addition of other
circumstance. And if Nature has graced the whole Garland with this honor, may
not every flower challenge his part? If any hair, then this hair (the
argument of our present mourning) more then any: But we must not think
(Princes and Senators) that the undaunted heart of our Emperor, which never was
known to shrink at the butchering of his own mother Agrippina; and could
without any touch of remorse, hear (if not behold) the murder of his most
dear wife Octavia after her divorce; we must not think (I say) this
Adamantine heart of his could resolve into softness, for the loss of a common
or ordinary hair. But this was (alas why is it not) a hair of such rare and
matchless perfection, whether ye take it by the color or by the substance,
as it is impossible for nature in her whole shop to pattern it: So subtle and
slender as it can scarce be seen, much less felt; and yet so strong as it is
able to bind Hercules hand and foot; and make it another of his labors to
extricate himself. In a word it is such a flower as grows in no garden but
Poppaeas; borne to the wonder of men, the envy of women, the glory of the
Gods, etc. A hair of such matchless perfection, that if any where it should
be found by chance, the most ignorant would esteem it of infinite value, as
certaynely some hayres have been. The purple hair of Nisus, whereon his
kingdom and life depended, may serve for an instance. And how many young
gallants do I know my self, every hair of whose chin, is worth a thousand
crowns; and others (but simple fornicators) that have never a hair on their
crowns, but is worth a Kings ransom? At how much higher rate then shall we
value this hair, which if it were not Poppaeas, yet being such as it is, it
deserved high estimation; but being Poppaeas (if it were not such) it can be
worth no less. When therefore a hair of this excellence is fallen like an
Apple from the golden Tree, can the loss be light? And can such loss do
less then beget a just and unfeigned grief, not proceeding from humor in our
Emperor* nor flattery in us, but out of true judgment in us all? Albeit I
must add this for the qualifying of your grief (most sacred Emperor) that
this divine hair is not utterly lost; It is but sent as a Harbenger before,
the rest must follow it: And in the mean time this remains in blessed estate;
it is at rest; it is free from the trouble and incombrance which her miserable
fellows that survive are daily enforced to endure. The cruel comb shall no
more fasten his teeth upon it; it shall no more be tortured with curling
bodkins, tied up each night in knots, wearied with tyres, and by all means
barred of that natural freedom in which it was borne: And, which is a torment
above torments, subject to the fearful tincture of Age, and to change his
amber hew into a witherd and mortified gray. From all this fear and trouble
this happy hair is freed; it rests quietly in his Vrne, straight to be
consecrated as a relic upon this altar of Venus, there to be kept as her
treasure, till it has fetched to it a fair number more; and then to be
employed by Venus, either as a bracelet for her paramour Mars, or else (which I
rather believe) for a Periwig for her self; all his fellows and his
Mistress, having from it taken the infection of the falling sickness. Dixi.

D. IVNII IVVENALIS LIB. 1. SAT. 5.
To Trebius.
Laboring to bring him in dislike of his continued course of frequenting the
Table of VIRRO, a great Lord of Rome.

IF of thy purpose yet, thou take no shame,
But keep'st thy mind (immutably) the same,
That thou esteem'st it as a good in chief
At others Trenchers to relieve thy life:
If those things thou can find a back to bear,
That not Sarmentus, nor vile Galba were
So base to put in patience of a guest,
No, not for Caesar's far-exceeding feast:
Fear will affect me to bleeue thy troth
In any witness, though produced by oath.
For nothing in my knowledge falls, that is
More frugall then the belly: but say this
That not enough food all thy means can find,
To keep thy gut from emptiness and wind
Is no Creek void? no Bridge? no piece of shed
Half, or not half? Would thy not being fed
At Virro's Table be so foul a shame?
Does hunger blow in thee so false a flame?
As not to taste it nobler in as poor
And vile a place as has been named before?
To quake for cold, and gnaw the mustiest grounds
Of Barly-griest (baked purposely for hounds)
First, take it for a Rule, that if my Lord
Shall once be pleased to grace thee with his board,
The whole revenues that thy hopes inherit
Rising from services of ancient merit,
In this requital amply paid will prove.
O it is the fruit of a transcendent love,
To give one victuals; That, thy Table-King
Lays in thy dish, though nere so thin a thing,
Yet that reproach, still in thine ears shall ring.
If therefore after two months due neglect
He deignes his poor dependant to respect,
And lest the third bench fail to fill the rank,
He shall take thee up to supply the blanck.
Let Us sit together Trebius (says my Lord)
See all thy wishes sum'd-vp in a word.
What can thou ask at Jove's hand after this?
This grace to Trebius, enough ample is;
To make him start from sleep before the Lark,
Poasting abroad vntrus'd, and in the dark
Perplexed with fear, lest all the seruile-rout
Of his saluters, have the round run-out
Before he come; whiles yet the fixed Star
Shows his ambiguous head; and heavens cold Car
The slow Boots wheels about the Bear.
And yet for all this, what may be the cheer?
To such vile wine, thy throat is made the sinck
As greasy woll, would not endure to drink,
And we must shortly look to see our guest
Transformed into a Berecynthian-Priest.
Words make the Prologue to prepare the fray,
And in the next Scene, Pots are taught to play
The parts of weapons: Thy red Napkin now
Descends to tell thee of thy broken-Brow:
And such events do evermore ensue
When you poor Guests, and Virro's serving crew
Grow to the heat of such uncivil Wars,
The vile Wine made the Bellows to your Iarrs.
For Virro's-selfe, the wine he drinks was borne
When Consuls ( Phaebus-like) appeared vnshorn,
A Grape that long since in the wars was pressed
By our confederate- Marsians, and the rest
Of which, no drop his longing-frend can git
Though blown in fume up with a Cardiack fit.
Next day he likes to taste another field,
The Albane hills, or else the Setine yield
Whose race and rich succession if you ask,
Age has decayed, and sickness of the caske,
Such Thrasea and Heluidius quaft, still crowned
When Brutus birth, and Cassius they renownd.
Virro himself in solemn Bowls is served
Of Amber, and disparent Beryl keru'd;
But to thy trust, no such Cup they commit,
Or if they do, a Spy is fixed to it
To tell the stones; whose firm eye never fayles
To watch the close walks of thy vulturous nails,
Give leave (says Virro) and then takes the Cup,
The famous Jasper in it lifting-vp
Inglorious praises: for it is now the guize
Of him and others to transfer such prize
Off from his fingers to his Bowl's; that were
Wont to grace swords: and our young Trojan Peer
That made Iarbus jealous (since in love
Preferred past him by Dido) used t'improue
By setting them in forefront of his sheath;
But thy Bowl stands an infinite beneath
And bears the Beneuentane-Coblers name,
Whose Gallon drunke-off, must thy blood inflame
And is so crazed, That they would let it pass
To them that Matches give, for broken Glass;
Now, if by fumes of wine, or fiery-meat
His Lordships stomach ouer-boyle with heat,
There Is a cold liquor brought that is made t'outvie
The chill impressions of the North-East-skie.
I formerly affirmed, that you and he
Were served with wines of a distinct degree,
But now remember it belongs to you
To keep your distance in your water too.
And (in his Pages place) thy Cups are brought
By a swarth foot man, from Getulia bought,
Or some steru'd Negro, whose affrightfull sight
Thou would abhor to meet in dead of night
Passing the monuments of Latia,
In his eye waits the flower of Asia,
A Jewel purchased at a higher rate
Then Martial Ancus, or King Tullus State.
(Not to stand long) Then all the idle things
That graced the Courts of all our Roman Kings
If then thy Bowl his Nectars store shall need
Address thee to his Indian Ganymed.
Think not his page, worth such a world, can skill
Or does not scorn, for thread bare Coats to fill,
And (to say truth) his form and prime beside,
May well allow him some few Grains of pride.
But when does he, to what thou want descend?
Or thy entreaties, not contemnet' attend?
Supply of water craving, hot or cold:
No, he ( I tell you) in high scorn does hold
To stir at every stale dependants call;
Or that thou call'st for any thing at all,
Or sit'st where his forc'd-Stand, his pride depraues;
Houses of State abound with stately slaves.
And see, another's proud disdaines resist
His hand to set thee bread: And yet what is it
But hoary cantles of vnbowlted grist?
That would a iaw-tooth rowze; and not admit
(Though nere so base) thy baser throat a bit:
But for his bread, the pride of appetite,
Tenderly soft, incomparably white;
The first flower of fine meal, subdued in paste,
That Is a peculiar for my Lords own taste;
See then thou keep'st thy fingers from offense,
And give the Pantler his due reverence:
Or say thou should be (malepertly) bold,
See thou not slaves enough, to force thy hold
From thy attempted prize, with taunts like these,
Hands off, forward companion, will you please
With your familiar Crible to be fed,
And understand the color of your bread?
Then grumbles thy disgrace: and is it this
For which so often I have forborne the bliss
Of my fair wife, to poast with earliest speed
Up to Mount Esculine, where agues breed?
When my repair did vernall Jove provoke,
To drive his wether through my winter cloak
And in his bitter'st hailes, his murmurs broake?
But let us to our Cates, our course address
Observe that Lobster served to Virro's mess,
How with the length of his extended limbs
He does surcharge the Charger: how the brims
With lust-full Sperage are all ouer-stor'd?
with what a tail, he ouer-tops the board?
In service first borne-vp betwixt the hands
Of that vast Yeoman; But, for thee, there stands
A puny-Cray-fish, pent in half a shell,
The dish not feast enough for one in Hell.
The fish he tastes, swimmes in an oil that grew
In Campany, and drank Venafrian Dew.
But, for the Worts (poor snake) presented thee,
Whose pale aspect, shows their infirmity;
They drink an oil, much of the Curriers stamp,
Exquisite stuff, that savors of the lamp.
For know, that for your Board, is billeted
An Oil that from the Lybian Cane is shed
The burden of a sharp Numidian Prow;
An Oil, for whose strength Romans disauow
To Bathe with Boccharis: an Oil whose smell
Against Serpents, does an Amulet excel.
Next, for my Lord, a Mullet see seru'd-in,
Sent from the Corsicke shore; or of a fin
Bred in Sicilia's Taurominian-Rockes,
All our Seas being exhausted: all our Flocks
Spent and destroyed, while our luxurious diet
Makes havoc, and our Kitchins never quiet
Still with unwearied nets, that no truce keep
Ransacke the entrayles of th'adioyning deep;
Nor respite our Etrurian Fry to grow,
And now our markets, their chief purueiance owe
To some remote, and ditionary coast;
Thence come the Dainties, that our Kitchins boast.
Such as to buie, the vulture Lenas deignes:
Such as to sell, Aurelia enterteines.
In mess with that, behold for Virro lies
A Lamprey of an exemplary Size,
That for dimension bears the price from all
Which Gulphes Sicilian sent his Festival,
For while the South conteynes himself; while he
Lies close, and dries his feathers in his Lee,
Our greedy Pursenets for their gain despise
The danger that in mid Charibdis lies.
Now, for his Lamprey, thou art glad to take
An Eele, near cozen to a hideous Snake,
Or else a freckled- Tiberine, bit with frost,
And he, the poorest slave of all the coast;
Fed with the torrent of the common Sewer,
And swims the towne-ditch, (where it is most impure.
Here would I on himself a word have spent,
So he inclind an ear beneuolent:
Nor do we such beneuolences crave,
As Seneca his mean acquaintance gave;
Such as good Piso; such as Cotta made
To deal for Largess; a familiar Trade;
For times have been, that in the worlds account,
The title of munificent did mount
Above triumphant, or imperial Baies:
But our desire, in this due limit stays,
That you will make, when you entreat a guest,
Civil respect the Steward of your Feast:
Do this and be (as many Lords are more)
Rich to your-selfe, and to your followers, poor.
Before him see a huge Goose-liuer set,
A Capon cramb'd, even with that Goose; for great
A whole wild Boar, hid in his smoking heat
That gold-lock't Meleagers dart deserved,
And after all this, Virro's-selfe is served
With pure-dress'd Mushroms: be the spring then freed,
And wished thunders, make his meals exceed.
And then the Gully-gut (Aledius) cries
O Lybia, keep with thee thy Wheates and Ries,
And ease thy Oxen, sending these supplies.
And that no indignation want to thee;
(As bound t'obserue) the Caruer thou must see
Dancing about his business: and he
That teaches him the Laws, to the true life
Of caruing comely; with his flying knife
Touching at every joint he carues, before
He dares the attempt; till not a gesture more
In all his dictates can deserve offense,
Nor must your note fail, how huge difference
There is 'twixt the unlacing of your hare,
And Hens dissection: against which, if you dare
But whisper, like a three-nam'd Noble man,
Like Cacus, struck by hands-Herculean,
Thou shall be, by the heels, dragged forth the place:
But when does Virro then vouchsafe the grace
To drink to thee? Or touch the Cup that thou
have, with thy lips profaned? Or which of you
So desperate is? so lost? to bid the King
Drink to me Sir? No: there is many a thing,
That threadbare coats dare not for fear bring forth,
But if some god, or god-like man; or worth
Better then Fate, would Wealth bestow on thee,
Fit to maintaime a Knight of Romes degree,
How huge a piece of man should thou ascend
Raised out of nothing? how much Virro's friend?
Give Trebius; Set to Trebius; Brother (now)
Please you these puddings taste? O moneys, you
He gives this honor: you, these Brother are,
Yet notwithstanding, if thou please to share
His Lordship with him; or become his King
You must to Court no young Aeneas bring
Nor daughter (though his daintier) to be
Play-pheeres with Virro's daintiest progeny,
But Childlesse be: a pleasing and dear friend
A barren wife makes: but suppose she lend
Thy lap much issue (even at one birth three)
So thou be Rich, Virro will join with thee,
In joy of that thy prating progeny;
And ever when the Infant Parasite
Comes to the Table, asking his delight,
Virro commands it, all his appetite
To all his cheap-priz'd friends, they serve the board
With dangerous Toad-stooles: Mushroms for my Lord,
But such as Claudius pleased to taste, before
His wif's gift came, that made him taste no more.
Virro commands for him, and all the rest
Of the Virronian rank, fruit of such Feast
As thou shall only in their odor eat;
Such as Phaeacia's endlssse autumnes sweat;
Or thou would think got from the golden trees
That grew in guard of the Atlantides,
Where thou eat'st spaky fruit, of that sour sort
That fresh-traind-souldiers feed on in their fort,
Bestowed on them in practice of their Art
At a stuffed goat-skin, to bestow a dart,
Fearing for their default, the scourges smart.
Perhaps, for saving cost, thou may conceive
That Virro feeds thee so* No* it is to grieve
Thy greedy liquorous appetite, because
There is no Comedy of more applause,
Nor any excellentest Zany can,
More then a weeping-gut, delight a man:
All is then done: (if we must teach thine ears)
To make thee purge thy choler by thy tears,
And live still gnashing of thy great-eye-teeth,
Thou think, he thinks thee free; and not beneath
Guests for his love and Grace: but he knows well
Thee only taken with his kitchins-smell:
Nor thinks amiss: For who, so naked lives,
That twice, on his entreates, attendance gives?
Vain hope of supping-well, deceiues you all:
But see (say you) that halfe-eat hare will fall
In his gift, to our shares: Or of that bore
Some little fragments, that his Hanches wore:
Or sure that Cap'net; when, for all prepared;
(Your musty bread pared clean) and no bit shared
Of all those meats of mark, and longed-for dishes
Your vain hopes vanish, and you are mute as fishes.
He Is wise that serves thee so: for if thou can
Bear all, thou should: and he is no unjust man
That lays all on thee, even to stoop thy head*
To the fools Razor; and be buffeted:
(...) if thou do, nor let'st thy Forag^ (...)
Besides to suffer Virro's whipping cheer,
With all the sharp Sauce, that he can extend,
You Are worthy such a feast, and such a friend.
FINIS.

