printer's or publisher's device

THE REQVESTES PRESENTED UNTO THE FRENCH KING and the Queen his mother, by
the three Rulers or Triumuirat.

With an answer made to the same by the prince of Conde

W. S.

A request presented unto the king and queen, by the three rulers or
Triumuirat.
WE the duke of Guise, pair, great master and great chamberlain of France,
the Duke of Montmorencie, pair and Constable of France, S. Andre, marshall of
France, to the end it may appear unto your majesty's and all the world,
that our hearts and intentes, which have been sufficiently known and declared
by all our doings heretofore, and the whole course of our time and lives,
which have been bestowed and spent none otherwise but in the faithful service
of the majesty's of our good kings deceassed (who^ god pardon) to the main
teinynge and increase of their honor, power, estate and crown: neither were
ever heretofore, neither presentlye are nor shall, by gods grace, hereafter
during our lives, be any other then such as tend to the same good and
faithful end, tofore declared, and that by just, reasonable, lawful, and
lowable means. Whereunto, next after the service of God, we have vowed the rest
of our foresaid lives, goods, and fortunes.

We most humbly beseke your majesty's our sovereign Lord and Lady, to
understand the botomes of our thoughts and intentes, the which we disclose
and declare unto you in all sincerity by this present writing, and therewith
also the causes of our coming and abode nere about your majesty's, for the
which we judge in our Faythes and Consciences (considering our estates and the
charges which we have taken upon us) that we may in no wise depart therefrom
without desert of everlasting shame and reproach, not only to our selves, but
also to our posterity, as unfaithful servants and officers, forsakers and
abandoners of the honor of God, the right of the church, the honor, welfare
and sauegarde of our king and country, and of the peace and quietness of
thestate of the same: which we see in danger of evident and inevitable ruin,
if it be not quickly and without delay provided for, by the only remedy of
such ordinances as we suppose ought to be made by your majesty's, sealed set
forth and allowed, as well in your great counsel as also in the Court of
parliament of Paris, and other courts of your Royalme such as these be which
be contained in thartycles following, the which we propone with all reverence
and humility.

First, we think it necessary not only for the discharginge of our own
consciences, but also of the kings and of his oath made at his coronation, for
the quietness and union of all his subjects and thauoydinge of the confusion
of all divine, human and politic orders, upon which confusion depends and
follows necessarily the overthrow of al Empires, Monarchies and common
wealths. That the king by an act remayninge for ever, declare that he neither
wills ne purposes to permit, allow nor suffer within his royalme any
diversity of religion nor church, preachinge, mynistringe of sacraments or
assemblies, ministeries nor ministers ecclesiastical. But wills and purposes
that only the church Catholic and apostolic and Roman received, kept and
allowed by his majesty and of al his predecessors with the prelates and
mynisters of the same, preachinges, ministering of sacraments by them and their
deputies, shall take place in his whole royalme and countreye, obedient to his
crown: al other assemblies for the like effect being utterly rejected and
reproved.

That all officers of France, of the household of his majesty and of my
lords his brethren and sister, all officers as well of judgment as of
warfare, to accomptes and finances of this realm, and others having charge,
administrations or commissions from his majesty, shall keep and observe the
same religion and shall make thereof express declaration. And all such as
refuse, delay, or withstand the same, shall be deprived of their estates,
offices, wages, charges and administrations or commissions, without to wchinge
for the same their goods or bodies, except they have made tumulte, sedicion,
monopolies, or unlawful assemblies.

That all prelates, benefyced persons and such as apperteine unto the church
of this realm, shall make like confession. And the refusers or withsta^ders
thereof shall be deprived of the te^poralities of their benefices: which shall be
governed under the hand of the king, and men of honesty and good religion
shall be appointed to the administration of the same by their superiors, such
as ought of duty to see thereunto. Who shall according as they shall se it
necessary and fit, deprive them of their tytles, and provide other in their
places, by due and lawful means.

That al churches within this realm which be violated, broken and spoiled, to
the great dishonor of god and of his church, of the king and of his laws
and ordinances, as well ancient as of later times (al which have forbeden
such sacrileges under peine of death) shall be wholly repaired and restored to
their first and due estate, and amends made unto them of all their losses and
damages received. And the offenders, breakers of the laws and spoylers
punished according to their deserts.

That all armoure borne within this realm by any person, who so ever he be or
for what color, occasion, or reason so ever he pretend, be left of and done
away by them who bore the same, with out thexpresse commandment to the
contrary of the king of Navarre, lieuetenant general of the kings majesty,
and who represents his person in all his realms and countries, obediente to
his crown. And that such as have borne armoure in such sort, and continue
yet still with the same, be pronounced rebels and ennemies to the king and
realm.

That it shall be lawefull only to the king of Navarre (as who is lieutenant
general of the kings majesty, and represents his person) and to such as by
him shall be ordained and appointed, to assemble and have with the^ any power in
this realm for thexecution and mayntenance of the things aforesaid and
others, such as may be thought expedyent for the wealth of the king and of his
realm.

That the hands alredye begun to be assembled by the said prince of Navarre,
for the service of the kings majesty to thententes before declared, shall be
mainteyned and enterteyned under his said authority by the space of certain
months. whithin which time there is good hope (if it be your majesty's
pleasure) to se the fruit of the remedies before rehearsed, and of the quietness
of this realm.

All other provisions requisite and necessary, apperteyning to the wealth and
quietness of this realm, which may be here by us omytted, shall be taken and
supplied by the counsel and advise which was given by the court of
parliament of Paris: when you sent last unto the same M. de Auanso^, to have his
advise concerning the Remedies which he thought convenient for provision
against the troubles of this realm, and concerning that which the said
court may presently adioyne hereunto.

These things being done and wholly performed according as we have before
declared (without the which we take this realm to be utterly cast away and
ruined) we are ready every one of us to go not only home to our houses (if
we be so commanded and appointed) but also (if need should so require) to the
end of the world into perpetual exile. After that our minds shall be
satisfied with perfect co^tentacion in that we shall have given unto God, our
king, our country, and to our own consciences the honor, service, love,
charity, and all other faithful duty which we owe unto them, in so great
and evident, so important and notable danger and necessity. To the remedy
and resistaunce whereof we are ready to offer in vow and sacrifice our lives,
all our goods, and such things as we most esteem in this world. The which
things we declare unto your majesty's and unto the king of Navarre, as well to
the end you may be witness and judges unto us therein, as also to set forth unto
you against the inco^ueniences which you se the remedies before rehearsed, the
which we take to be most necessary and only in this case to be used: to
the intent it may please you to declare therein your will and determination.
Protesting unto god and your majesty's that this our advise before declared
meanethe nothing else but the wealth and sauegarde of the king and of his
realm, and that we verily think that who so ever earnestly tendreth the same
can in no wise dissent from the things before mentioned and declared in this
writing, the which we have subscrybed with our own hands for the dyscharge
of our consciences and our selves toward God, toward your majesty's and
the whole world hereafter.

Concluded at Paris the fourth of May. Anno. 1562. Subscribed. Frauncis of
Lorrayne, De Montmorency. S. Andre.

An other request presented unto the Queen the same day by the said estate
of the three Triumuirate.
MAdame, besides the conte^tes of the writing the which we have this present
day presented unto your majesty, the which also we purpose and trust (with
your favor and license) to cause to be set forth and publisshed throughout
whole Christendom: to the end we may give more occasion to your majesty's to be
assured yt we desire to submyt our opinions to the judgment of your majesty,
and of the king of Navarre, and that we seek only the quietness of this realm.
Sith it has pleased you to declare unto us that neither the king nor you
would ever command us to depart from your court.

If so be that they which be at Orleans will disarme the^ selves, and the
countries, towns and places of this realm give due obedience to your
majesty's, and that every one will swear that they will be obedient to the king
(as to their sovereign and natural lord) and to all the statutes and
ordinances the which either be already or shall hereafter be made by his
majesty, by the advice of his counsel, and publyshed by his court of Parliament
at Paris: The power of men of war remaining still in the hands of the king
of Navarre, who is the kings lieutenaunt general, and represents his person,
in such number, quality, and so long as shall seem necessary: without and
before the performance of which things we judge as in our faith and
consciences (considering our estates and charges) that we may not neoughte not
to depart from your court and train: but if we so do, we shall purchase
parpetuall shame and reproach unto our selves and our posterity as unfaithful
servants and officers, who have abandoned the honor, wealth, and sauegarde
of our king and of his realm, of our country and the peace and quietness of
all thestates thereof, the which we se in danger of evident and inevitable
ruin, if provision be not out of hand and without delay made therefore.

We offer that we will withdraw our selves every one of us to one of our
houses, there to obey the king of Navarre in all that we shall be commanded to
do. During the which absence of ours, so much lacks (Madame) that we will
desire or require the like departure of the prince of Conde to any of his
houses, that we wish to se him present nere unto your majesty's, and do beseke
you to procure the same, and to cause him to depart out of the place and
company where he is: where as we neither can will look for at the hand of
such a prince any other thing but such as becomes the blood and stock
whereof be is come and descended.

At Paris the fourth of May. Anno. 1562. Subscribed as before.

An answer made by the prince of Conde, to the request presented by the three
Triumuirat.
ALthough by sundry writings which have been published, and by other means
also I have largely declared the causes which moved me to put on armoure, and
there wythall under what condycions I was ready to lay of the same and to
wythdrawe my self unto my house: yet could I never get of them which have
the king and queen in their power and custodye other language then threatening
words and such as were full of reproach and me nasing. And especially at my
first being at Orleans, before they had understanding what my meaning was they
sent hither letters and so strait command mentes and in so outrageous
terms as if they had had a do with robbers by the high way or common
thieves. But when they perceived that I set at naught their indiscreet
behavior, and that neither their anger ne crafts could turn me from the
way which I had already taken (which was to continue in my just and
reasonable request, grounded not upon mine own affectyon or profit, nor
upon mine ambicion, but upon the zeal that I have and ought to have unto
the liberty of the king and queen and unto the wealth and quietness of
their subjects) they devised to present unto their majesty's a certain
writing, the which they call a request, with all humility and reverence, but
except a man look well on it, and he do but lightly pass over it, a man would
take it rather for a decree then a request, that is to say a determination
concluded and decreed by the three peticioners which are the duke of Guise, the
Constable, and the Marshall. S. Andre with the legate the Popes messagier, and
the ambassador of the strangers. But they which by the space of these six
months passed have marked their practices and conueiaunces can bear witness,
and that according to the truth that this conclusion was grounded not upon any
zeal toward the faith or religion, but rather upon the craft, subtlety,
and ambicion of the foresaid three peticioners, who saying them selves out of
the court, not for any displeasure which they had there received, but because
they could never in any time endure that a prince of the bloudde royal should
remain nere about the king, and also for that they saw well that the Queen
went about rather the kings profit and the comfort of his people, than to
please them, or (that I may more truly speak) to satisfy their couetousenesse
already known and abhorred of every man: they laid their heads together, and
sought away how they might be restored to their power, and recover their
authority to command every man in more ample wise then eeuer they had done
theretofore. And for that they well understood that they could look for no
help at all, neither of the people, nor yet of the nobylitie, and that all
honest pretense, all means, all favor and assistence of the kings subjects
would fail them (so well have they behaved the^ selves sith the time of their
governance) they grounded their purpose and enterprise upon religion,
trustinge that the prestes and such as depend upon them and have gain by
their order, would aid them with men and money. And to assure them selves
the rather of the victory, they cauled unto the^ strangers to be partakers of
their practices, (which thing shall one day be scene and judged, to the end
they which come after us may take example thereof) and so being prepared and
trusting upon folishe and vain hopes, they determined to call unto them all
their friends, as they have sithe done from all parts of this realm, how
be it the number of them was not very great. They appoyncted to visyte the
king and queen being so furnished and accompanied as that no man durst be
bold to wythstande what so ever it should please the^ they should command.
And for the more assurance of their long raygne, they made a roll of all
such as should suffer death, and of them which should be banyshed, and of an
infinite number of others which they purposed to put out of their offices
and estates and depryue them of their goods. Emongste the first number was
the Chauncelour and diverse good men of the privy counsel and other which were
in honorable place and estymation nere about their majesty's. The men were
already chosen and appoincted which should supply the rowme of them which they
purposed to murder or exile. And it pleased god that they should show their
good judgment by the six which they chose to be of the pryuye counsel in
place of other sire which they purposed to put out of the same. The comparison
of the one parts unto the other is such that children are compelled to make
songs of them.

The queen should have been sent unto Chenonceau, there to have occupied her
self in making of gardeynes. My lord the prince de la Roche Surion, a prince
of the blood royal, a man wise and of great virtue should have been removed
from the king, and the place which he has, ben given and appoincted to others
which should have taught the youth of his majesty, never to here speak of
god nor of any such thing as might nourishe his wit, which of it self is
inclined to all goodness and godliness. And yet much less should he have been
taught to understand his own affairs, and how he should use his men as his
ministers and not as his masters, to give audience to every one to honor his
Nobility, to leave arms because of necessity, to maintain Justice, to
comfort his people, and to favor the pore especially and to defend them
from all oppressions and vyolence, and above al other things not to suffer any
Idol to remain nere about him, that is to say, a man which makes the king,
and who under pretense of frendshippe or long service usurps his authority
over his subjects. Such is the bringynge up which the queen has bestowed
upon the king and which offends these gentil men very much, who desire
rather to frame him for their own toothe, and to make a king of him which
can daunse well, ride a horse, bear his staff well, make love, love (as they
say) his neighbors wife better then his own, and in the rest to be all
together ignorante. For it is not sitting for a king (say they) to have
knowledge in any thing at all. Let him keep his reputation with vsinge a
certain notable gravity toward pore people, who have to do with him. Let
him auaunce his servants, and commytte unto them his affairs and the whole
gouernemente of his realm, let him never give audience to any man let him
never look upon any letters, neither subscribe them with his own hand, to
thentent he never understand the deceptes which be used and pass under his
own seal. Let him esteem only two or three which he shall him self
choose, whoo shall be at debate one with an other for the pryncypall place of
his favor, or for the especial mean and authority to rob and polle. Let
him be prodigal toward those whom ^e favors: but nygardely and miserable
toward all others. Let him be cruel toward his people and spoil them
of all their goods. Let the estates of judgment be sold for ready money,
into the hands of ignoraunte men, couetouse and ennemies of justice. And
fynallye let the kings house be tryumphant in vanity and superfluity of
garments and other ornaments, and a receptacle of men of evil life and
behauyoure. I speak not these things without cause, but every man may well
understand what I mean, and the queen already knows the news.

These lords therefore who present this request, have made this goodly
faction more hurtefull and noisome unto this realm, and therewithal more blud
dye than ever were the factions of Sylla or Caesar, or the Triu^uirat of Rome,
which sith chanced, the which they had erecuted before this time, if god
had not given me the grace to withstand the^. And surely I marvel greatly at
their boldness and with what face they dare speak in presence of the queen such
things as they do speak. But more I wonder at the patience of the forsaid lady
who ca^ endure to here the^, especially where as from the time that they first
began their prac(...)ses she has been advertised and had intelligence day by
day of that which they have done and purposed to do. And at this present she
receives their glosing^ words even so as though she had never ben made privy
of their purposes, wherein she declares euidentlye that she is a prisoner in
deed, and more then a prisoner. For she takes upon her as though she never
either understood or suspected so wicked an act, and such one as deserves
public revenge, whereof she has been fully informed. And if she had not ben
afraid lest she should have been stra^gled in her bed (as she has been many
times thretened, wherein I report me to her oath) she would not have missed to
have denied their request, and to cast in their teethe that they have been the
causers of all this trouble by their cou^tousnesse and ambicion. And sith the
danger wherein presently she remains, is cause that she can not either dare
not as knowledge the fact as it is in deed, and answer unto them, who with
fair and flatteringe words cloak these matters: I am constrained for the
mayntenaunce of the kings authority and hirs, to make answer unto their
request in the name of their majesty's: of whose liberties I have taken upon me
to be a defendour emongst others. Trusting that if the foresaid peticioners
will not acknowledge their fault, God will assist me, and favor the good mind
and purpose which he has given me, and that all the kings good subjects will
join with me to deliver this pore realm out of the hands of them who would
becomme tyrants over it.

In the beginning of their writing, to give thereby the more gloss and
authority unto their words they declare their qualities, they make mention
very honorably of their great and faithful services, and will that
according to their deeds hearetofore men shall presentlye give judgment of
their minds and purposes.

But they neded not to have made so goodlye a beginning (according to their
own judgment) to bring to pass thereof so evil an end. For if they were yet
greater than they are and their services worthy more commendation than they
speak of, yet should it not follow that their fault which is present and so
great and euydent should therefore be coucred, much less allowed as a good and
reasonable work. And though some amongst them have done service (as surely I
will always confess that they have) and have never received any recompense for
the same: yet must they not presently seek it by the undoing of the king and
the ruin of his whole realm. But thanks be to god they be so good husbands
all three, and so much evermore regarded their own profit that they have not
tarried so long before they asked and obtained their reward. My witnesses bear
in are two hundredth and fyfty thousand livers in rentes, and a Million of gold
in mouables, which at this day over and above that which their fathers left
the^, besides three hundredth thousand livers in rent which their kinsemen
possess of the goods of the church. And if they be not content with the
goods and honors which they have received at the hands of our kings
hertofore but for the full answer of their natural disposition we must
moreover account emongst the rightes of reward certain particular reuenges, in
this behalf also they have be^ satisfied to the full. Let them call to their
remembrance a number of good and notable men which only at their request
without charge or informatio^ have been committed to prison, a number of houses
decayed and of honorable famelyes empouerished during the raines of king
Frauncis the first, Henry, and Frauncis the second. So that they have used the
favors of their majesty's not only in aduauncing and enrichinge them selves:
but also in enpouerishing of others and revenging their private quarelles.

And if they will (as they say) that their purpose be known by their doings
here tofore, it may be easily judged that their enterprise is such as all the
kings good subjects and servants ought to oppose them selves unto, and
withstand in all that they are hable.

Afterward they say that an evident and inevitable ruin is greatly to be
feared if it be not by the^ spedely prevented and remedied. And to this end
they present certain articles with all humility and reverence. But if a man
should ask them whoo were the cause of their ruin and who it is that has
sought and procured it? If they would say the truth they should be
compelled to lay the blame thereof upon them selves. For after the publication
of the statute concluded in January there was an universal peace and quietness
throughoute all this realm. And a two coople of you (that is to say the
Constable of France and the Marshall. S. Andre) can not deny but that so
long as they thought that those which were of the reformed religion would
not be content with the order taken so long they took upon them to be pleased
with it and to allow it and swore betwixt the Dueenes hands (as did also the
king of Navarre and all the rest of the counsel, that they would cause it
to be mainteyned in the countries appointed to their governance, and that they
would never speak for dispensation or abrogation of the same for either the
one part or the other. But so sone as they saw and perceued that the
professors of the relygion aforesaid, obeyed readely the kings
commandment, they went about to exasperate the contrary faction. Howebeit
they had so few to follow them that they could find no man fytte to be
their mynister, but only the Provost of the merchants, Marcel, and. x. or.
xii. porters, so that the Duke of Guise him self was feign to take the matter
in hand at Uassy, and there to cut in pieces the poor people as they were at
their prayers.

The Constable because he could not entrappe the church of Paris, wreaked his
anger upon the pulpittes of the prechours and upon the houses where the
assemblies were made, which he caused to be set on fire, and certain houses
of such as professed the foresaid relygion to be spoiled. And it is not to be
marueyled that the revenge has benne made upon Images in diverse parts of
this realm. wherefore if they thyncke that the division of the people be the
ruin which they say is euydent, they the^ selves are the authors thereof, and
so they ought to be taken and blamed therefore. And as for the humility and
reverence which they use toward the king and Queen, hitherto I have not
seen that they have obeyed any commandment given them by the said lady. But
well I wotte they have al three refused to go unto the countries committed to
their charge and governance, and I know also well that they would not come
to Monceaux as I my self did at the queen's commandment.

They came to Paris in arms against her commandment, and thence would they
not depart for any prayer yt might be made unto them, where as I came away
from thence obeyinge the wills of their majesty's. They went to the king and
queen being accompanied with a band of men in arms, although they had
expressly ben forbede the same.

They brought them from Fontaineblean to Melun, and from Melun to Paris, and
that wholly per force. In which thing I report my self unto the conscience of
the queens majesty, and to her oath or word at such time as she shall be at
liberty, so that she may safely say the truth. They had rather see civil
war within this realm, yea so far forth that they bring forainers into
the same, than be content to withdraw them selves home to their howses without
deminishing of their goods or estates. Lo this is the reverence and humility
of them which present the foresaid requests. This is the; eale which they
bear to the saue-garde of the king as they say, whom they love and honor
so much that rather than they will go home they will se his realm in danger
of ruin which they say is evident and not possible to be avoided. This is the
love which they bear to their country, into the which they bring foraine
power to pylle and spoil it (and if god hold not his hand over it) to subdue
and utterly destroy it.

Sith they require a decree which shall remain for ever upon thestate of
relygion. And where as we required that that should be observed which is
already made until the king should come to age, they answered that it was an
vnciuyle and an unreasonable request, for that it is in the kings power and
will to change, lymitte, enlarge and restrayn his decrees when so ever he
thinks good. And that we in requyrynge that that which is alredye decreed by
him and his counsel should be kept and observed during his nonage, desire to
keep his majesty in prison and captivity. And yet this notwithstanding they
will that the decre which they three have made shall remain in force and
unchanged for ever. But if the reason which they aledge against us are to be
received, we will also by the self same conclude that they them selves will
keep the king prisoner both in his nonage and lawful age. But by like they
think they are able to master and keep at commandment not only the kings
person but also the whole realm. Seeing that in a thing of so great weighte
and which brings with it so many inconvenience, they dar^ take upon them to
present a decree allowed only by them three. what more did ever August. Mark,
Antonius and Lepidus, when by their wicked and shamful triumuirate they
subverted the laws and common wealth of Rome. If they had been moved with a
good and peasible zeal (as they say) and not sedicious, with a zeal of
religion and not of ambition, they would never have begone with rigorous
punishment as they have done, they would have cume unarmed and presented them
selves with all humility and reverence: They would have declared the causes
which moved them to mislike the decre of January. They would have humblye
besoughte the king and Queen to consider with their counsel, with the advise
of the parlementes and of other estates. If any other mean might be found to
remedy these troubles, to the conservation of Gods honor with the sauegarde
and increase of the king and of this realm. And in so speaking they should
have showed that they had been led by none other affection, but only by the
zele of their consciences. But their manner of proceadinge sufficiently
declares that their religion serves them to get folowers and partakers and
to so we strife and division amongst the kings subjects, and with the one
part having the strangers there unto adioined, to make the^ selves lords of
the whole: unto whom I am constrained to say that the princes of the blood
royal (unto whom they have evermore ben enemies and thrust them back in all yt
they might) will in no wise suffer that and strange nation and such as be not
called to the governance shall take upon them to make statutes and
ordinances in this realm. Moreover they will and require that the church of
Rome (which they call the catholic and apostolic Church) be only received
and acknowledged in France, and that they which profess the reformed religion
be excluded from preaching and receuing of the sacraments. It is a duke of
Guise an out landishe prince, a lord of Montmorency and a lord of S. Andre
which make an ordinance contrary to the decre of Ianuarye, which was agreed
upon by the king and the queen his mother, the king of Navarre, the princes of
the bloudd^ royal with the kings counsel, and forty of the chief of all the
parlementes. They be three which make an ordinance against the request
presented by the estates, that is to say the nobility and the third estate at
Orleans first, and since at S. German. The which two estates require that it
will please the kings majesty to give and appoyncte churches for them that
profess the forsaid reformed religion. They are three which make an
ordinance that can not be executed with out civil war and with out putting
the realm in danger of evident ruin. And they them selves see it and
confess it. Lo thus is the realm bound unto them, and this fruit brings
forth their konwledge and good zeal (or that I may more truly speak) their
practices, their conueyaunces and ambition of rule and commandment.

The Duke of Guise and his brethren taking upon them this enterprise to
banishe away the professors of the reformed religion, what good zele so ever
they pretend to have can not deny but that they willingly go about to trouble
and bring into danger this realm, where as they se that in the like enterprise
their matters had so euyle success in Scotland. In the which country the one
part and the other lived in peace under the obedience of that good and
virtuous princess the queen dowagier, unto such time as it was by the
authority of the foresaid Guise published and proclaimed that the king minded
not to permit that any other religion were received in the said contreye but
only the religion of the church of Rome, which was cause that a certain
small number of people of the common sort rise and put themselves in arms, who
were by the prudence of the said lady and the help of the nobility within
short time dispersed. This beginning might have served for an admonition to
the said Guise of the danger which might ensue of greater troubles, if they
give not over their enterprise, of which thing yet not withstandinge they
would take no regard at all: but (contrariwise) being in greater heat than
ever they were theretofore writ unto the said lady very sharp letters
blaminge her for that she had used to much gentleness, especially in the quarrel
of religion. And that for the ame^des of her faults passed it was needeful
that she should bluddie her hands upon them especially which were the chief.
And for this purpose they sent unto her the bishop of Amiens, and M. de la
Brosse, whoo to declare them selves at their first cumminge good catholics
of the Romish sect, they would have constrained every man to cum to mass.
They objected oftentimes to the said lady and to M. de Oysel that they had
marred al. They proclaimed their purpose which was that they would use force
and constraint in the matter. The bishop of Amiens as the popes legate
lokynge for the bulls of his legacy, promised that he would refourme the most
part of them which he said were out of the way. M. de la Brosse promised
within the space of one month to banysh them which would not be reformed.

And for so much as couetousenes is evermore the companion of cruelty, they
cast a pleasant eye upon the lands and possessions of the nobility. They
write unto them who had sent them that by taxinge the people and putting to
death out of the way such gentylmen as favored and followed yt reformed
religion, mean might be found both to increase the kings revenues two
hundredth thousand crowns by year, and to furnyshe a thousand french gentilmen
with houses and goods, who might continuallye dwell there and serve as an
ordinary garrison of men of war. This condition was wyllingly received and
well lyked and allowed, to the great commendation of them who were the authors
thereof. And notwithstanding al demonstrations that the foresaid lady and M. de
Oysel were hable to make, that the Scotts could not so easily be brought
under yoke, but yt if they went about to co^strayne the^ they would put the^
selves into the hands of strangers, by whose aid to assure the^ selves of the
whole they would banishe the name and obedyence of the church of Rome, and that
thereupon they should put in danger the estate and so much as aperteined to the
authority of the king and queen. All this was mislyked and rejected. The
queen was a good gentylwoman but she had marred all. M. de Oysell was but a
fool without all understanding, because he would not lose that which he had
by his labor and diligence kept so long. In conclusion these gentilmen (who
se so far in a mylstone) handled the matter so well by their wytty devises, that
the chief and greatest part of the nobility arise and in arms and joined them
selves with their ancient (and that I may so say) with their natural enemies.
And within short time drive away all their priests, who might well inoughe have
lived and continued in their estate, if they could have been content with a
common peace betwyxte the one part and the other. So that both the name of
Guise and the name of the church of Rome was sent back again on this side
the sea. And so those folk which would have had all to them selves lost al.

Hereof should the duke of Guyse and his brethern have taken example and have
acknowleged the fault which he committed in putting the realm of Scotland in
dangier, and should have kept in those words which so many times they have
rehearsed and publisshed: which are that the one of these two religions must of
necessity be banished out of the realm of France, and that the one part must
needs give place to the other. These words are not sitting to be spoken of a
subject or servant. These are the words of a king, being in his full age and
authority, who has be^ advised not only by his ordinaries counsel, but also
by the wisest of yt three estates of this realm. For in such a matter wherein
comes in question the diminishing of the force of a king and of the half (I
speak of the least) of his nobilite and of the people which is able to serve,
we must not go so generally and roundly to work, as well because there is no
king which feleth not as sensibly such a loss, as if a man cut away the half
of his limbs from his own body, as also consideringe the danger which
should ensue (at the least at this present time) where as our king by reason
of his tender age rules only according to the opinion and affection of an
other man) that this half saying it self persecuted did not instede of
departure and giving place, take courage and drive out the other. And as
concerning the estate of the Romish relygion, they which go about by force of
arms to plant the same only in this realm, put it in danger of dimynishing
every day more and more, in that they to^mytte it unto the force and defense of
arms. And it had been far better to have kept the one and the other in peace
and union, and not to have disputed of these matters any other wise but with
paper and parchme^t and not with ma^slaughter and effusio^ of blud, which
(peradventure) has provoked the anger of god and called upon his vengeance in
such sort, that the priests and the other of their order (who might have
lived quietly in their charges and enidyed their goods) shall be the first
which shall sustain the danger of the folly, and (that which is worse) of
the rage of the people. And what so ever come to pass hereof, the protection
of these gentilmen the peticioners can not but bring unto them a certain loss
and the danger of an huge ruin. For seeing they were once assured that they
should not be troubled or molested in their living, in their charges, nor in
their goods: they could not say that they had any occasion at all to
complain, except they will take upon them that they were moved with
compasshion for the loss of our souls. But how is it come to pass that they
are lately become so careful, where as there is neither bishop nor curet
emongst them who can prove that he has heretofore regarded them any thing at
all.

Seeing therefore that it was of our part determined that no man should in
anyewise trouble the^, what neded you to name them in this quarrel and to cover
your selves with the name of them and of the church of Rome? Is not this the
way to provoke and kindle the one part against the other? Is not this the way
to make this order odiouse to the whole people which already is to much
offended with it? Is not this the way to kyndle (if god do not set to his
helping hand) emongst them which lived in peace, the like furyouse hate unto
that which was in Scotland. And what so ever chance thereof saying it is so
that one of the two parts must needs be banished and that the petycioners will
have it so, there never chanced in this realm so piteous^ a spectacle as that
is like to be. Is there any profit in the world, is there any commodity, is
there any power (yea and if it were for the king him self) that ought to be
bought so dear and with such a ruin and desolation? What pardones, what in
dulgences, what bulls of the pope can ever recompense the loss of the blood
which shall be shed for this quarrel? These three peticioners may say unto the
king sometime hereafter that in the defense of that which no man did assault
in maintenance of the religion of Rome (which no man troubled nor let) they
have caused him or would have caused him to lose the half of his nobility and
of the best of his majesty's subjects. A man may and that according to the
truth lay to their charge that even as with their feigned and false opinions
they put the realm of Scotland in danger of an evident ruin, and were
causers of a great and piteouse effusion of blood, so with the same opynyons,
the same purpose, the same mynysters theye have cast the apple of discord
amidde this realm, and so have instigate one against an other that these three
peticioners and their ministers shall be noted to posterity as the only
authors of all the harms and inconveniences which shall chance both to those
that be of the reformed church and also of the church of Rome.

Moreover least they should fail to cause troubles enough, they require that
all officers, whether they be of householde, of ordinance, of judgment, of
finaunces, and others having administration or commission, and likewise
prelates of the church shall make confession of their faith. And they which
delay or refuse the same, shall be deprived of their estates and pensions, and
the men of the church of their benefyces. These be three private persons,
which make a law contrary to the laws of this realm. For it has never ben
either seen or understood that the kings heretofore have at any time
constrained their subjects to make other confession of their Faith eccept
only their ordinarye belief or Credo. This law is contrary to the laws of
the church, I under stand of the church as they do that is taken of the
general counsels and of those ancient fath^rs which they allow.

Wherefore he who endyted their request, who is of so great knowledge should have
brought some example therewith to have cloked his wicked purpose, the which
in deed he can not do except he bring into this realm the inquisicio^ of
Spain. The which was judged so unjust of al other nations that not one
amongst them all would use or accept it. And if I shall say the truth this
law is the trappe which they had set at Orleans sumwhat before the death
of king Frauncis lately deceassed, the which can tend to no other but to the
ruin and utter subversion of all the kings subjects. For the foresaid
peticioners do know well that there be ten thousand gentle men and an
hundredth thousand men after them able to bear armoure, which neither for force
nor authority will ever forsake the religion which they have received. Neither
will they suffer that either preachinge administration of the sacraments be
taken from them. And the king being under age as he is there is no man that
has aucthoritye to command them to avoyde the realm, yea they will defend
them selves with the sword against them who in this behalf will abuse the
authority of his majesty. This great and notable company can not be
overcome ne vanquisshed, if it so come to pass (which god forbid) with out
the ruin of these which shall assail them. So that the strangers the which
they have already called (which is treason and an offense worthy of death) shall
bear away the fruict of this civil war. And for a conclusion speakinge as I
do both for my self and for a number of great lords of this realm, and for
ten thousand gentelmen and other of our train who will live and die in this
quarrel. I say that the forsayde decree was made by three private persons who
by their authority have broken them which were made by the king and his
counsel. And because they would execute it before they had by lawful
consultacion approved it they put on armure and took by force the kings
person. I say moreover that the foresaid decre is against the laws of this
realm, yt custom of whole christendo^e against the decre of January, against
the request of the estates, against the quietness and security of the kings
subjects, and against the concience, the honor, the life and goods of an
infynite number of honest people, who have sought to bring some to death, to
drive others out of their contreys under yt cloak and pretense of co^cience and
religion. This decre also is made against the liberty of going to the general
counsel. The which he that gave the^ the advice should have better marked. For
if it be said that in this realm such confession of faith as they require
shall be made with declaracion of maintenance of the doctrine and ceremonies
of the church of Rome, it is a sentence given against them of the reformed
church. wherefore neither our ministers nor the ministers of other nations
must not go to the general counsel, seeing they are condemned before they be
heard. But before that the said duke of Guise and the Cardinal his brother
can set forth this decree of confession they must renounce a number of
artycles of the confession of August which they agreed upon at Sauerne and
promised a great prince of Almaine that they would cause them to be observed
in France. And if they will deny this let them put it in writing and they
shall be answered by them unto whom they made the promise. The said Cardinal
must also put in writing that it may be sen and publisshed whether he remain
in the same mind the which he ones hertofore declared unto the queen in the
presence of a great sort of honest^ men touching the articles of
transubstanciacion, of the keeping and bearing of the holy sacrament of
Justification, of the innocation of Saints, of purgatory, of Images, of al
which articles he spoke contrary to the opinion of his catholic, apostolic
Romish Church.

In the request not much after this is made mention of the breaking of
Images. And request is made by them that presented it that the damages
should be recompensed and the offenders punished. Where unto I will answer
this word that the bloudde of them who breoke the foresaid Images the which
was shed by the hands of certain of our retinue who would have stayed
them and sith by authority of justice in the same place of Orleans, will bear
witness evermore before god and before men, how greatly such executions done
by the ignoraunte people always myslyked me for many respects, and specially
because the same was contrary to the decree of January, and also to an
assosiatio^ which we had caused be published a few days before. But if the
breaking of Images deserne any restitution and punishemente (because it is
done contrary to the kings ordinance) what punishment look they for who
garnyshe them selves so well with the name of the king: for the murders the
which partly by the^ selves, and partly by their example and motion have been
committed at Uassy, at Sens, at Castesna de Arry, and at Angiers. In which
places it is well known that betwixt men and women there have been slain
above. v. hundredth persons for none other occasion but for religion. He who
made the request should have examyned his own conscience and have acknowledged
that it is not found yt the dead image did ever cry vengeance but the blood
of man (which is the lively image of god) requires it in heaven, and as it
were pullith and causith it to come at yt length although it be for a time let
pass.

Than the peticioners or (that I may speak more truly) the commanders
require that their armure shall be taken from them who have borne the same
without the express commandment of the king of Navarre, and that they
which have worn armure in that manner be declared rebels and enemies to the
king and realm. Now would I ask of these lords who say they are so wise and
so great friends of the common wealth. If their request tend not to take a
way all hope of agreement, Seeing they require that I and they which be with
me be declared rebels and ennemies to the king and realm. For they say not
that they which will not leave of their armoure, but that they which be in that
sort armed, shall be declared rebels. Which is an article that deserves an
other manner of answer than by writing, wherefore I trust within few days to
go and meet with them, and dispute with them with the sword whether it be
meet that an outelandishe manne with a couple of mean mates such as they are
to pronounce a prince of the bloudde royal and the two parts of the nobilitye
of this realm rebels and enemies to the king. Neither behooves it them to
use the name and authority of the king of Navarre, to whom they have been
continually deadly ennemies even from the time of other kings. They have thrust
him back and kept him behind so much as possibly they might, yea in so
much that they would not make mention of him ne of his rightes at such time as
question has been as concerning the conclusion of a treaty of peace. They
cannot say that he ever obtained at their hand any thing which he required,
whether it were for him self or for an other. They can not say but that when
soever occasion served they put him beside the place which of duty he ought
to have commanded were it in time of war or peace. And for to make up the
matter, in the time of king Frauncis last deceassed they made as little count
of him as if he had been the poorest gentilman in this realm, and since they
caused him by threatenings to come unto them, they caused that no man durst be
so bold as to go out of Orleans to mete him. They forbed all knights of the
order and other gentilmen to vysite him or communycate with him in any wise.
They sent a marshall of France with a band of horsemen and sore men to sease
upon his whole lands, and called in strangers to the spoil of the same as it
is well known to all the world. And seeing their enterprise broken by the death
of the foresaid late king Frau^cis it is welknowen what counselles they held to
be faite him all together.

They continually so withstode him that he never could have authority to
command The foresaid prince of Guise by the counsel of the Constable, said
now a year ago that he would not depart from the court neither at the
request nor comman^demente of the king of Navarre. The marshal of S. Andre
said unto him in full counsel. I will obey the king and the queen and none
other. And now they will use his name for their profit. Whom in times paste
they have so naughtely entreated. And they intend to use the authority of his
name, thereby to destroy his own brother. And where as the foresaid lord king
of Navarre was so well loved (as ever he was) they seek means to make him
hated of the most part of the nobility and people hoping that if they can
wholly put him out of conceyte with them who have so long and faithfully loved
him, the^ they may well enough set him at naught and handle him at their
pleasure as they have done in times past: but the deceit whereby they thought
to come to their purpose is disclosed and well known and shall shortly be set
forth and published throughoute all christendom, to the shame and confusion of
such as have been the mynysters thereof.

As touching their request that the king of Navarre may assemble force to put
in execution the things before rehearsed, they therein show evidently either
great folly or a great desire that we never come toany agremente. For seeing
they have determined to constrayne by force of arms them of the reformed
religion, to do that which they require they should not have told us so
before we had laid apart our arms. For saying they have so plainly given us
to understand their purpose we will take heed that we be not deceived and will
not lay of our harness (but with very good tokens.)

Theye require also that certain other articles which shall be given by the
court of parleament of Paris may be received, wherein they declare the littel
regard that they have to the queen and king of Navarre and the kings
counsel. And I marvel greatly that at the least they had no respect to the
six great wise personages which they placed in the counsel, at whose hands I
doubt not but a man might easelye receive good and notable advertisement. And I
doubt not at all but that in the said parlemente there be many good men, who
in virtue and knowledge, represent the ancient integrity of the Senate.
Howebeit the three peticioners have taken so good order therein that partly by
benefices, partly by offices some sold and some half given and by other
unlawful means, and not to be suffered in this realm, they have made such a
number of friends, that the good me^ be many times ouerlaide by the badde. And
concerning this matter it shall be sufficient to all edge that the legation has been twice refused, following the edicte made and confirmed at the request of
the states, published and proclaimed in all the courts of this realm. And
(that which is more) their refusal was grounded upon their consciences and
the conscience of the king. And yet without loking for any other commandment
but of a simple letter of the seal they have received and approved it through
the solicitation and practices of these. iii. and their ministers. Loo what
hope we have that we shall there find good advise and counsel.

By a remembrance presented with their request they desire that the towns
may be rendered into the kings hands with new oath of fidelitye. And they
would gladlye (as they did in the time of king Frauncis lately deceassed)
persuade the world that al they which will not endure their tirannie are the
kings enemies. It might suffice the duke of Guise and his brethern that they
have ones already had the use of this craftye inuencion, to the great
displeasure of a number of honest^ men. Whereas to defend them selves against
such as ought them evil will they covered their private quarrel with the
kings. If any manne were either by private or public injury susspected
only to have spoken evil of any of them, he was straight way emprisoned,
persecuted, and by letters patentes declared ennemie to the king and to the
estate. And because this goodlye inuencion of theirs has once had good
success (wherewith they had brought to pass greater matters if god had not
put to his helpinge hand) they would now return again to the same and
although there be at this day no man within this realm (at the least
amongst the^ which be of our side) which is not ready to endaunger his life
and goods in the service of the king, yet for all that they call us rebels.
There is no man of our part (as god is our witness who would not with all
his heart hazard his life) to save and preserve his majesty from harm or
danger, whom we love derely and honor as a singular and preciouse gift
which god has given us. There is none amongst us which has taken arms to
ask any thing at all at the kings hand ne at the queene^ his mother, ne
yet at the kings of Navarre. We require to have none other king ne other
prince but him who is our natural lord. We desire not to have the custody
of his person, neither any authority of rule and governance. We require
not the diminishing or releasinge of any taxes, subsides or other right
appertayninge unto him, but contra(...)wise our men have never murniured what
but then so ever have been laid upon them. And they have offered and presently
offer, that they will with all their heart agree unto all that it shall please
him to require, so far as their goods and lands will stretche. The towns
which are named to be rebelliouse, have not changed their master ne lord,
but acknowledge more gladly than ever heretofore the obedience which they
ought unto our king. And who so shall se the Answer which they have made,
shall easily perceive that their arms were not taken in hand against the king.
They shall perceive that we have not required any thing which concerns the
person aucthority the governance or life of his maiestee. They shall perceive
that our arms are borne against the house of Guise, the Coustable and
Marshall S. Andre. And that done with such modesty that we seek not their
goods their lives nor their estates. Wherefore he that will say that we bear
arms against the king (as they would make men believe) must needs confess
that he is a slaunderour, or rather that he is willinge to help them
forward to usurp this realm, and to take upon them the name and doings of
the king. And those that shall counsel the king to receive their protection,
to grant unto them the use of his name and authority, to lend them men and
money against us as though we made war against his majesty: such
counselors I say (chance when it will) shall one day be called to judgment
where they must declare how they could join the quarrel of three private
persons with the quarrel of his Majesty and of the whole realm. They must
also make accomptes of the money which shall be spent in this war, against the
decree of the estates and of the kings counsel, to defend that which pleases
these three private persons: for it is none other but their pleasure, that is
to say, to be at the court or at home at their houses. And if such
counsaylours have goods wherewith to make answer. I trust that at the
endethe war shall be made upon their charges and the charges of such as be
principal authors thereof. Upon whose goods I hope to take so much as shall be
spent and to restore the same unto the kings treasure to the comfort of the
people.

For thend and conclusion of their request they protest that if that which they
desire be fully executed, they are ready to withdraw them selves home to their
houses. Yea (if need be) to go to the worlds end. So that we now understand
when we may trust that they will withdraw them selves. Than (say they) when the
things beforesaid shall be done, accomplished, and executed. That is to say,
when the decree of January shall by their authority be broken, when by their
ordynances all the ministers shall be banysshed, when they which be of the
reformed religion shall not be suffered to hear any sermon, nor to receive the
sacrament but of them of the church of Rome. When all that be of the foresaid
religion shall be deprived of their estates, of their charges, of their offices,
and moreover spoiled and sent home to their houses in open danger of the rage
of them who will devour them, and cause them to lose their life with their
liberty if they incur any offense. Interpreting offense (as they have in
times past done) not to come to the mass, the assembly of neighbors together
to make their prayers to god. Lo this is it that they call an offense. When we
shall be proclaimed rebels and ennemies to the king and realm, because we
have borne armoure and when they have taken away the same from us, and that no
man may bear it but in the execution of their determinations. Loo these be
the conditions which we may look for at these noble men's hands. Lo this is
the most honest purpose that they pretend. But they are wiser the^ to declare
to what pas they purpose after ward to attain. Now let my request be
reported and set in comparison against theirs. I require the maintenance of the
decree of January, and they will by their authority break it and disanull it.
They require the decay and ruin of an infinite number of houses, as well of
the nobylitie as of the third estate. I require and desire that all the kings
subjects of what sort so ever they be, may be mainteyned and kept in their
estate and goods, and defended from all injury and violence. They purpose to
banishe all them that be of the reformed religion: And I desire that we may be
reserved til the time that the king be come to full age, at what time we will be
ready to obey all that it shall please him to command us: and in the mean
season that they which be of the Romish church be not troubled, molested, ne
hindered, neither their goods, nor in the exercise of their charges. They
require an army, wherewith to execut that which they have taken in hand, and
consider not that they shall constrain an infinite number of good men to defend
them selves. They consider not the lack of expenses: neither the incommodities
and ruins which civil war brings with it. And (that which is the worst
of all) they have sent for and have agreed together to cause foreign soldiers
to come into the country, which is to say in plain language, to give this
realm in pray unto forayners. On the contrary part I require not to have men
of war remain with me. I spend not the kings money, I call not strangers
into my country: but have refused to receive such as were offered me, as god
is my witness. I prayed them that they should not come, and that they would let
others to comme either with me or against me. And I require (as I have done
ever heretofore) that we may put away our arms as well on the one part as the
other, being assured that on our part there shall neither be rebellion ne
disobedience, and that on our behalf arms shall never be of such force and
efficacy as the love, the fidelity, the obedience which we ought unto our
king, for whose sake we will never stick to hasarde our lives and goods. And
we have given to under stand that we are not Ideotes, as it was reported, and
that we are more hable to do him service in his need than they who would
banysshe us, with all their train and practices. They require that we may be
proclaimed rebels, they require our lives, our honors and consciences. We
require nothing at al parteyning to their lives, to their honors, to their
goods, nor to their consciences: neither do we wyshe the^ any more harm than
that which we will bind our selves unto, which is that they and we withdraw
our selves home to our houses, following wholly the conditions which are written
at large in our declaration and protestations made heretofore, and sent to the
king and queen. And they can not say that their honor is therein any thing
touched at all. For saying we also accept the same conditions, there remains
no place for them to complain or discontent them selves. Our request is just,
for so much as they came to their king (as has been often reheried) otherwise
than according to their duty, and with such purposes as have been the causes
of the troubles which we presently se. And they have required and sought the
undoing of so many good men, that notwithstanding our request were not upon
so good a ground as we suppose it is, yet ought we rather to displease. v. or
vi. (for so many they be) than offend the two parts of the whole realm. And
they which be of the like sort and force as be they them selves, who would
banishe the^ acknowledge and confess this day that there is no way to assault
the^, much less to overcome them, without the aid of forraines and
strangers.

And although there be no like comparison of the on request unto the other,
for so much as the one is full of justice and equity, the other of injustice,
tyranny and cruelty. And that they who present the blouddy and violent
request, mean for their pleasure and to bring their purposes to pass to
trouble this royalme: The other require nothing else but a common rest and
quietness, and have not taken arms but upon constraynt and for to defend their
lives, their honors and their consciences. The queen may judge which of yt
two requests ought to be received or denied. And whereas presently either
because she is not at lybertye (as she is not in deed at this time) or for
some other consideration she can not give judgment hereof, neither would
displease them who have presented the^. May it please her majesty, that these
troubles may the rather be brought to an end, to cause the foresaid two
requests to be registered in the court of parlemente at Paris. That the decree
of January be mayntayned and kept, and that the one part and the other lay
away their arms and withdraw them selves to their howses till the king be
come to full age, that he may judge who has done well and who evil. Orelles
that the queens majesty will give judgment herein with the advice of the
estates which shall for this intent be caulled together. This remedy is common
to us all, and no man shall have occasion to complain or disconte^t him self
therewith. And may so easily and readely be executed that he who will not agree
thereunto, cannot deny but that he is ennemie unto the king and realm. And it
is not to be judged that there is any man in the world (if he be not carried
away^ with some pryuate affectyon) but he will condemn all them that might
and would not slake this fire and flame which threateneth us so many euilles
and inconvenience. Moreover every man may judge who is the rebel and enemy to
the king, whether he that offerethe to leave his arms and to withdraw himself
to his house, or he that will rather lose all then to let go the pray which
he has of the kings person. And for so much as in all civil war none other
end can be looked for, but such as is full of all misery and calamity, and that
it is a hard matter to stape the hands and affections of Soldiers being
provoked against them who would become tirannes over them. I protest before god
and before al men, that I am greatly sorry and agreued to take arms and to
lead them who bear the same. And that I would with my blood if I could take
away the miserable effects wherewyth the war threateneth us. But sith my
request is not regarded, sith mine ennemies will be my judges and command
now adays under the name and authority of the king. I protest that my
purpose tends to none other end but to set the king at such liberty as he
was in now six months passed, to restore the gouermente to the queens
hands with the assistence of the king of Navarre as was concluded by the
estates. And to keep and preserve the nobility and people from all tyranny
and oppression of such as be not called to rule and command them. And that
of this whole enterprise I look not for nor will look for (but had rather die)
any private profit, neither any purpose that tends to couetousenesse and
ambition.

But I will refer all my doings and the grace which god will give me, unto
the honor of god, to the service of the king, and to the quietness and
comfort of all his subjects.

Ended at Orleans the. 19. of May. 1562. thus subscribed. Lois d' Bourbon.

