FAVLTES ESCAPED IN THE first Book.
Page 2. lin. 37. Wily. 15. 11. vainelie. 62. 21. renforce. 64. 35. come. 65.
8. the. 82. 8. runs forth almost into over great. 90. in the marg. ad
illumin. 91. 4. soon. 103. 28. immortal. 111. 16. litterallie. 118. 13.
textes. 33. as expreslie. 124. 33. left. 126. 13. one of other. 130. 24.
Spanianum. 156. 32. without confusion. 169. 26. brandes. 177. 29. which with.
184. 15. learned. 186. 5. contra. 206. 37. put out, that. 212. 8. hic. 29. fiat
hoc. 215. 22. (...). 228. 1. is. 237. 28. some. 239. 17. have. 240. 30. a
thought, and yet raueth. 256. 8. dare not. 274. 21. greatest fault. 279. 31.
Pacianus. 280. 10. quotations. 282 5. remains. 299. read the 9. line before
the 8. 309. 22 Ioh. 1. 321. 18. He faith 324. 23. (...) 333. 8. de genesis ad Lit.
336. 17. de Sp. S. 30. it is. 36. not whatsoever. 337. 36. suppose. 351. 3.
ever. 352. in the marg. cont. 3. in margin. 353. 37. is the.

FAVLTES ESCAPED IN THE second book.
Pa. 4. l. 2. to. 7. 19. disorder. 22. 9. ever. 41. 12. to God. and 13. put
out, to. 44. 33. to the. 49. 34. in the marg. put out, Allen. and. 37. where.
103. 16. For. 114 8. Matthie. 115. 1. thisplace. 128. 23. the. 138. 2. expound.
158. 6. grounded. 173. 30. at hand. 177. 24. strong ones. 184. 2. by himself,
or by his saints, and therefore remission ofsinnes by himself. 186. 15. said.
201. 35. of mutual offense. 212. 5. but from. 222. 1. as (...) 35. eordes.
251. 36 Christ's. 311. 2. demurre. 314. 3. that. (...) ters. 17. Monks. 324.
28. delegaui. 325. 33. put out, (...). 334. 14. both. 341. 1. half. 35.
deemed. 342. 26. no (...) 345. 13. consortatiues. 346. 33. false. 350. 29. to
the. 366. 27. (...) 30. I. 369 28. prostant. 398. 15. money. 483. 30. put out,
not. 521. 34 the marg 1. Ioh. 5. 529 2. and figures. In the answer to Prarine
p. put out the note in the marg.

TO THE READER.
AGainst this Popish and traiterous defense of the proud Censures, given upon
Master Charkes and M. Hanmers books, there has been already set forth an
answer, containing a maintenance of the creditte of those excellent
Ministers, and Elders of Gods Church, which this malicious slaunderer has
sought to deface (for stay of the simple reader) till Master Charkes book
come forth. There has also been printed and set forth by Doctor Fulke a brief
confutation of sundry cauills and quarrel uttered by diverse Papists against
his writings, and specially by this Censurer in this his book of defense,
whereby some part of his dishonest dealing is displayed, to the discredit of
this defender, and to the shame of all Papists. Nevertheless, understanding
that Master Charke is not minded (...) set forth his answer, (although he have
it (...) written) before this defender has (...) his wholl book, as he
promises; I have thought it not amiss, to write a short treatis for the
(...) (...) the matters of doctrine especially which are in controversy
between M. Charke and the Censurer, either omitting, or but breiflie touching
the points handled more at large in the two (...) books. Neither do I think M.
Charkes staying to be misliked, for diverse causes: First, to avoid confusion,
which might ensue, if the defender should replic upon his answer to the first
part, before the confutation of the second part were finished, and published:
Secondly to avoid misunderstanding: for that diverse points touched in the
first part, may be more at large, and otherwise handled in the latter part,
upon view whereof Master Charke would change his answer. And last of all, lest
replying, and reioyning upon the first part, might be occasion that the latter
part should never be handled. For which reasons, and some other, perhaps
better known unto himself, indifferent readers may gather, that it is
expedient for him to stay, until he see the wholl charge of the adversary,
and then more orderly and seasonablie he may publish his answer altogether.

But now to the purpose taken inhande. Three tall fellows step forth upon this
bulwark of defense: the Corrector of the printe: the setter forth of the
book: and the graunde Captain defender himself.

The Corrector comes forth with his part, to stop a gappe, or empty place
of a page, with the real (...) of a nowne Heretic: and that presuming (as he
(...)) without the authors knowledge: to wise a man belike to be made privy of
such gramaticall trifles. But whereas he weeneth that by reading his authors
treatise, a man shall see the most points verified in Master Charke and his
companions, he is foully beguiled. For there is no wise man, but sees all the
points of his newly devised declension thoroughly verified in his author and
his Accomplices: who has showed himself to be, not in one, but in all cases, a
proud maleperte Liar, and an obstinate seditious Atheist: (...) hereunto an
impudent heretic, and a malicious traitor. And if any man be so simple, that
he cannot yet perfectly be hold all these points in his own treatise, yet
in the answers, and confutations thereof, he that will not acknowledge them to
be verified in him, is like to prove a nowne of the same declension with him.
Thus the Owlie Corrector having shot his bolte out of the bulwark, which by
evil hap of a contrary wind is carried back against him self, and his own
friends, retireth into a corner, and does no more appear, saving that some
notes of his negligence, here and there bewraying him, do declare that this was
not the first time that he was ouerseene in his life, and that he should have
done his Master better seruise, if he had employed the time he spent in
devising this grammatication, in being occupied more diligently about his
office of Correction.

The setter forth of this book has the next place, who writing an epistle to
Master Charke, minister, as he terms him, and as he is indeed, of the Church
of god in England, under color of expostulation of some particular matters,
concerning the person of M. Charke takes occasion to be a setter forth, not
only of a seditious and slanderous book against the Church, but also of
most spiteful accusations against the prince, and Magistrates of the realm:
a sin the particular view of this epistle shall most manifestly appear.

First therefore he excuses the long delaie of setting forth this defense of
the Censure, which has been deferred more months, then the Censure was days
in writing, upon such cause as is easy to judge, and specially to Master
Charke, which for the most part is privy to the same. The meaning is, that
the author is so quick a dispatcher of his matters, partly by means of the
weakness of our cause, partly by singular dexterity of his own wit and
learning, that having finished his Censure in eight or nine days space at the
most, he could also in like proportionable time have accomplished his
defense, if he had not by the cause pretended, been stayed or interrupted. And
here the author is much beholding to the setter forth, that does so cunningly
commend his faculty in expedition of such writings: which in a Papist must
needs be an argument of great and wonderful promptnes, both of wit and
learning, though in a protestant it be gyrded at by the author himself, with
a scorneful reproach of rashness and ignorance. But what is the cause, trow ye,
that has stopped the force of these flowing streams of the authors eloquent
style, that in so many months he has not fullfilled that course, which
without impediment he had been able to have dispatched almost in as few
days. Every one (says he) may imagine how difficult a thing it is in
England, for a catholic man, to write any book: where neither liberty, nor
rest, nor library, nor conference, nor being is permitted. But I pray you sir
(if I may be so bold to ask you) what greater liberty, rest, lybrarie,
conference, or being, had your Catholic author in contriuing his Censure,
which he wanted in writing his defense? Or rather what cause had he to
complain of the difficulty of the times, which with such faculty, in so
short a time, could perform so great and weighty a piece of work, as by
his own judgment (who you know is nothing partial in his own cause) deserved
to be called by the honorable name of a Censure? unless perhaps you think, that
either the Prince, her Council, or the Clergy of the realm, should have
invited him to write against the religion of God, and the state of the realm,
with promis of liberty, rest, library, and all other things, the lack
whereof you pretend to have hindered him.

And yet whatsoever you say in general, you confess in particular, that all
difficulties notwithstanding, the author had, soon after M. Charkes reply to
his Censure, in great part dispatched his defense ready for the printe, but
that by misaduenture your seditious printe was discovered, and taken with many
things printed, or in printing, concerning your defense of truth and equity,
against his falshoode, and violent oppressions. That you speak against M.
Charkes falshoode, it is lawful for you to renew, if you can discover any
committed by him. As for his violent oppressions, being a man of noe power or
authority out of the Church, al may know how vainly you charge him, or rather
how lewdlie in speaking to him, you speak of the lawful proceedings of the
Prince, and all her magistrates, against Popish traitors, terming them no
bettet then violent oppressions, when God knows, you have but in a few yet
tasted of most just condemnations, and executions. Oflike stomach and style it
is, that you say, the same print was so long sought, and much feared by him. By
like he thought that your printe being taken, you had noe mean to publish your
authors defense against him: as though you have not printers enough in places
beyond the sea. How dangerous an unknown printe within the land may be to
the state, if it be abused by seditious persons, no man of mean understanding
can be ignorant: and therefore meruell not if the magistrates have been
careful, to search for it, and diligently to suppress it being found.

But of this disturbance (as you tell us) had like to have come a great loss:
for the author had almost given over his enterprise of defense, not only upon
these difficulties alleged, but also because Master Charkes reply did seem
sufficiently to answer it self. A pitiful case, but how did the reply
answer it self so sufficiently? He tells us, it was so obscure in many
places, as most men without the Censure might not understand it. Admit it
were so: is the obscurity of a reply, a sufficient answer to it self? but
why might not he that could not understand it, have recourse to the Censure,
whereunto his reply had relation? Then he answers for a second reason: It
was so weak otherwise, as it needed little confutation of others. This will
best appear by the authors doughtie defense, when both are compared, and
examined together. A third reason. Campian the subject of the Censure, being
fallen into Master Charkes hands, it was looked for, that according to reason,
and all his promises, he should be disputed withal openly, publikelie, and
freely: and so the matter without writing dispatched. No man is so simple, but
he may well perceive, that while the words are directed to Master Charke, they
are meant against the Prince and state. For who can truly say, that Master
Charke had Campian in his hands? or that he had made promis, of open, public,
and free disputation, who knew full well that he was not able to perform such
promis if Campian had been taken? or that any man of our profession, made any
one such promis? what means then our setter forth, by these his words, and
all your own promises, but thorough fayning of many promises, to slander us
of many breaches of faith and much falshoode. This is, in Popery and Knauerie,
a common practice, to charge men with a promise where none was, that they may
overcome modesty with impudency; or at left to make her blush, being
unjustly accused of unfaithfulness.

But you will say, it was according to reason, that Campian should have been
so disputed withal, if there had been no promise at all. Great reason
forsooth, that a well known, vain, light, runnagate person, challengeing all
the grave, wise, and learned of the land to disputation, should so greatly be
regarded, that his challenge should be taken. Nay that an arrant traitor,
furnished with faculties from the Pope, the Queens open enemy, whose banner
of defiance at the same time was spread within her Majesty's dominions, should
be admitted under color of an open disputation, to stir up the unconstant
people to tumult and sedition: as though the religion so long by law
established, were now brought into doubt, and disceptation. Finally, it was
small reason in wise men's judgment, that such a lusty Champion as did first
cast his glove of defiance out of a secret corner, after he has been long
sought for, and is at length drawn out of the bench holl, should be set on
the open stage to answer his challenge against al comers, with no small glory
of his fool hardy attempt, though he loose the day, and be vanquished in the
cause. Never the less it pleased them that had authority, partly to
repress the insolency of the proud peevish challenger, and his foolish
fautors, that made no small accounte of such a glorious Thraso, pattelie to
satisfy the weak minds of such, as might surmize of his bragges, otherwise
then they deserved, there was a conference or disputation granted, wherein
although Campians learning was well known before, to all them that knew his
bringing up and studies, yet was it then thoroughly discovered to many others,
which conceived better of him before, then at that time showed manefestlie to
be in him. For besides his shameful ignorance in the learned tongues, which
he sought most rediculoussie to cover and hide, there appeared in him to all
indifferent men's judgments, no more then is written of Catiline the Roman,
whom he followed as well in practice, as he resembled him in qualities,
Loquentiae multum, sapientiae parum, many words, little wisdom, impudent
loquacity, small learning, and less judgment.

But when it came to the hearing of the world (says the setter forth) how
courteously you had used this learned man with torments. The world here
signifies, the secretrable of traiterous papists, which give themselves to no
thing more then either to hear or invent, most impudent lies against religion,
and al mainteyners and professors of the same. For to omit the common phrase
of this epistle, wherewith all things that are done against the papists, are
imputed to M. Charke, whom al reasonable men know to be one of the most, that
may do lest in these cases: who is so far from all sense or understanding
(if he know what racking means) to believe that Campian endured such torments
of racking: whereof no sign could appear in any part of his body, either
before the conference, or after, whereby he should be less hable to dispute,
as may be proved by many hundred witnesses: yet the glorious fool, partly to
boast of his sufferings, partly to excuse his impatience, and pusillanimity,
which for fear rather then feeling of the rack, had discovered many of his
friends and accomplices, with his own hand writting, immediately after his
racking, was not ashamed on the day of the first conference, to complain of
his grievous torments, until by testimony of Master Lieuetenant of the Tower,
and others that were present, his impudency was so restrained for that time,
that he thought it not best to brag any more of his intolerable racking. But
in the conference (say you) he was handled without all indifferency or law of
reasoning. How so, I pray you? The questiones were taken out of his own
book, in which he could not bevnprouided: he had as great warning of them, as
any of his adversaries: he required no book to furnish his memory, but it was
provided for him: the opponents for the most part, dealt with him in lawful
syllogismes, except when his own lavish tongue, discoursing against the law
of reasoning, enforced other manner of communication: he was neither threatened,
nor reviled, though he gave great occasion by his insolent speech and gesture.
He was pressed with no authority, but the book was showed him: and what other
indifferency or law of reasoning would you require?

But it is no marvel though you dare be bold to quarrel at his handling in
the conference, when you are not ashamed to speak so impudently of his open
trial and condemnation, saying: Finally you made him away by cruel death,
without any show or shadow of particu lar crime committed by him, against
Prince or country. This were more then barbarous immanitie, if it were true:
but being false, what is it, but a most heinous, and sedi tious slander,
whether you consider the matter, or the persons against whom it is uttered?
Let us begin with the persons. Who made Campian away? not M. Charke, I am sure:
for all men would laugh at you, if you so should say: for immediately after,
you distinguish him from that action, saying, and that your self Master Charke
followed him in person: Then who can be understood to have made him away by
cruel death, but they by whose authority, in whose high Court, by whose
order, he was brought to trial: by whom evidence, verdite and sentence was
given, and execution commanded? Now let us weigh the matter: was he not in
dighted, and arraigned, found guilty, atteinted, and judge ed, according to the
ordinary and accustomable manner always used in the case of hie rreason,
according to the laws of the realm? had he not leave to answer for him
self, to challenge the Jury, or to use any other plea, that is permitted and
allowed in such cases? was there noe show or shadow of particular crime
contained in the indictment, or in the evidence? The world knows it must
needs be, and the records are yet to be seen. But there was nothing proved,
perhaps you will say, though much was alleged against him: he was slaundered
by them that gave evidence against him, he never did bear a traiterous or
undutiful mind against the Prince, or the state. Well, admit for Campians
sake, that the credit of sworn witnesses, and the wholl process of so
honorable a state, as is of this land, must stand in suspense, and not prove
so much as any show or shadow of treason committed by him: yet what shall his
own confession subscribed with his hand testify, concerning his treasonable
affection against her Majesty? shall it not confirm the testimony of such as
gave evidence against him, and prove him most manifestly to be guilty of
high treason? his own confession taken the first of August, 1581. subscribed
with his hand, remains to be seen: in which, after certain most traiterous
sentences were showed him out of the books of Saunders and Bristow, concerning
the Bull of Pope Pius, by which he took upon him, by his Antichristian
sentence, to deprive her Majesty of her regalitie, and to discharge her
subjects of all obedience, and duty toward her highness: it follows in
these words: Edmund Campian being demanded, whether he would acknowledge the
publishing of these things before recited, by Saunders, Bristow, and Allen, to
be wicked in the wholl, or in any part, and whether he does at this present,
acknowledge her Majesty to be a true and lawful Queen, or a pretensed Queen,
and deprived, and in possession of her Crown only de facto: he answers, To
the first, that he medleth neither to nor fro, and will not further answer,
but requires that they may answer. To the second he says, that this question
depends upon the fact of Pius Quintus, whereof he is not to judge, and
therefore refuses further to answer.

Edmund Campian.

Answered and subscribed in the presence of Owin Hopton. John Hammonde. Robert
Beale. Thomas Norton.


Here except you will say, that it is no treason in a natural borne subject of
this land, though he refuse to acknowledge the Queens Majesty to be a true
and lawful Queen, and in possession of her Crown de Iure: and though he will
not in one word disalow them that speak, write, and practice against her
right, her Crown, and dignity, and seek by all means they can, to depose
and disposesse her of the same, there was never traitor more clearlie
discovered by the testimony of others, then Campian is displayed by his own
confession. I need not here note the faculties granted by the present Pope
Gregory the 13. to Campian, and his fellow traitor Parsons, which were taken
about one of their accomplices immediately after Campians death, in which they
desire of the Pope the explication or meaning of the Bull of Pius Quintus,
given forth against our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth: and yet because they
do most plainly convince him of the same horrible crime, where of he was
condemned, I will here set down the same, as it is testified in the book of
execution of Papists for treason, and not for religion.

Facultates concessae PP. Roberto Personio and Edmundo Campiano pro Anglia,
die. 14. Aprilis, 1580.
PEtatur a summo domino nostro, explicatio Bullae declaratoriae per Pium
Quintum contra Elizabetham, and ei adhaerentes, quam Catholici cupiunt
intelligi hoc modo, vt obliges semper illam and haereticos, Catholicos vero
nullo modo obliget rebus sic siantibus, sed tum demum quando publica eiusdem
Bullae executio fieri poterit. The answer to this and many other faculties by
them required is this, Has praedictas gratias concessit summus Pontifex patri
Roberto Personio and Edmundo Campiano in Angliam profecturis die. 14. Aprilis,
1580. praesente patre Oliuerio Manarco assistente.

Which is thus much in English.

Faculties to the two fathers Robert Persons and Edmund Campian for England,
the. 14. day of April. 1580.
LEt it be desired of our most holy Lord the explication of the Bull
declaratory made by Pius the fifth, against Elizabeth, and such as do adhere
unto her: which Bull the Catholics desire to be understood in this manner,
that the same Bull shall always bind her, and the heretics: but the
Catholics, it shall by noe means bind, as matters do now stand: but
hereafter when public execution of that Bull may be made. The highest Pontiff
or Pope granted these fore said graces to father Robert Persons and Edmund
Campian, who are now to take their iourneyes into England, the 14. day of
April. 1580. Being present the father Oliuerius Manarcus assistant.

These things known, and considered, it is evident that none, but as honest a
man as Campian, could write that Campian was made away by cruel death, without
any show or shadow of particular crime, committed by him against Prince, or
country: or that Campian suffering for such horrible treason, is a Martyr of
Christ: or that he and his fellows died most constant, pure, and innocent
martyrs of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ. But for that Master Charke in
person followed Campian to his execution, as a conqueror of his adversary,
with big looks, stern countenance, proud words, and merciles behavior,
the author of the Censure was moved to resume his answer, as well for the
honor of Christ's martyr, as for declaration of what value he is in reason,
learning, and weight of argument by writing, which is so feirce and violent
upon Gods saints in death, and torments, so pompous in gate and speech unto the
people, etc. Here are many grievous accusations, but no proof at all, but the
common report, and that of traiterous Papists: for no honest man will charge
Master Charke with these crimes. If he followed Campian, it was not to insulte
upon his misery, but to exhort him to repentance. What big looks or stearne
countenance he could put on in that time and case, I cannot conceive. I hope
all men that know his face, will testify, that he looked then no otherwise,
then he does at all times, except commiseration of the damnable state of those
obstinate traitors and heretics, did cause some tokens of heaviness to appear
in his countenance. What his proud words and merciless behavior was, in
what point he showed him self so feirce and violent upon those traiterous
heretics, in death and torments, when you can declare, but in three words,
you shall receive an answer. In the mean time you may not think that with
any reasonable man it is sufficient for you to accuse him of pride in words,
and cruelty in behavior, when you bring no example nor proof thereof. And
sure I am, what words of his soever then used, you may wrest to make a show
of pride, you are hable to allege no action, wherein you may declare his
unmercifulness, feircenes or violence. As for his pompous gate and speech, which
you note in the last place, I doubt not but all they which know him, do laugh
to hear you object it to him, as also that you note him afterward, to wear
gorgeous apparel, and therein to have excelled Campian. His value in
reasoning, learning and weight of arguments in writing, what they are, and how
to be esteemed, albeit his friends know already, yet I hope his adversaries
also shall in their conscience acknowledge, especially after the smoke of your
authors cauils be driven away, by the clear light of truth.

As for the disturbance thorough searchers and persecuters, that you complain
of, which caused your author to break of in the midst, is but a shift of
descant. For as your author, whatsoever he be, is still hidden, so in his
hiding place, he may go through, if it please him, or if he be weary of his
enterprise, he may take his ease without controlement. For the extremity of
the time is not such, though you whine never so much, but if he can abstain
from undermining the state, he may enjoy more rest, then an heretic deserves
to have, or then Papists in time and places of their government will afforde
unto true Catholics.

But you (says the setter forth) having gotten the starte before us in the
favor of our Prince, you follow the same with such vehemence and streightnes,
as you allow us no one (...) either of courtesy, or humanity, or of reasonable
indifferency. First mark how manerly he speaks of our princes favor, as a
matter not bestowed by judgment, but gotten by starte of that party that first
steppeth unto her. Secondly, how hyporbolically he describes our vehemence: no
one jot of courtesy, humanitic, reasonable indifferency. Why sir? who are you
with whom we deal so straightly, for whom we make search so diligently, and
punish so extremely? A wholl hundred of Papists and more be daily in our
sight, dwell in their houses, and suffer not so much as the lest ordinary
punishent which is appointed by law for them, which come not to Church. They be
temporal men, you will say. Read the book entitled the execution for
treason, etc. and you shall find a number of your clergy men used with all
courtesy, and humanity, that may be showed to men of a contrary religion. It
remains then, that you are some rebeilious Jesuits, or seminary priests,
which are sent hither by the Pope, and his Antichristian adhaerents, to
alienate the princes subjects minds, yea to steal away their hearts from
obedience of their Lawful Sovereign: that you might by such means prepare a
way the sooner for the public execution of that blasphemous bull of Pius
Quintus. And would you, wandering about with such intents and practices, have
courtesy and gentleness showed you? And yet when you are apprehended, there is
no duty of humanity denied you. You have the due trial of law, and many times
the deserved execution is forborne. Such lenity so lightly regarded, nay so
tragically inueighed against, as most barbarus cruelty, deserves at the hands
of God and man more sharp, and yet but just entertainment.

You exclude us (say you) from speech, conference, writing, printing,
disputing, or any other due trial of our cause. Still you would have your cause
to be religion, when it is high treason. And as for trial due for treason, is
never denied you, before you be condemned for it. As for speech, conference,
writing, printing, disputing for trial of the cause of religion, when you will
permit to be free, in places of popish regiment, you may expostulate with us,
for not allowing you the same in this Christian state of government.

But what extremity soever we use, we are sure (say you) allwaies to be
answered by one means or an other. It may be as you say: but you tell us not
when. For if you speak of answering our books, you scarce give one for ten.
Neither do you so disquiet us by your pretended claim, as you mainely boast,
but we might sleep on both sides, if we had none other business then to confute
your popish treatises. And if you had no greater hope in treasonable practices,
as in your rebellions, both in England, and Ireland, and in your Popes bands
and banners, your Saunders, your Feltons, your Someruils, your Parries, and
such other execrable traitors and treasons, then you have confidence in writing
or reasoning, you would not look to see the rooting out of our faith and
religion, which you term heresy, as you do vainly prognosticat and prophecy.

But our credit (you think) is greatly crushed in our own conceiptes, seeing
we fly openly and without shame all kind of quiet trial what soever, and
with fury only move the magistrate to violence against you. In deed you know
your own cause best, where you have the magistrate obedient at your beck, how
unwilling you are to have any other quiet conference for trial, but
imprisonment, torment, fire, and faggot. And if the same measure were paid you
home again into your lapps, it were no more but good justice, and such as you
shall surely find one day, according to the prophecy of the holy ghost.
Reward Apoc. 18.
her even as she has rewarded you, etc. when God shall put into the heart of
Kings, to hate the Romish whore of Babylon, to eat her flesh, and to burn
her with fire. But as yet, God calling you to repentance, you have no cause to
repine against our severity, much less to condemn us of violence, if you
seek not your own bane, by practicing of treason and sedition. But how do you
openly and without shame, say, that we fly openly and without shame all
kind of quiet trial? What lawful kind of quiet trial has not been offered
to you? Would you have conference? was there not a most solemn conference
agreed upon, in the beginning of her Majesty's reign, where principal men of
both parts have been chosen to confer, and all the states of the realm
assembled in parliament ready to hear? And who did there openly and without
all shame fly the trial? did not the pillars of popery, upon a friuolus
cavil, misliked by their own Fecknam, give over the combat? As for private
confirence, it has been many times offered, and often practiced with such of
your heresy, as be in hold, but of them for the most part misliked or
rejected. Trial by writing of books, has always been, and yet is open and
free, in so much as many of your popish treatises being confuted by us, are
allowed to be inserted into our books, that the indifferent reader may judge
of both more freely and easily: a trial which you papists never yet durst
enter into, and a manifest argument, that you fly the most indifferent kind
of trial. You have been openly challenged by Doctor Fulke to conclude the
controversies In his request and protestation before his retentiue against
Bristowes motives.
of religion that are between us in the strict form of syllogismes, both for
your own ease and for the clearnes and certainty of judgment: and this rea
sonable request, if you refuse to yealde unto, he has protested before God and
the world, that you show your selves thereby to be enemies of truth, that you
fly the light, and dare not abide the trial. And yet these four years day,
none of you all has adventured that most easy, certain and necessary trial,
which you cannot refuse, if you will have truth to be thought to stand on your
side. Let wise men judge therefore, whether we refuse all kind of quiet
trial, and whether it be not a seditious kind of trial, that you would have,
as appeared by Campians challenge: who although he were a person too
contemptible for years, gravity, learning, or honesty, to make so proud a
challenge, to all the learned and wise of the Church and commonwealth of
England: yet when he was brought to light, he was conferred withal, by diverse
grave, and learned men, and tried in the defense of his own treatise, in which
God wot, he was quickly found to be none other, then his familiars always knew
him to be, that is more bold to challenge, then able to defend himself: more
ready to cavil like a childish sophister, then to answer like a sober divine.

And as for his constancy and patience (which you magnify with so many
words) in his just execution for treason, which you falsely term martyrdom,
for your false religion, there is small cause you should boast of it: but that
it is necessary, where you cannot be borne out with truth, to break through
with open lies. For many hundrethes of eye witnesses can testify against you,
that of his patience (which yet had been perforce) there was no sufficient
trial by torment, or sense of bodelie pain, at his death, other then is usual
to all that be strangled with an halter. But as for constancy or cherefull
passage unto his death, it appeared less in him, then in any of his fellows,
but rather great tokens of deiection and consternation of his mind, bewraied
in his color, countenance, voice, and gesture, plainly noted by such as knew
his stomach, courage, and lusty behavior when he was in prosperity. That he
and his accomplices, would acknowledge no guilt of treason, whereof they were so
clearly convicted, it makes their death more detestable, and shows their
hypocrisy more damnable: who seeing it was necessary for them to die as
traitors, desired of their fautors to be honored as martirs: declaring thereby
intolerable rancor, and malice against the prince and the state, and no less
pride and ambition in themselves. Of such Martyrs boast as long as you will,
you shall neither get credit by them, when their cause is known, nor terrify
us with revenge of their blood, when their punishment was just. Hitherto belike
you have spoken to all that abhor Popery in general: for now you will speak
aword or two to Master Charke, as to his own person in particular. And two
things you tell him of, that in this matter do principally concern him. The
first is his writing, which, as shall appear by this authors defense, does
convince him of gross ignorance, and that in very common matters, both of
divinity, and of Philosophy, wherein it is well known that Campian was most
excellent. But seeing the proof of this conviction rests only in the
authors defense, the discreet reader will suspend his judgment, until he see
Master Charkes answer also. In the mean time it will appear, by that which
other men write in his defense likewise, that all is not gross ignorance,
which cauilling and malicious Papists, seeking to deface him with a false
accusation, are disposed to impute unto him. As for Campians learning in these
two sciences, I may be as bold to say, it is well known, that it was but
vulgar, and inferior to many of his years and time of study, which you
commend to be in the superlatiue degree of most excellencye. Some piece of his
divinity he showed in the conference with in the tower of London. His knowledge
in Philosophy, as it is not to be waighed in the controversy of Religion,
which we have in hand, so it is not to be thought, that he so far excelled
therein, but Oxford and Cambridge can aforde an hundredth Masters of Art his
iuniors in time, at the lest way his equals, if not his betters therein

That Master Charke outfaced him in the tower of London, by reason of his high
place, gaie apparel, great words, assistance of friends, countenance of
authority, and applause of Protestants standing by, it is a poor excuse of
Master Campians insufficiency, which though it was manifest to the wise and
learned, in every of the former days of conference, yet in that last day of
Master Charkes encounter with him, was apparent even to the simple and
ignorant: so that Campians impudency, wherein he chiefly excelied, was so
repressed at that time, as even in the opinion of every man (albeit he was
vanquished before) yet now at last he seemed to be clean overthrown. And this
shameful foil, you would feign have to be thought to have happened unto him,
as one ouermatched with M. Charkes high place, gaie apparel, great words,
etc. It is pity your Champion was noe better armed aganst so weak arguments,
but did suffer him self to be outfaced with such frivolous reasons, of place,
garments, words, countenance, and multitude. verily they that knew his
audacitie from a child, marueled to see him so greatly daunted, but that it
pleased God that day, to make him, and all the papists, in their foolish devise
of his impudent challenge, ridiculous to all the world. But if we may examine
these reasons, by which he seemed to be so much outfaced, what difference of
place, I pray you, was there between the opponents, and the respondent? were
not there stools of equal height? you would have fools imagine belike that
Charke sat a loft in a throne, seven stepps higher then Campian, or what mean
you to prate of high place. As for gay apparel, men may see Master Charke
daielie how gorgeously he is araied, so that he turns the eyes of all men
upon him, which way so ever he goes: or else Campian had small cause to fear
him, for his gaie apparel. In truth his apparel was of color black, of
matter woollen, of making such as the common sort of Ministers in London
commonly do use to wear. But if Campian had been stripped out of his rugge
gown, whereunder his ruffianlike garments were hid, he would have appeared
in much gayer apparel for matter, color, and fashion, then Master Charke was
ever seen to wear, since he came into the ministry. Nevertheless his gown
could not hide his to spots hat, which, if not on that day, yet at all other
times of the conference, it is certain was the same, that was seen with the
rest of his Iesuiticali robes, when he rid through Cheap Side toward the
tower of London: And therefore me thinks you need not to have spoken of
Master Charkes gaie apparel. But what Sesquipedalia verba.
were those great words of his, a foot and a half long at the lest, that
Master Campian might be outfaced with them? They that were present could
observe no affectation os words, but weight of matter, that bare down
Campians courage, especially when he was pressed to answer to syllogismes,
which (as though no man but he could skill of) at the first he did scornefully
call for. The assistance of friends was a small prerogative, when they were
only hearers, and not helpers of his disputation. The countenance of
authority little avails in conference, where each party, by leave of
authority, may say what he can for his cause. Last of all the applause of the
Protestants standing by, was no cause of Campians outfacing, but a consequent
of his insufficient answering. That vain scoff, of Campians coming within
the reach of Charkes ministerial power and authority, sauoreth of nothing,
but of proud folly, and foolish malice. For all men may easily know, that
when Campian was apprehended for moving the Queens subjects to sedition, and
committed to the tower, for imagining and practicing of high treason, he was
not within the reach of any Ecclesiastical persons power, or authority, much
less of poor M. Charkes jurisdiction, which is none at all, further then by
commission might be granted to any of the state civil or Ecclesiastical to
examine him, or to confer with him.

The second matter you have to speak to Master Charks own person, is of his
false dealing, to deceive: wherein you grant him principality, not only above
Campian, who had no talent at all therein, but even above the chief masters of
his own side, most expert in that faculty. The term of talent, being taken
out of the gospel, and signifying some grace or gift of god, how
vngraciouslie it is abused, not only in this place, for a faculty of false
dealing, but also by the auctor himself asterward, for a custom of railing,
I wish the sober reader to observe, and to consider what religious affection
these men bear to the doctrine of Christ, that can find no terms to play
with all in their spiteful inuectiues, but such as are shamefullie detorted
and abused from the holy use, and phrases of the blessed scriptures. As for the
crime of false dealing, let it appear in Gods name, by the trial and
examination of both the parties writings, and rest where it shall be found to be
practiced. In the mean time, we must a little consider of these examples here
brought for a taste, to show his false dealings by Master setter forth: First
M. Charke inueigheth against the Censurer very sharply, because he charge
Luther with an opinion, which he confesses that sometimes he held, and
afterward recanteth, concerning the licensing of wives to lie with their
neighbor, when their husbands by natural infirmity, were not hable to do
their parts. This say you, seems a very reasonable defense: where is then
the false dealing? Mary (say you) the words that immediately follow in Luther,
declare that now he would do worsse then before: for now he would compel the
poor husbands, to grant their wives that liberty, or else would he tugge
them by the locks of the head. And can there be any more shameless See
afterward in the answer to the defense more at large.
dealings, etc. If Luther declare his opinion in the words following, to be as
you say, I must needs confess that this was a great oversight in Master Charke
at lest, if it were not shameless dealing. But if Luthers meaning by the whole
scope of that place be plain, not to give the wife license to lie with an
other man (the band of wedlock continuing) but to compel such an insufficient
husband to be deuorced from his wife, because she cannot have the lawful
remedy of incontinency by his company, do you not play the papist in grain,
thus to exclame against Master Charks false dealing? As for the phrase of
tugging by the Locks, being a Dutch proverb, signifying no more but inforcement
(to use your own words) has that man any conscience, trow you, that will
urge it to color such dishonest and false accusations? Verily you had been
better to have held your peace: for now you are, and shall be more hereafter
discovered, while you slander him untruly to use deceit, and do use false
play your self, and that most impudentlie.

Another example of his false dealing you bring, in the controversy, Whether
concupiscense in the regenerate without consent be sin. Where Master Chark
being sore oppressed by many places of Saint Augustines authority, brought by
the Censurer, finds no other relief of his credit with the reader, but to
forge a place of Saint Augustine to the contrary: in which to deceive the
reader, he foisteth in this word (sin) reciting his words thus: Concupiscense
is not so forgiven in Baptism, that it is not sin. By which addition of the
word (sin) the matter seems to stand clear on his side. And this cannot be
excused by ignorance: but shows open and wilful malice in the man. Hasty
judgment. Peradventure he may excuse the addition, by the Printers fault, and
so it was neither ignorance, nor malice in him. But take it most hardly, that
Master Chark did purposely add the word ( sin) unto S. Augustines text
(which yet in a strict translation, where there is no need, is not alowable)
if it be manifest that it is Saint Augustines meaning, the addition of a word,
for explication of the sense, is neither forging, nor foisting. But it is most
impudentlying in you, sir setter forth, to say, he finds none other relief
of his credit with the reader, but to add this word ( sin) to S. Augustines
text, when immediately after this pretended forgerie, he brings a most clear
place of Saint Augustine, in which he does expressly affirm, that
concupiseense, even in them that have the spirit of God, is sin: which
argues, that he needed not at al to forge and foist, having Saint Augustines
words so evident on his side, and that he finds not only another, but a far
better relief of his credit with truth, then he could look to gain, if he
had been disposed to use false dealing. Master Charkes words are these: Saint
Augustines place making it no sin in the regenerate without consent, is
expounded by himself afterward saying: Concupis cense is not so forgiven in
Baptism, that it is not sin, but that it is not imputed as sin. For a
clear proof hereof, in another book he says plainly, it is sin. and so
showing the occasion of his saying, cites the place at large Cont. Iul. lib.
5. cap. 3. in which are these words. Concupiscense of the flesh, against which
the good spirit lusts, is sin, because there is in it a disobedience
against the regiment of the mind. Where he says, for a cleerer proof, it is
probable that the word ( sin) in the formet text, was not added by him, at
lest wise not to deceive: for with the addition, you will confess, it is as
clear, as can be for his part. But if he added that word, as being of the
plain meaning of Saint Augustine, yet subject to cauilling, because it is not
in him expressed, to take away al color of wrangling, about the term, he
joins a most clear proof, of Saint Augustines judgment plain, that
concupiscense in the regenerate is sin in his own nature, although because
it is forgiven, it is not imputed to them as sin. So that the sense is
manifest, that concupiscense in the regenerate is sin, but sin forgiven, or
sin not imputed. And therefore although in some sense, a man may truly say,
that sin forgiven, as adultery, is no sin, or sin not imputed, is no
sin, because the guiltines there of is removed from the (...) remission,
covering, or not imputing, through Gods mercy, or satisfaction of Christ; yet
it follows not there of, that sin of his own nature is not damnable,
because mercy has made it remissible: or that sin forgiven, as adultety, or
such like, cannot be properly called sin, because it is pardoned; but the
clean contrary does follow of necessity: even so is co^cupiscens, which is
forgiven in the regenerate, yet remains in them, not as a virtue, or an
indifferent thing, but as an evil thing, as Augustine else where confesses: yet
no sin able to condemn them, because it is not imputed to them, or because
it is pardoned in them. Therefore except you will say, that sin forgiven or
not imputed cease to be sin in his own nature, concupiscense in the
regenerate is sin, although forgiven and not imputed to them. But of this
matter enough at this time, seeing it is to be handled more at large hereafter,
and to be plainly showed, that Saint Augustine, although in some sense, he say
that concupiscense is no sin, yet in another sense he does as plainly
affirm, that it is sin, and such as would condemn unto death, if it were
not satisfied by Christ, and remitted unto the regenerate.

Your third example, of his purpose to deceive, is, that not having at hand the
Censure of Collen it self, he reports diverse untruths against the Jesuits
out of Gotuisus, concealing his name, quoting only Censura Coloniensis, which
he is sure cannot be seen, as not to be had in England, andomitting Canisius,
whom his author Gotuisus does likewise cite, which may be had, and red of every
man. This is but a bare surmise, without any sufficient reason to uphold it: of
two he cites one, Ergo he seeks to deceive. And as for the Censure of
Collen, it is now as common to be had in England, as Canisius his Catechism,
although when Master Chark did set forth his first book, it was not to be sold
in the shops, yet many had it in their studies. And it seems he did choose to
cite that which was like to be of greater authority among the Papists, as done
by consent of a wholl University. But it touches him more nearly, that where
Gotuisus did not beelie the Jesuits sufficiently, Master Chark without
blushing will falsify his words, to make them more odious: as where Gotuisus
his words are, that the Jesuits say, the scripture is, as it were a nose of
wax, Master Chark says their words are, the scripture is a nose of wax. This
quarrel was objected at the first by the Censurer, and answered by M. Charke
in his reply, that protesting at the first, not to set down the very words,
but the meaning, he has nothing varied therfro. For there can be no other
sense of these words, the scripture is a nose of wax, and these, The scripture
is as a nose of wax, seeing no man would dream of a transsubstantiation, but al
reasonable men understand a semblans or likeness, although the note of
similitude ( as) be not expressed. Therefore there appears no purpose of
deceauing by this citing out of Gotuisus, when Paiua Andradius also excusing
the same crime against Kemnitius, confesses that the fathers of Collen, in a
most apt similitude, called it a nose of wax: and Pighius the leaden rule of
the Lesbian building, as Master Charke shows, whose purpose is no more, but
to prove that this is an unapt, and an unworthy similitude, and therefore has
offered no wrong to the Jesuits or Censurers of Collen, nor used any fraud to
deceive the reader.

Now concerning his other behavior toward M. Campian in the tower of London,
and else where, you mean not greatly to stand upon, because you cannot imagine
what color you should set upon your slander, and yet somewhat you must say,
or else burst for spite. First his inciuility in words uttered against Campian
in his book. These blasphemous heretics, and arrant traitors, where they have
no authority, and most bloody butchers of gods saints where they have power,
require to be reverenced, even of them, whom by all possible means they
persecute, and abuse, so that there may not an ungentle word be spoken against
them, though it be not half so much as they deserve to hear, but they
complain forsooth, of great inciuilitie used toward them. But what the
Ceusure noted, the reply has answered, and therefore to a general charge, I
need make none other, but a general answer. But that was nothing to the
contemptuous usage of so learned a man in open audience. Surely learning goes
very low among the English Papists, when Campian is made so learned a man, and
even with lothsomnes so often commended for learning: in whom as we
acknowledge there was more learning, then honesty, so they which either were
privy to his studies, or had trial of his knowledge, must needs confess, that
there wasin him much more arrogancy, then learning. But what contemptuous
usage (I pray you) can you lay to Master Charks charge? Barbarous threatening
of that further cruelty which then he had in mind, and now has put in
execution upon him. Is any man so simple to belecue this slander? has M.
Chark put any cruelty or punishment of justice, either upon Campian in
execution? or had he any more to do in Came pians punishment, then you? or was
any greater cause thereof then you? nay verily, I may think probably, that
you, or at lest wise I may say boldly, that some of his greatest friends the
Papists, were a much greater cause of Campians death, then any minister in
England. For they knowing his proud stomach, and arrogant disposition (which
no man could be ignorant of, that was acquainted with Campian) chose him for a
meet instrument to be sent into England, as a trumpet of sedition, with his
traitorous faculties, which is in deed the right and true cause meritorious of
such pain, as he suffered, and not Master Charks cruelty or malice: which if
he had borne any against Campian, he is neither of authoritic, nor credit, to
procure execution thereof, in such sort as Campian was punished. Therefore
this slander of Barbarous threatening, and contemptuous usage, is as the rest
of your honest reports, which neither have truth, nor likely hoode of truth
in them.

But of all other things it seems to you most ridiculous, and fit for a
stage, which yet Master Charke thought was excellent, and became him well: and
that was his often turning to the people, and requesting them to rejoice, and
thank the Lord that had given him such an argument: which when it came forth,
proved not worth three eggs in May, for that Master Campian dispatched it
often times in less then half three words. Ofthis turning and requesting
they that were present do say, you lie in your throat, that any such was
used by Master Charke, as also where you say, that when he was brought to a
non plus, and thereuppon the people beginning to depart, he caused the doors
to be shut, and no man to be let out, until they had joined with him in prayer
to thank the Lord for his victory, etc. But if it had been true, that he had
requested such thanksgiving of the people, or caused the door to be shut, that
the wholl multitude of hearers might join with him in prayer, is prayer and
thanksgiving ridiculous, and meet for a stage? and does the use of them
prove a comicall exercise to get applause of the people? if the one or the
other be so in the account of papists, surely they are otherwise judged of
among true christians. But it was the weakness of the arguments (you wilsay)
which were so lightly dissolved, in less then half three words, which made
that preparation ridiculous. A marvelous dexterity of the Champion, orels a
ridiculous marvel of his parasite, to say, that he could dispatch arguments
often times, and show the infirmity of them in one word only, so that all
men might laugh at the opponents folly. Of like credit it is, that Master
Charke in the end was brought to a non plus, and thereupon the people began to
depart: when as many as were present can testify, that the day being far
spent, Master Liuetenant signified that the time was past, whereupon Master
Charke gave over, and concluded with prayer. In which if any Papist, by reason
the door was shut by order of them which might command it, were constrained
like an hypocrite to veil his bonet, or bow his knees against his mind, yet
none was so hardy to protest that he would not join in prayer with him, but
ouelie your grande Captain Campian: which yet was so courtcous a gentleman,
that he offered to join hands with them in familiarity, with whom he refused
to join his tongue in prayer. A lack that treason and vain glory would not
suffer him to live: for otherwise many think he would have been tractable
enough in Religion.

But it was to get applause of the people that Master Norton the rackmaster was
at Master Charkes elbow, to repeat and urge his arguments for him to the
purpose, What else? except we might be bold with your worship, and tell you that
you gable. Master Norton was there as a diligent and faithful writer, as well
of the arguments, as of the answers: and when he repeated any argument that
he had written, it was that the opponent might acknowledge that he had taken it
truly. As like wise he repeated Campians answer also, who often times when he
misliked it himself, either added, or detracted, or altered the same, so that
he weried the writer not a little, until it was set down, as he would have it
stand, and as he would stand to it: otherwise it had been small matter of
applause, that Master Charke should get, to have an other man urge his
arguments for him to the purpose, as though he could not follow them himself
sufficiently: so great likeliehoode of truth your surmises have, which yet
you set down as absolutely, as they were oracles of Apollo. For which cause
also you had Master Norton the rackemaster, etc. But how well do you remember
the rule of civility in words, whereof you are such a rigorous exactor in
other men, that so reprochfully scoff at M. Norton, who beside his rare gifts
of wit, learning, and wisdom, was of special trust with other appointed by
the Prince, and her most honnorable council, to examine such as were thought
meet to be tried, or terrified with the rack, and therefore in respect of the
authority, by which he dealt in those cases, neither in civility, nor in
christianity deserved the odious, and opprobious name of a rackemaster. Again
you pity the case, that we durst not make those few disputations public,
where more men might have laughed and been witnesses of our folly etc. No no,
if we had parted with Master Campian but at an even hand, as we joined with him
with all inequallitie, you should have had books of triumphset forth before
now, and this secret of ours all the people of England does know. What secret
of ours? be like that we durst not make these disputations publiker by printing
the report thereof. For otherwise there were witnesses enough, at the hearing of
them. But now all the people of England know that you lie impudently. For the
report of that conference has been imprinted almost this two years, and never
a papist of you all, at home or abroad, has adventured to control it,
although there have been printed brags, that you would shortly set'it out your
selves to our shame. You will say it is set down by our selves, or our own
friends, and consequently partially in report of Campians answers. Admit it
were so (as in deed it is otherwise) for Campians answers touching the
substance of them, and in his own words, are as truly set down, as the
opponents arguments: yet because the matter is not the victory against
Campians person, but against his heresies, if you think Campian, or your cause
have injury by the report of his answers, why do not you show, either what
his answers were. or what they should have been, to the avoiding of those
arguments that then were brought against him? Which arguments as they were
then propounded to Camipans person. so now by publishing of them in print, they
are offered as a small taste to al his fautors and abbertors, to answer them,
if they can, better then Campian, but a young nouis in popish divinity, was
hable to do. But I suppose it much more easy for you to laugh at them in
corners, and smile in your sleeves in open presence, then keeping the laws of
disputation, to avoid the force of them. As for the vain glory whereof you
dream, that we be so greedy, you see by differring the publication of that
conference so long, that we could well have forborne it altogether, if vour
insolent bragging, false surmising, impudent slaundering, and childish daring,
had not in a manner extorted the setting forth thereof. The example you bring
of our desire of praise, by Doctor Fulke, looking into Wisbige Castle, is by
the same man sufficiently answered, with all other quarrels, that you pick
against his writings, in a several treatise annexed to his defense of the
English translations against Gregory Martine, and therefore there needs not
any other confutation of those slanders and cauills, then is already set
forth.

But with what inequality did we join with Campian, by means whereof, he
might be less hable to make his party good? We know (you say) the
inequality, whereby we dealt with that man, being but one, vnbooked,
unprovided, wearyed with imprisonment, and almost dismembered with the rack,
threatened and terrified with death to come, appointed only to answer, and
never to oppose: yea all this we know, and the world both knows and
marueileth at it abroad. The world may marvel at his arrogancy, in making
such a proud challenge, and at your impudency, in defending his
insufficiency with such manifest untruths. First you say, he was but one,
and the world knows there were but six, of more then six hundredth whom he
challenged, hable to have incountred with a greater giant, then he was, that at
several times had conference with him. He being but one, with manifest note of
intolerable pride, provoked all the learned of England: and do you complain,
that being but one, he was assaied by so few of so great a number as he
challenged? There was but one that challenged all, and therefore it was thought
meet, that this one should be a little discovered, partly to repress the
insolency of himself and of his friends, partly to satisfy the weakness
of some ignorant persons, that might imagine, there was some great matter in
his bold challenge, who showed therein the greatest folly that could be, if it
had notserued for an other subtle practice. Hewas vnbooked (you say) but in
deed he was licensed to have what books soever he would call for. Canisius
great Catechism he required, and had, which he said should be unto him instar
omnium. Unprovided he could not be, being opposed in his own book, or at lest
wise could not complain of it, having as long time to consider of the
questions, as his adversaries had. His imprisonment had not been so long before
the conference, nor his keeping so strait, that his wits could be dulled, or
his memory quailed in so short a time of five or six weeks. That he was
either almost, or any thing at all dismembered, or distracted in body with the
rack, is a most false lie, and shameless slander, although he bragged as of
his suffering by the rack, which he rather saw, then felt, as Master
Lieuetenant told him. It is as false that he was threatened or terrified with
death, by any of the disputers. If he were terrified in mind with conscience
of his treasons, to fear that death, which he knew he had deserved, there was
none to blame but himself. Otherwise his behavior was not like one that
feared death, as it was afterward when death in deed was present before his
eyes.

Finally, that he was appointed only to answer, and never to oppose, it was
noe disadvantage to him, if he had maintained a true cause, and had been that
man of learning, which he would seem to be. For all men which know what
belongs to disputation, will confess, that it is easier for a learned man to
answer with commendation in defense of truth, then to oppugn a true cause,
with hope to win credit. Wherefore the inequality was in the cause, not in
the disputers part, which was appointed to Campian. For if his positions had
not been false, by answering he had the advantage against the opponents.
Again, Campian did first take upon him the opponents part in publishing his
book of ten arguments against us, which by our side was answered, and
therefore it was meet, and agreeable to order, he should be appointed to
answer, and our side to oppose, and that by the very law of equality and
indifferency, although (as it is evident by the report of the conference) he
was permitted sometime to oppose, and propounded such arguments as his weak
cause could afforde him.

But you are sure and dare auowe to our faces, that we will never deal with
you at even hand, or upon equal conditions, while we live. You may be sure
that to maintain your purpose of sedition, for which your challenge was made,
that we will not deal with you at any hand, or upon any conditions. But to
show your falsehoode, ignorance, and arrogancy manifest to the world, we are
ready to join with you in any conditions, that our prince and magistrates
will allow us, and shall think may stand with the quiet of the state: who,
seeing our religion after lawful and solemn conference by us offered, and
shamefullie refused by your good masters, is by law established, will not
rashly admit every vain and ridiculous challenge of disputation, that is
offered by such, as Campian and you are, who dare auow to our faces, and yet
dare not show your own faces, before you be drawn out of your creeping
corners, and hiding holes, as Campian and his accomplices were.

Yet you are in the name of all your fellow Catholics torenew your bublike
challenge of equal disputation. Who are you, and what Commission have you from
your fellow Papists, that we may credit you? If we knew either the one, or the
other, we might the rather consider of your pretended public challenge. Edmond
Campian did more like a Champion, who when he cast down his glove of defiance,
spared not his name, though he hid his head. But you, coming with so loud a
challenge, so large offers, so magnifical promises, not of your own
countrymen, but of strangers also, of matters not in private men's power, but
of the grant of Princes, and that in any kingdom and country, which you call
Catholic; and moreover, rather then you would fail of disputation, are ready
to bear the expenses, not only of our countrie-men, which are many, but of
all the learned Protestants of Europe, whom you give us leave to call for our
defense, must needs have great intelligence and conference with all the popish
states in Europe, and a wonderful large commission from them all, which we
would beglad you should show, for our assurance, or else you show your self the
noblest fool in the world, to think that any man will credit you in so
weighty matters, upon your own bare word, not knowing so much as whom to
enquire for, or where to find you, if we were disposed to confer with you,
about any conditions of equality to be used in the pretended disputation, or
about the time, place, or persons to be employed in the same.

Nevertheless to show your confidence, and desire of trial in all the haste,
you tell us, that albeit we think your cause to be greatly weakened by the
taking away, and dispatching (so you call the just execution) of Campian, and
Sherwine, yet you are the same men you were before, yea much more disirous of
this trial, then before. Indeed I am persuaded you are no changelings, but
even as the devil hardneth them whom he has once in possession, so your
obstinacy daily increases, both in herisie and treason. For the weakening of
your cause, we never accounted any great moment to be either in Campian, or
Sherwine, more then to the strengthening thereof. They were of the ripest fry,
that your seminary could afforde, sparing the old stores, and yet they were
but frothe, for any sound learning that was in either of them. You say, we
were want for more abasement of the other, to say that M. Sherwine was far
better learned, then Campian himself. It may be some have said so, and they
that have had conference with both, do affirm that is the learned tongues
Greek and Hebrewe, Sherwyn had some little sinacke, so that he could talk of
them, whereas Campian was as blind as a betle in them both. Again, Sherwyn in
reasoning had for the most part, the common shifts and ordinary answers of
Papists, to the places that were cited out of the Doctors: Campian had nothing
but frivolous distinctions, framed of his own head upon the seddaine,
seldom, or never understanding the argument of the book, or place of the
Doctors, that he was pressed withal. So that it might casilie appear, that
Sherwin was better studied, and Campian quicker witted. In impudency they were
almost equal, saving that Campian was impudent with arrogancy, Sherwine with
more show of humility. I will note one example of Sherwins impudency, and an
other of his small knowledge in the Hebrewe tongue, wherein yet the Papists
would bear us in hand, that he was excellent. When after some private
conference had with him in M. Liuetenants lodging, within the tower of London,
My Lady Hopton chaunsed to speak somewhat against the licentious and
abominable life of the Cardinals, and clergy of Rome; Sherwin said, if any
such thing were, they should answer for it themselves: but he took the
eternal God to witness, that those eyes of his never saw in the city of
Rome, which he had often walkedouer, that could offend his heart, or
conscience; which shameful protestation of his, all that heard him did
abhor, seeing that, if Rome were the holiest city that is in Europe, as it
is wellknowne to be the most sinful in (...), yet noe honest and religious
man, could remain so long in it, but he should see some tokens of pride,
wantonness, covetousness, cruelty or vanity, that must needs be a grief unto
his heart to consider. Now for the other matter. In the conference itself, he
would have taken upon him no small judgment in the (...) ewe language by
auouching that he wo^^^ (...) (...) and notable corruptions in the Hebrewe text
of the Bible. when an example was required, he brought forth the ^7.v. of the
22 Psalm, which by like he had learned of Gregori^ Martin as Martin had
learned of (...) here the Hebrew text (said he) is C AR I I, as a (...) my
hands and my feet: but the truth is, as the v^lga^e (...) station has, they
have pierced my hands and my feet. Here when it was answered, that of the
Mazorites do discharge this text of corruption testifying that the ancient
reading was CAROV which signifies they have pierced; which Mazorites? said
Master Sherwine. And so much touching the comparison between Master Campian
and Master Sherwine in whom as there was little help for your cause, so we
think you have lost noe great advantage by their taking away out of this life.

But let us see what be the words of your public challenge. We request you,
yea we conjure you, either for trueths sake, if you seek it: or for your own
credits sake, if ye will retain it, that you yeald us after so much suit and
supplication, some equal trial, either by writing, preaching, or disputing
Although we should not yealde either to your request, or to your (...), we
might have that love of truth, and care of our credit, which becomes us. For
truth has been so well and long tried to be on our part, that our credit in
mainteining thereof cannot be cracked, if we should altogether refuse any new
trial. For why should you be admitted after. 24. years to any new trial,
which refused in the beginning so lawful and solemn a trial, as the like in
any memory was never offered in this land? what suit or supplication you have
made I know not, except you mean the seditious challenge of Campian, which
was cast about as a lible, to erect and stir the wavering minds, of your
inconstant disciples, into expectation of some great alteration, not lawfully,
and orderly delivered to them, to whom it was entitled, as an humble suit or
supplication. Again, there is noe reason, that upon any suit or supplication,
there should any further trial be granted unto you, that have been already
so often convicted, and condemned in the cause, as though the matter were still
in question or doubt with us; but only in respect of some weak, and doubtful
persons, unto whose infirmity, in hope of their satisfaction and full
resolution, something may be yealded. For what wise man would grant to the
Manichees, Arrians, Macedonians, and such other absurd heretics (so long
since condemned) at this time any new trial or judgment by public
disputation, preaching, or writing, although they did never so importunatelie
crave it, yea (as you doc) adjure and conjure them to it? And seeing you are so
indifferent, as you pretend, to enter into any equal trial, either by writing,
preaching, or disputation, what makes you so vehement in calling for trial,
when one of these ways neither is, nor can be denied unto you, namely trial
by writing? yea you have been provoked, and challenged to the most equal way
of trial by writing, which is by syllogism, to try how you can uphold any of
your heresies by us condemned: whereunto you are now the rather to be called,
because you complain that Campian was not suffered to oppose. Set down your
syllogismes in the defense of any article of controversy that you hold against
us, or in oppugning any point, of doctrine that we hold against you, either in
writing or in print, so as they may come to our hands, and you shall receive a
speedy and a ready answer. This trial you may have without danger, suit,
or charges, if it were trial, and not treason, that you sought to practice
under pretext of public trial, by preaching, or disputing. Else what need you
be so importune for any equal trial, when this the most equal, the most
easy, the most profitable trial, or way of trial, for finding out, and
iudgeing on which side truth does stand, neither is, nor can be taken from you.

There is noe reason in the world (you say) but only fear that may move us
to deny you this your request. But they that be wise can easily judge, that
there is great reason to deny you any such request, where your purpose is
known to be sedition, and not trial: nevertheless your request of trial by
writing is not denied you, as I have said before: use it then when you think
good, and make no more babbling of trial, if you seek nothing but trial, and
be indifferent to take any of these three kinds of trial.

The reason of the state (you say) which is alleged against your request, is
mosts vain. For what can a peaceable disputation granted you for religion,
indaunger our state, but only it may chance to discover our errors, and so
make the hearers detest our state of heresy? You carry peace in your mouths,
and swords in your hearts. I have touched some reasons already: they that
govern the state can say much more. As for peaceable disputations upon
controversies in religion, are daily practiced in our schools, for exercise
sake, in which all the arguments you can bring, are urged as vehemently, as
you your selves can do, in peaceable manner; and are so clearlie avoided,
either by the answerer, or at lest by the moderator, as all reasonable hearers
may plainly see, that we stand for truth against (...) and heresy, and if
any do waver in opinion upon so manifest evidence of truth, he ^ judgment,
without that we stand ^ of trial, that are ready to abide ^ stand with our
duty, and is ^ demonstration of truth. As for the (...) (...) you do once
again require, that ^ obtain for you, whatsoever you ^, is well known to be
but a (...), for an other purpose then trial of truth, whereof if you were so
desirous, as you would seem to be by your challenge, and so indifferent to
accept any of the three before named kinds of trial, as in words you did so
lately make show, you would not be so importunate, for this kind of trial by
disputing, which is not like to be granted unto you, lest it might be
surmised, that we would be content to bring our faith into doubt, and
disceptation, and refuse the safest, the quietest, and the best kind of
trial, that is offered unto you, which is by writing. You fare like a
cowardly russian, which knowing a man to be bound to the peace, will make no
end of bragging, and challenging him to fight: but if any man that is at
liberty offer to try a blow or two with him, he is as cold to the combat,
as he was before hot to the challenge.

You offer your selves to the labor, charges, and peril of life, and yet you
ask for your safeties such a warrant from her Majesty, as the late council
of Trent did offer to all protestants of the world. If you offer your selves to
the peril of your lives, what need you any warrant for your safeties: except
you think her majesty's warrant is no better then such as is given by popish
Councels and princes, which notwithstanding any safeconduits, leagues, truces,
or warranties of safety, are at their liberty to make contrary Canons, and
to execute most cruel burnings, massacres, and murders of Gods saints and
innocent lambs, which have committed their lives into such faithless tyrants
hands. But God be praised, her highness honor has never been blemished with
the least spotte of unfaithfulness, that you should sear notwithstanding her
majesty's warrant, any danger to your lives, or boast that you offer your
selves to peril of life, when you demand a warrant for your safeties, without
the which you dare not so much as utter your name, that be the challengers. And
therefore it were a ridiculous suit for a warrant, that our ministers shoold
commence in your behalf, when they know not what you are, nor what warrant you
have, from any learned Papists to make such large offers, vponwarrant of your
safteties: seeing it is known, that the best learned of your side in England,
have not only refused the same, but some also judged al disputation to be
unprofitable.

Your offers I confess are very large, as that we shall appointe in what kind
and number, at what time, to what place, you shall come, either our country men
only, or strangers to dispute in our universities before the learned only,
that you give us leave to call all the learned protestants of Europe for our
defense, you taking only our own countrymen: That you give us leave to
oppose or defend, begin or end or use any prerogative that may not impugn
the indifferency of trial. But when you ask, what we can allege why we
should not accept this, We answer, that beside many causes, not here
needful to be rehearsed, though before in part touched, we allege for this
present, that we do not believe that you are able to perform any of these
liberal offers, except we see matter of greater credit, then an epistle of an
unknown papist, written to Master Charke a private man. If you had showed us
such warrant or commission, as we might probably have been persuaded of the
performance of these promises, you might more reasonably have required, what
we had to allege, why we did not accept them: but now there is noe reason in
the world, that we should entreat with our Prince and Magistrates upon these
frivolous words of an obscure hedge-creeper, or boasting bench-whistler for
any thing we know: I am in the name of all my fellow Catholics to renew,
etc: Once again I say to you ministers, etc. We will give you leave, etc: and
such like. But it is not sufficient that you are liberal at home only,
except you be lavish abroad also: for if we had lever make trial in other
Countreies, we may choose what Protestant state we list, and procuring you
safety there, you will meet us. Or if we please to come into any Catholic
Kingdom or Country, you will procure what security soever reasonably we
will demand, and more then that, you will bear our expenses also, rather
then so good a work should remain unattempted: or any other condition that
we can denise, you will fulfill; Then you conclude, If we offer you reason,
then deal somewhat reasonably with us again. For all the world will cry
shame and begin to discredit you, if you will neither give, nor take, upon
so great odds as here are offered you. I answer, you offer us great words,
but no reason at all, because we know not what assurance you can make us, to
perform your words. If Master Charke, a man well known by his name, should
make the like offer to you, by such an other printed epistle, or taking your
offer, should promise you as great warrant as you require, at home or abroad,
and moreover to bear your expenses, rather then you should sail to appear at
any time or place by him assigned, is your simplicity so great, that you
would keep the appointed day, and place of disputation, upon his pure
promise, without further assurance? And yet you can not miss to hear of him,
and his dwelling place at London: whereas we know not to whom, nor whether to
returnethe warrant, that it may come to you: except per haps youwould have it
proclaimed with sound of trum pet, and sent into all parts of the realm, that
you may heareof it. It may be you will allege, that it is great danger for
you to appear without warrant of security, and noe peril for us, to procure
you assurance of safety. But all wise men may see, that we should deserve noe
less punnishment by procuring such a warrant for you, upon so light a
grownde, if you did not accept it, as you should incur, appearing without
warrant, for any difference in religion, if you be not guilty of fellonie or
treason. If you meant nothing, but peaceable disputation for trial of truth, you
would not make your challenge in printed libels, and seditious pamphlets, but
rather seek it at the hands of them that have authority to grant it, by
intercession of those foreign princes, with whom you pretend your credit to
be so great, that you can procure what security soever reasonably we can
demand, in their dominions. But to use any such lawful means, I trow you
will make no haste, when you will not accept that quiet form of trial by
syllogismes in writing, which by Doctor Fulke so many years ago was offered
unto you, and yet is free for you to take, if it please you, and that without
suit, without danger, and to the best and surest trial of the truth.

But if we dare not venture with disputations, yet you require us to grant you
certain sermons to encounter with us upon this matter. A very reasonable
request, I assure you. when you will grant the like liberty of preaching in
Spain, or Italy, we will become suitors for you to preach in England. Or if
that also be to dangerous, we must procure you but a little passage for your
books, and specially Master Charke must obtain license and free passage for
this book, until it be answered. Sir whenwe see what passage you can and will
procure for our books, at lest such as be not answered, until they be
answered, in places where they are now restrained, we will endeavor, that you
shall have the like entertainment with us. In the mean time, take what
controversy you will, or think you self best hable to prove against us, set
down such arguments as you have to oppose against our assertion, in lawful
and logical syllogismes, and whether you send them written or printed, you
shall receive them again printed with our answers to them, and have as free
passage for your arguments, as shall be granted for our answers. If you will
reply against our answers, in like form aforesaid, you shall have our (...)
in like manner set forth with your reply; and (...) the grace of God, you
shall not fail of, toties, quoties, until you be non plus, or which we had
rather will he, until you yeald to the truth. This offer is so reasonable,
that when the like was made to M. Mettham, one of the prisoners at Wisbeach, M.
Fecknam of his equity acknowledged that there could no more be required. Butas
Mettham did then refuse it, so I am afraid will you. And yet it is more then
you will do for us, to give license, that our books may be read of every man
among you, with your confutations. And Doctor Windham then said, that no wise
state would suffer it. Neuerthe less our state, God be thanked, upon
conscience of truth on our side, has with no less wisdom, then good
success, always permitted your books with our answers to them, to be read of
all men to judge indifferently, so they contain nothing but question of
religion, and not shameful diffamations and inuectiues against the prince, and
the state of government: which matters deserve to be answered with an axe or
an halter, rather then with pen and paper. But to permit your books
vnconfuted to have free passage (although they pass with an hundred times
less danger, then ours may do among you) as you require, it were neither
wisdom, godliness, equity, nor reason.

AN OVERTHROVVE OF THE ANSWER TO Master Charkes preface, touching Discerning
of Spirits.
M. Chark beside the matter in question, etc.

IF this answerer beside the matter in question, had not made many
unnecessary, and vnpertinent digressions, the substance of his answer might
have been contained almost in as few lines, as now it fills leaves. The
trial of the Spirits which Saint John requires, that is, by the kind of
doctrine in teaching Christ, and not the quality of the teachers, Master I.
John, 4.
Charke desires, the adversaries refuse, allowing nothing finally, but the
only, and falselie named title of the Catholic Church of Rome for
themselves, and accusations of the persons, some perhapes true, some utterly
false, against us. To this practice so many popish treatises, and this
especially in hand, do give testimony. This is the sum of Master Charkes
preface. Now comes our answerer and because he had many by-quarrels to
deliver, he takes occasion to utter them in this place, though little or
nothing pertaining to the direct confutation of Master Charkes preface. First
he charge Master Charke to say, that the Papists refuse Saint John's trial,
which is false: for their books are extant, wherebie they have called to
trial all sectaries of our time: among whom he names Munster, and Stancarus:
against whom I never heard what Papists have exercised their style,
especially Stancarus, holding one principle, coming very near to their
position of Christ's priesthood, to be only according to his manhood: as
Stancarus taught, that Christ was a mediator only after his humanity: but
read their books who shall, and he must needs confess Master Charkes saying
to be true. For first or last, they draw all trial to Rome, and not to
examine which doctrine gives al glory to God by Jesus Christ our only
Savior, which is the scope of Saint John's trial.

But if we had not desired trial of Spirits (says he) we would not have
labored so much, to obtain the same of our adversaries in free printing,
preaching, or disputation. You speak of great labor, which none of us ever
heard that you took, except it were in spreading a few coppies of Campians
seditious libell, not to the end of trial of spirits, for discerning of
truth: but to the stirring up of men's bodies and minds to treason, and
Saunders treason in Ireland.
rebellion; as the like labors, by the like messengers took effect, and make
manifest demonstration in Ireland. But if free printing, preaching, and
disputation be a goodway for discerning of Spirits, that Christ may be known
from Antichrist, why do not you Papists grant the same in Spain, Italy,
and other countries thrall to the Popes tirannie, yet assaulted by the doctrine
of the gospel, as by the power of Christ against Antichrist? if it be not a
good way (as it seems you think, because you take it not your selves) how
can you say, that you require in those places this trial of spirits? No, no,
it is an other trial, of the sharpest swords, that you mean, when you
require such trial of Spirits.

You add further of the aduenturing of your lives in coming and offering the
same to us at home, with so unequal conditions on your side, as you have done
and daily do, for the trial of truth. There is no danger of life among us,
in offering the trial of Spirits, according to Saint John's rule; but in
seeking to auerte the Queens subjects from their duetifull obedience unto her
Majesty, to make a way for the execution of the Popes most blasphemous, and
traitorous Bull, Bull. Pij. 5.
and this has procured most just, and necessary execution of some few of
you: and not, as you slander, justice; that offering to try the truth, has
obtained nothing hitherto, but offense, accusations, extreme rackings, and
cruel death. Again, these inequall conditions, these daily offers, these
many petitions, and supplications that you speak of, who has made? to whom
have they been offered? when were they presented? where were they seen, or
heard? by whom were they refused? except Campians ridiculous challenge be all
in all with you. But what will a Papist spare to affirm, that he may make
falsehood have some likly shape of truth? yet being admitted that you offer
trial, it must be seen who do offer best means of trial.

And here you will endeavor to show, that all means of trial, which Master
Charke and his fellows will seem to allow in word (For they offer none in
deed) are neither sure, possible, nor evident; but mere shifts to avoid all
trial: and that your selves do offer all the best, and surest ways of trial,
that ever weere vsedin the Church, for discerning an heretical spirit from a
Catholic. Your endeavor is great, but your ability is small: for you shall
never be able to demonstrate either the one, or the other, howsoever with vain
sophistications, and wrested authorities, you seek to dasell the eyes of the
simple. Let us hear therefore how you begin. The only means of trial
(you say) which Master Charke will seem to allow, is the scripture. But this
is a shift common to all heretics, especially of our time. First you slander
Master Charke, in saying that he allows the scripture to be the only means
of trial of spirits, whereof he speaks not at all in this preface, but of
trial of spirits by the doctrine of Christ, which is most plainly and
certenlie set forth in the holy scriptures, and therefore by the holy
scriptures the doctrine may best and most certenlie Ioh. 5. 39.
be tried, and judged. But that Master Charke by referring him self to the
holy scriptures only, as suffi^^^n and ^^le to decide all controversies of
Religion, does deny, or exclude all other means of (...), whereby the true
meaning of the scripture may be known, it is imp^dent he affirmed without
either proof, or likelihood of truth, as hereafter more plainly will appear.
Saint Augustine (as though he were an enemy of con^^^^ing heresies by the
authority of the scriptures only) is quoted in the margent de nupt. and
Concup. lib 2. cap. 31 whose words are these. Non est mi^^am, si Pelagiani
dicta nostra in sensus (...) volunt, deto^quere cona^tur, quando de scripturis
sanctis, non vbi obscure aliquid dictum est, sed vbi clara ^^aperta sune
testimonia, id facere consueuerunt, more quia^^ haere^icorum etiam caet^rorum.
It is no marvel, if the Pelagians endeavor to wrest our sayings into what senses
they will, when they are accustomed to do the same by the holy scriptures, not
where any thing is spoken darkely, but where the testimonies are clear and
manifest, after the manner indeed of the rest of heretics.. These words of
Saint Augustine do as aptelie agree to the Papists, as though they had been by
name uttered against them; as in that which follows you shall see verified in
this Papist, who both wresteth out sayings to such sense as himself pleases,
and also the holy scriptures themselves, where they are most plain and
evident against him: a right pranek of old herenkes. Note also by the way
that the scripture by Saint Augustines judgment, contains most clear and
evident testimonies; which though they be never so much wrested of herenkes,
yet in the conscience of all that love the truth, they do manifestly deliver
true doctrine, and confute false; and therefore be not as a nose of wax, or a
leaden rule, by which no Pighius.
certentie may be found, or any sure trial had by them, as the Papists do
blaspheme.

The next quotation. l. 3. cont. Donat. ca. 15. is uncertain, because of
diverse treatises that S. Augustine did write against the Donatists: but I
guess he means his book de Baptismo contra Donatistas: where yet is nothing
to his purpose, or to any purpose in hand: but that the scripture of the
Gospel, If it be wholl, is the same, although it be alleged by innumerable
heretics, according to the diversity of every one of their opinions: and so
Baptism, ministered by heretics, according to the institution of Christ, is
the same, what opinion soever the heretics have of the words, by which it is
consecrated and ministered. He says also that the snares of heretics and
schismatikes, are therefore very pernicious to carnal men, because their
pro^ting in knowledge is shut from them, their sentence of vanity being
confirmed against the Catholic truth and their sentence of dissension being
con^^^med ag^in^ the catholic peace. These things are true of obstinate
heretics, and consequently of Papists, but they make nothing against Master
Chark, or for the trial of spirits, which is the question now debated between
him and his adversary. But that the scriptures are sufficient to beat down
al heresies, and to reach all truth necessary to salvation, and the only
sure and certain trial, whereby all doctrine is to be examined and adjudged,
the same Augustine does plentifully and in many places of his works declare,
and even in that same work de Baptismo contra Donatistas, lib. 2. Cap. 2. de
vnitate Ecclesiae. cap. 2 and 3. and 16. de nup. and conc. lib. 2. cap. 29. de
peccat. merit. and remiss lib. 3. cap. 7. de natura and gratia, cap. 60. etc.

Three causes there be (says our answerer) of appealing only to scripture.
The first, to get credit with the people by naming of scripture, and to seem
to honor it more then their adversaries do, by referring the wholl trial of
matters unto it. To win credit by cleaving to the authority of God,
expressed in his holy word written, and to honor it by acknowledging the
sufficiency thereof, for the trial of all matters of religion that may comme
in controversy, is no shift of heretics, or new teachers, but the ancient
practice of the best and most approved Catholics. To pretend these things in
show, and not to accomplish them in deed, is the guise of hypocrites, what
religion soeuet they would seem to mantaine.

The second cause (says he) is by excluding Counsels, fathers, and aunciters
of the Church (who from time to time have declared the true sexse of scripture
unto us) to reserve unto them selves liberty and authority to make what
meaning of scripture they please, and thereby to give color to every fancy
they list to teach. But Master Charke and his fellows, giving the sovereign
authority to the only scriptures, do not at all exclude counsels, fathers,
and aunciters of the Church, except it be in case, where they teach contrary
to the manifest scriptures of god, which do either in express and plain
words, or else by most easy and necessary conclusion deliver unto the Church
all things needful to be credited, and known unto eternal life, as both the
Apostle testifies. 2. Timoth. 3. and S. Augustine, a worthy Father and
ancient of the Church consents. Ep. III. Fortunatiano. Neque enim
quorumlibet disputationes, quamuis Catholicoru^ and laudatorum hominum, velut
scripturas canonicas habere debemus, vt nobis nonliceat, salua honorificentia,
quae illis dcbetur hominibus, aliquid in eorum scriptis improbare atque
respuere, si forte inuenerimus quodaliter senserint quam veritas habet, diuino
adiutorio vel ab aliis intellecta, vel a nobis. Talis ego sum in scriptis
aliorum, tales volo esse intellectores meorum. Denique in his omnibus quae de
opusculis sanctorum atque doctorum commemoraui, Ambrosij, Hyeronimi, Athanasij,
Gregorij, and siqua alioru^ talia ita legere potui. For we ought not to account
the disputations of all men, although they be catholic and praise worthy, as
the Canonical scriptures, that it should not be lawful for us, saving the
reverence which is due to these men, to disalow and reject something in their
writings if perhaps we have found out, that they have thought otherwise then
the truth is, of things by gods help either understood of others, or of our
selves. Such one am I in the writings of other men, such would I have other men
to be understanders of my writings. Finally in all these which I have
rehearsed out of the works of holy and learned men, Ambros Hicrott.
Athanasius, Gregory, Andif I could so read any like of other men's writings,
etc. Also, Ep. 112. Pauline. (...) scripturarum, earum scilicet quae canonicae
in Ecclesia nominantur, perspicua firmatur authoritate, fine vlla dubitatione
credendum est. Aliis vero testibus vel testimoniis quibus aliquid credendum
esse suadetur, tibi credere vel non credere liceat, quantum meriti ea
admonentem ad faciendam fidem vel habere vel non habere perpenderis. What
sceuer is confirmed by the plain and clear authority of the holy
scriptures, of those truly which are called in the Church canonical, without
all doubt is to be believed. But other witnesses or testimonies, by which any
thing is counseled to be believed, it is lawful for thee to believe, or not,
according as thou shale weigh what worthiness, he that counsels those things,
has to cause credit, or else has not. Again, De doctrina christiana, lib. 3.
cap. 6. Magnifice and salubriter spiritus sanctus ita scripturas sanctas
modificauit, vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus autem
fastidia detergeret: Nihil enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur, quod non
planissime dictum alibi reperiatur. The holy ghost has magnifically and
wholsomlie so tempered the holy scriptures, that with evident places he might
satisfy hunger, and with more dark places might wipe away disdainfulnes. For
nothing almost is found out of those obscurities, which is not found else where
most plainly uttered. It were no hard matter to heap up many testimonies of
the ancient fathers to this purpose, but that the va nitie of this answerer
appears sufficiently in all our books written against the papists, in which
not only by the manifest places of the scriptures, but also by most evident
testimonies of the doctors of the church, we confute them in the most and
greatest matters of controversy that ate between us.

But what says our gallant answerer, that the councels, fathers, and anciters
of theChurch, have from time to timedeclared the true sense of the scriptures
unto us? has none of these at any time erred in expounding the scriptures, and
may we safely believe them whatsoever they say? He will (I warrant you) deny it,
except the Pope of Rome do allow their interpretations. And therefore this flying
from the only scriptures to the interpretation of Coun cells, fathers and
ancetors of the Church, is nothing else, but an impudent shift, to reserve unto
the Pope liberty and authority to make what meaning of scripture they please,
and thereby to give color to every fancy they list, to father it upon the
authority of the holy scriptures.

The third cause he affirms to be, that by chalenging of only scripture,
they may deliver themselves from all ordinan ces or doctrines, left unto us by
the first pillars of Christ's Church, though not expressly set down in the
scripture, etc. In deed to deliver our selves from the burden of men's
traditions, the ordinances or doctrines of men, we affirm 2. Tim. 3.
the holy scriptures to be hable and sufficient to make us wise unto salvation
by faith in Jesus Christ, as the Apostles and principal pillars of the Church
have taught us: who have left no such ordinances or doctrines, but they be
either expressly set down in the holy scriptures, or by plain and necessary
collection to be gathered out of the same. For how will our adversaries prove,
that any thing is received from the Apostles, which has not testimony out of
the writings of the Apostles? who can be a sufficient witness of such de
liuerie, seeing many things were of old referred to the Apostles tradition,
which even our adversaries do Eusebius. li. 5. c. 26.
not admit to be Apostolical? seeing the most ancient and immediate successors
of the Apostles, as Polyearpus, and Anicetus, can not agree about a ceremony
received from the Apostles, namely the celebration of Easter, what certentie
can there be of any other ordinances or doctines, fathered upon the Apostles,
without witness of their writings, yea and some times directly contrary and
repugnant to their writings?

But hereof, says our adversary, they assume authority of allowing or not
allowing, whatsoever likes or serves their turns for the time: and hereof he
brings example: First of the number of sacraments, whereof some protestants
have written diversely, because the name of sacrament is diversely taken:
sometimes largely, for every holy sign: sometimes strictly, for such holy
signs only, as being instituted of God, are seals of the dispensation of his
general grace in the new teftament, perteining to every member of the Church:
sometimes for all holy mysteries: or secrets, etc. But what does it serve any
protestants turn, whether there be more, or fewer signs in number, that may
be called sacraments? seeing all protestants agree about the things themselves,
that are set forth in the scriptures to be visible signs of grace invisible,
and the name it self, Sacrament, in that sense we speak of, when we say
there are 2. 3. 4. or 7. sacraments, is not once used. This diversity
therefore is but of a term, and that not used in scripture: therefore it
arises not of any interpretation, or perverse understanding of the scripture,
as our answerer would have it seem to be.

But let us hear his example. Martin Luther, says he, after he had denied all
testimony of man, besides himself, he begins thus about the number of
sacraments. Principio neganda mihisunt septem sacramenta, and tantum tria pro
tempore ponenda. First of all I must deny seven sacraments, and appoint three
for the time. Marie this time lasted not long: for in the same place he says,
that if he would speak according to the use of only scripture, he has but
one sacrament for us, that is baptism. In this sentence how many lies and
slanders be packed together? First he says, Martin Luther denies all
testimony of man, which is false: for he allows all testimony of man, that
agrees with the testimony of God, expressed in the scriptures, and often
cites the testimonies of the ancient fathers for confirmation of the truth,
which he taught: indeed he allows man no authority to institute sacraments,
or to make articles of faith, or laws to bind the conscience of man: and he
would have all man's testimonies to be examined and judged according to the word
of God: but this is not to deny all testimony of man, but to distinguish true
testimonies of man, from false. An other slander is, where he says, that
Luther in denying all man's testimony, excepteth him self: which is altogether
untrue. For he requires none other credit to be given to his own testimony,
then he allows to the testimony of other. Neither does he arrogate any
authority to him self, which he derogateth from other men. And namely in
this book of the captivity of Babylon, he takes not upon him absolutely to
teach every point, but so far forth as he did for the present understand of
them: promising after greater study, and more diligent inquiry, to entreat of
diverse of them more certainly: and even in this very place of the number of the
sacraments, he says, he will admit three onclie for the present time,
intending to be further a duised whether there be fewer, or more, to be
entitled with that name. Wherein our answerer offers him the third injury,
in translating, tria pro tempore ponenda, I must appoint three for the time, as
though Luther had taken upon him to appoint how many sacraments the Church
should have, or would challenge power to appoint more or Jesse at his pleasure;
where as his words (if the answerer did not wilfully corrupt them by false
translation) do import no such thing, but only as far as he did presently
see, there were no more but three of those, that were commonly called
sacraments of the new testament, which were rightly to be called by that name.
The fourth slander is, that Luther has but one sacrament for us, which is
Baptism, if he would speak according to the use of only scripture: yea this
is a double slander: for neither does Luther say, that he has but one
sacrament for us, in that mea ning of the word sacrament, in which he is
charged by the cauiller to alter his opinion so shortly, but in an other
meaning: neither does he say, that this one sacrament is haptisme: in which I
can but wonder at the impudency of this fellow, that forgeth this last lie in
his own brain, without all color or show of Luthers words: as though Luther
would allow no sacrament of the Church but Baptism. The words of Luther are
these, of the number of sacraments. After he has denied the number of seven,
and admitted for the present but three, namely Baptism, penance, and the
supper, all which he affirms by the court of Rome to be brought De cap. Bab.
into miserable captivity, and the Church spoiled of all her liberty, he
adds: Quanquam si vsu scripturae loqui velim, non nisi'vnum sacramentum
habeam, and tria signa sacrament alia, de quo latius suo tempore. Although if I
would speak after the use of scripture, I have but one sacrament, and three
sacramental signs, whereof more at large in due time. This one sacrament,
whereof he speaks, is the holy mystery or secret of our redemption, or
salvation by Jesus Christ; of which the other that are commonly called
sacraments, are holy and mystical signs: so that herein he changes no
opinion of the thing, but only speaks of the diverse taking of the word.

Well, yet will our a duersarie reply, he allows three sacraments, so does
the confession of Auspurge, Melancthon four, and Calvin two: and all this by
only scripture. I have showed before sufficiently, that this question of the
number of those signs that may be called sacraments properly, or
improperly, generally or specially, is not determinable by the holy
scriptures, because this name of sacrament is not found in them. Those holy
mysteries, which by external elements do testify the invisible grace of God
workeing in us, unto our salvation by regeneration and preservation, are
plainly set forth in the scripture, Baptism, and the Lords supper, without
naming them sacraments, which comprehend that whole mystery of our salvation,
which Luther calls the only sacrament, by the use of the scripture,
according to which explication of the word sacrament there are but two, so
rightly, properly, and specially to be termed, according to the ancient
usage of the Latin Church, and no more acknowledged, by any protestant of
sound religion. For Luther, his enemies shall testify, which were appointed to
gather out of his writings whatsoever they thought to be erroneous, to be
objected against him: and this is their Censure. Negat septem esse sacramenta,
sed tantum tria pro tempore ponenda, baptismum, poenitentiam, panem. Immo non
nisi vnum esse sacramentum, and tria figna sacramentalia. Duo tamen in Ecclesia
Dei esse sacramenta, baptismum, and panem. He denies (say the collectors) that
there are seven sacraments, but that three only for the time are to be
admitted, baptism, penance, and the bread: nay rather, that there is but one
sacrament, and three sacramental signs: nevertheless there are two sacraments
in the Church of God, baptism, and the bread. Luthers judgment thus appearing
by the confestion of his own adversaries, that as baptism and the supper are
called sacraments, there are no more that rightly and properly can bear that
name: The confession of Auspurge and Melancthon, which as our answerer says,
pretend and profess to follow Luther in all things, can have none other
meaning in this matter of the number of the sacraments of the new testament.
And Melancthon expressly discoursing of the term sacrament, shows how
diversely it may be taken, to comprehend two, three or four. And in the last
edition of his common places, where he answers the articles of the Bauaricall
inquisition, he holds but two properly to be called sacraments, as Luther
before him, in his Catechism the greater, and the lesser. Wherefore this
frivolous cavil is thus easily discussed, to the shame of the cauiller, and
to the attestation of our consent in the matter and substance of truth,

The like brable of words he makes of the title of head of the Church, which
Calvin and the Magdeburgeans do mislike, and Calvin in King Henry found to
be Antichristian, but Caluines folowers in England do find by only scripure
to be most Christian. Where all the dissension is in the term, which being
rightly understood, as by law it has been confirmed unto the Prince,
contains no other authority, then Calvin, and all other professors of the
Gospel, do acknowledge to pertain unto the Christian magistrate, and is
proved to be most Christian, not only by scripture, but also by testimony
of the most ancient and Catholic Fathers of the Church, as it were easy to
show, but that it is here no place to decide these controversies. The title of
supreme head of the Church, granted to King Henry, Calvin says was
blaspheomus, not as it was understood of the godly at that time, but as it
was applied by Stephen Gardener: who in a conference at Ratisbone, cared not
much for the testimonies of the scripture, but said, it was in the Kings power
to abrogate decrees, and to institute new ceremonies, as to appoint days of
fasting, abstinence from flesh, etc. And not staying there, he proceeded
further, to affirm, that it was lawful for the King to forbid marriage unto
Priests, to forbid the lay people to drink of the cup in the Lords supper;
and generally to command, or for bid in his kingdom what he would, because
he had sovereign authority. This authority, or the title in this sense,
neither our princes do accept, neither does any godly man allow unto them.

A third example he brings of burning of heretics, wherein he says: The
Protestants a great while by only scripture, defended against the
Catholics, that no heretics might be burned, or put to death, whereof large
books are written on both parts: Now they have found by evident scripture,
that they may be burned. As though there were not controversies enough, between
the Papists and the Protestants, this man will needs make more, as this of
putting blasphemous heretics to death, which was never denied, the scripture
of stoning blasphemers, false Prophets, and Idolaters, being so manifest. A.
nabaptists indeed, and such like sectaries, are loathe that heretics should be
punished with death. But there has bone long books (says he) written thereof
on both parts. If you ask him by whom, he bids you in the margent look
Eckius in Encher. and Luther contra Latom. de incendiariis. Would you not
think this follow had read these treatises, for burning of heretics, pro and
contra, whereunto he sends us, to justify his saying of large books written
on both parts? but in truth he either never saw the books, or else he is the
most impudent forger, that ever was heard of: for Fckius in his little book,
called Encheridion, loco 27. de hereticis Comburendis, which is but a short
section or Chap er, does not charge Luther with this opinion, of heretics not
to be burned; but the Donatists, whose fancy is renewed again in the
Anabaptists, and Libertines. As for Luther Contra Latomum deincendiariis,
handles not this controversy at all, but only expostulateth with the
deuines of Louane, which burned his books without examination, or Conviction
of them, out of the word of God. Many men have complained, and that most
justly, of the cruelty of the Papists in burning as heretics, the true
saints, martyrs, and members of the Church, whose faith and religion they were
never hable to convince of heresy, by the authority of gods word. But that no
blasphemer or obstinate heretic, maintaining blasphemy against the express
and manifest truth of God, is to be punished by death, I am persuaded he can
bring no book or author of any account, that so holds.

Fourthlie, he adds, that Luther by only scripture, found the
sacramentaries to be heretics. D. Fulk by the same scripture finds that both
parties are good Catholics. But as Luther erred in his opinion of the
sacrament, so he was over rash in condemning those whom he calls
sacramentaries: nevertheless seeing he erred of ignorance, and inconsiderate
zeal, he has found mercy with God, and is not to be adjudged as a
blasphemous heretic. For neither the error he maintained is blasphemy in it
self, neither did he hold it contrary to his knowledge, but as he was
ignorantly persuaded with zeal of truth, though deceived with error. How
Doctor Fulke proves this not only by scripture, but also by example of
ancient fathers, erring in like cases, and yet not to be condemned for
heretics, you may read in the place by this answerer quoted, and in his
confutation of Popish quarrels.

His last example is of many things which Master Whitgift does defend against
Thomas Cartwright, to be lawful by scripture, as Bishops, Dcanes, Archdeacons,
officialls, holy days, and an hundredth more, which in Geneua are holden to be
flat conirarie to the scripture. There are many things lawful by scripture,
which yet are not necessary to be used. The form of external government and
discipline of the Church is not so expreslie set down in holy scriptures, but
that euetie particulare Church has liberty, and must of necessity appoint
many things for order, decency, and government, which are not in express
terms contained in the scriptures, even as god shall give them grace to see
what is most expedient, according to the difference of times, places, and
persons, for the building up of the Church, in truth and love. Wherefore
although the Church of Geneua in the form of outward regiment, rites, and
discipline, differing from the Church of England, do not use the same things
that we do, yet it follows not that they hold them to be flat contrary to
the scripture, neither is our answerer hable soundly to prove, that he does
so boldly asseuere.

To proceed, he tells us what advantage herctikes have by only scripture:
they make themselves therebie judges of Doctors, Councels, histories,
presidentes, cusiomes, prescriptions, yea of the books of scripture, and sense
it self, reserving al interpretation to themselves. But this is nothing so,
for howsoeuerheretikes take upon them to control al things, according to their
fantasy, yet have they noe advantage by only scripture, but therebie may
be, and are confounded, when they come to examination and tri all. And as for
the professors of the Gospel, which acknowledge the scriprure to be
sufficient to teach all Ioh 5.
things needful to be knownevnto salvation, although they are by god him self
made Judges of the spirits of al men, by exacting them unto the trial of the
word of Iho. 17.
god, which is the only certain rule of truth, yet do they not by private
authority judge of Counsels, doctors, fathers, customs, etc. But by that
charge, which is laid upon them to judge, and condemn, even the Angels Gal. 1.
from heaven, if they should bring any other Gospel, then that which the
Apostles have preached; without al arrogancy or insolency against the Angels,
Councels, Doctors, Fathers, and whatsoever: but in giving god the glory, to be
only true, and al men to be liers, and no Angel to be credited, except they
speak by the spirit of God; of whose speech we have no certain
demonstration, but in the holy scriptures, and whatsoever is agreeable unto
them. The discerning of the books of scripture, and of the true sense of them,
is also committed unto the Church, and the faithful members thereof, that
doutful books be judged by those that without doubt are indicted by the holy
ghost, and delivered to the Church by faithful witnesses and instruments of
the holy ghost, to be of sovereign and perpetual authority in the Church, and
so are known and taken of the true Church from time to time, in such sort,
that although the same truth may be found in other books, yet (as Saint
Augustine says) they are not of the same authority, because there is not such
certentie of truth. As for the sense and interpretation of the holy
scriptures, it must be taken out of the scriptures themselves, which are
always the best and surest interpretation of themselves, in all points
necessary to be known, with the aid of the gift of tongues, the gift of
knowledge, the gift of interpretation, in them that have labored in finding out
the sense thereof, according to the analogy of faith, which is comprehended in
the scriptures, and that in places so plain and evident, as they need no
interpretation, and therefore cannot be wrested by damnable heretics without
great impudency, and against their own conscience: for which cause Saint Paul
wills an heretic after the first and second admonition to be avoided, as one
who though he will not acknowledge the truth, yet he is condemned in his own
conscience, and sins unto eternal damnation. Wherefore Counsels, Fathers,
Doctors, customs, examples, are by us admitted, but not hand over head, without
distinction, but such, and so far forth, as they be true and faithful
interpreters of the scripture, by matters and places plain, and certainly
known, opening matters and places obscure and unknown. Which is the office of
an expounder, and not to determine by his own authority of another meaning,
whereof, as among men, euetie man is the best in terpreter of his own, so is
the holy ghost of himself, in the scriptures by him inspired: of whose
meaning, where they be hard to be understood, no man can be certain, but
either by his own plain words, or by plain and necessary conclusion out of
his plain words.

Now touching the Papists, whom our answerer says to be restrained from
chopping and changing, affirming and denying at their pleasures, because they
bind themselves to other things beside the scriptures (to which they give
sovereign authority) as to counsels, ancient fathers, traditions of the
Apostles, and primative Church, with the like, the matter is far otherwise.
For whatsoever they prate of the sovereignty of the scriptures, of the
authority of councels, ancient fathers, traditions of the Apostles, and
primitive Church; they bind them selves to nothing, but to the present Popes
authority and determi nation in things, which he may choppe and change at
his pleasure, against which they admit neither scripture, Council, Fathers,
nor Church. For example briefly. The scripture most plainly forbiddeh the
worshipping of Images. will they give sovereign authority to the scriptures?
All the primitive Church for six hundred years after Christ, condemned the
worshipping of Images, even Pope Gregory that allowed the use of them: shall
the authority of the primative Greg. ep. lib. 7. ep. 109. Se reno. and lib: 9.
ep. 9. Sereno. Theod. dial: 2 Gelasius cont. Eutych
Church, or of Pope Gregory in this point ouerrule them? No, I warrant you:
they will set them al to school, and learn them a new lesson. Theodoretus
Bishop of Cyrus, and Gelasius Bishop of Rome, do in plain words affirm,
that the substance of bread and wine does remain in the Lords supper after
consecration: does either the antiquity of these fathers, or the determination
of the Bishop of Rome, which otherwise they affirm never to err in doctrine,
prevail with them against their new here sie of transsubstantiation? The
counsels of Constantiople the first, and of Chalcedon decreed, that the Bishop
of Constantinople should have equal authority and dignity with the Bishop of
Rome. The counsels of Constans and Basil determined, that the Council is
above the Pope. The councels of Constantinople the sixth and Nice the second,
condemned the Pope for an heretic: will the Papists of these days, trow you,
stand to the determination of these Counsels? you may be assured they will
not. But the traditions of the Apostles they hold fast, and bind themselves
unto: yea verily, as long, and as much as they list. What bears a greater
show of the Apostles traditions, then the Canons of the Apostles? which
excommunicate Can. 6.
a Bishop, priest or deacon, that puts away his wiffe under pretense of
religion: which excommunicate any of the clergy that is present at the
communion, and does not communicate, Can. 8.
except he show a cause why he does not. Which admmitted him, that is maimed
in his eye or other parts of his body, being otherwise worthy, unto the
office of a Bishop, because the maime of the body does not pollute a man, but
the Can. 77.
filthiness of the souls. These and such like traditions of the Apostles, how
are they regarded of our Traditioners? even as much as they list; and that is
never a whit at this time: and yet these men bind them selves to Counsels,
Fathers, traditions, primitive Church, you see how far. Yea you see, that
while they rail upon us, for appealing to only scriptures, they themselves
rely upon the present Popes authority only. Let all indifferent men
therefore judge, whether it be more safe for a Christian man, to bind himself
to the authority of scriptures only; or to the Popes authority only? and
whether claim a privilege of ease, they that will admit no testimony
irrefragable, but only the scripture; or they which chattering of many other
things, in the end conclude upon the Church only, which when it comes to
trial, is nothing else but the Pope only: for if all the Church say it, and
the Pope deny it, it is nothing worth with them: and if the Pope affirm it,
though all the Church deny it, it must stand for payment.

But seeing the sense and interpretation of scripture, is the chief matter we
have to speak of, let us consider, whether Master Charke be justly charged by
our answerer, to have abused that scripture by interpretation, which is the
chief ground of his preface, and which he says, is a full and plain rule,
whereby to discern and try the spirits: namely the text of Saint John. 1.
John. 4. Every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ being come in the flesh,
is of God: and every spirit, which confesses not Jesus Christ being come in
the flesh, is not of God, and this is that spirit of Antichrist, etc. This text
Master Charke does so expound, as that it contains a confession, not only
of the person of Christ, but also of his office, for which office sake, that
wonderful person of God and man, Jesus Christ, was ordained, and sent into the
world, to be a Prophet alone to teach, a King alone to rule, a Priest alone to
sanctify us, and to reconcile us to his father, by the obedience of faith. And
if any spiritte shall teach, that Christ is not our only teacher, by his
Gospel, but that we must admit unwritten belief, and traditions, from we
know not whom, to be of like authority with the written word: Secondly, if
any spirit make not Christ alone our King, and head to rule us by his holy
spirit, but teach, that a mortal and sinful man must sit in our consciences,
and for hatred or gain (which is his practice) bind or loose at his pleasure:
lastly, if any spirit impeach the all-sufficiencie and entire virtue of
Christ's sacrifice, offered up once for ever, and teach that themselves must
enforce it from day to day, by the continuance of their daily sacrifice of the
Mass, offered for the quick and the dead; it appears manifestly that such
spirits are not of God, etc. This interpretation of Master Charke (says the
answerer) contains many absurdities. For first the ancient fathers did
expound this place (as of it self it is most evident) against the Jews,
which denied Christ to have taken flesh, also against Ebion, Cerinthus, and
other heretics, that denied the Godhead of Christ. Note here by the
adversaries confession, that some places of scripture are of them selves most
evident, whereof this is one against the Jews and other heretics, that deny
the godhead of Christ. And I hope you shall see it shortly as evident against
the Papists, that deny his offices. To this interpretation of the ancient
fathers we agree, that whosoever denies the person of Christ, or any thing
proper to his person, is of Antichrist. But none of the ancient fathers do
affirm, that this text is to be understood against such enemies only, as
deny the Godhead or manhood of Christ. For Augustine and Oecumenius do
interpret it against all heretics and schismatikes, which, although they
confess this matter in words, yet deny it in deeds: and Oecumenius against
all wicked persons, which have not the spirit of Christ, mortifying their
ungodly lusts, which carry not the mortification of Christ in their body,
etc. Augustine also expounds the place against all that break charity.
(...). Joan. Tract. 7.
Omnes negant Iesum Christum in carne venisse, qui violant charitatem. All they
deny Jesus Christ to have come in the flesh, which do break or violate
charity. and why so? because not only the person that came, but the end
why he came must be considered, in the interpretation of this place (as Saint
Augustine rightly judges) or else all heretics will after a manner in tongue
and words confess, that Jesus Christ came in the flesh. But, Quaeramus (says
he) quare venerit in carne Christus, and inueniemus qui eum negant in carne
venisse. Let us inquire wherefore Christ came in the flesh, and we shall find
who they are, which deny him to have come in the flesh: For if you give heed
to their tongues, you shall hear many heretics confessing, that Christ came
in the flesh: but the truth conuinceth them, wherefore came Christ in the
flesh? was he not God? was it not said of him, In the beginning was the word,
and the word was with God, and the word was God? did he not feed the
Angels, and does not he himself feed the Angels? did he not so come that
he departed (...) fromthence? did he not so ascend, that he did not forsake us?
Then wherefore came he in the flesh? Because the hope of resurrection ought to
have been showed unto us. He was God, and he came in the flesh, for God could
not die, the flesh could: therefore he came in the flesh, that he might die for
us. And how died he for us? No man has greater love then this, to give his
life for his friends: therefore love brought him to the flesh. Whosoever
therefore has not love, denies Christ to have come in the flesh. It is
manifest now by this discourse of Augustine, upon some particular causes of
Christ coming in the flesh, that his chief and principal offices cannot be
excluded in the right interpretation of this text, and therefore Master Charke
has rightly inferred, that whoesoeuer denies the offices of Christ, or any
part of them, is no less confounded by this scripture, then they that deny
his person, or any part, or essential property thereof: and that by the
consent of the ancient fathers exposition, without the which also the text is
evident of it self. For the very names of Jesus and Christ do comprehend
his offices, which whoesoeuer denies, although in words he confess his
person and names, does make but an Idol of Jesus Christ, whoesoeuer therefore
confesses not Christ to be a Savior, Prophet, King, and Priest, is not of
God, but of Antichrist: he whosoever confesses not that he is a wholl and
only Savior: Prophet, King, and Priest, is of the same spirit of
Antichrist, that denies Jesus Christ being come in the flesh: or, as the
vulgar translation has, that dissolueth Jesus. For whoesoeuer sets up any
other Savior, Prophet, King, or Priest in that sense, that these offices
pertain unto Jesus Christ, dissolueth Jesus, denies Jesus Christ to have come
in the flesh, who came to be our only Master-teacher, according Mat. 23. 8.
to the manifest texts of scripture, which has taught us all things, likewise
our only spiritual King, and eternal Ihon. 4. 25.
and high priest, whose office both kingly and priestlie, being confirmed to
him by an oath, passes Psa. 110. Heb. 7. 2. 24. Ioh. 18. 37. 1. Tim. 6. 5.
Apoc. 17. 14. 19. 16.
not from him unto any other in succession, but remains always the only
mighty Prince, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. Whoesoeuer therefore
derogateth from Christ any part of these dignities, and offices, denies
Jesus Christ coming in the flesh, and so do the popish Catholics, or
papists, by their doctrine of traditions, Popes authority, sacrifice of the
Mass and such like.

Nay, says the answerer, Martine Luther interprets this place, to be
understood of M. Charke and his fellows, Tom. 7. Wittemb. Fol. 414.
saying, That spirit is not of God, but of Antichrist, which dissolueth
Christ's flesh in the sacrament. It cannot be denied but Martin Luther was in
this case to rash and presumptuous, in condemning other men for holding this,
contrary to that wherein he erred himself. But this answerer is too
impudent, to faigne sayings and words of his, yea and to apply that which he
said further then Luther him self does. For first these words that are
alleged as Luthers saying, are none of his, but forged by the answerer.
Secondly that which Luther says, founding to such a matter, can not be
drawn against M. Charke and his fellows, who maintain no such absurdity, as
Luther in that place oppugneth. The very words of Luther in his book
entitled Defen: verb: Caenae, Accipite, etc. are these. Quare in superioribus
dixi hunc spiritum non esse bonum, neque per istos fanaticos homines quicquam
boni machinari: quanquam existimem hos concionatores, contra quos haec
scribuntur, nondum mali quicquam in animo habere. Sed bone Deus, non sunt sui
ipsorum compotes. and continentes, a (...) (...) and captiui tenentur. Quare
eis nimium sidendum non ect. Nam spiritus qui Christi carnem dissoluit, non est
a Deo, inquit Ioannes, idqque probam spirituum vult esse. Hic spiritus vere
dissoluit carnem Christi, cum came inutilem, pereuntem, and prorsus communem
carnem affirmat, qualis est bouis aut vituli. Wherefore I said before that
this spirit is not good, neither Luther spea keth against the rebellious
rustical bou res principally, and the Anabaptists.
goes about any good thing, by these fantastical men (the rebellious boures)
although I suppose these preachers, against whom these things are now
written, as yet to have none evil thing in their mind. But good God, they
have no power nor hold of them selves, they are blinded and holden captive by
a spirit, wherefore they must not be trusted too much. For that spirit which
dissolueth the flesh of Christ, is not of God (says Saint John) and that he
will have to be the trial of spirits. This spirit in deed dissolueth the
flesh of Christ, when it affirms, that it is unprofitable, perishing, and
altogether common flesh, such as is the flesh of an Ox or a calfe. This is
Luthers saying: now it is certain that M Charke and his fellows do neithet
think, nor speak so irreverently of the flesh of Christ, animated with his
spirit, which they acknowledge to be very true meat, wherewith we are fed
unto eternal life. They had some smacke of Nestorianisme therefore, against
whom Luther utters these words, from which M. Charke and his fellows, God
be thanked, are free.

But now comes our answerer, after he has forged a place of Luther, and
hammered it out against Master Charke, to marvel that these men can find so
many absurdities upon one sentence of scripture: and first he would ask,
whether Master Charke thinks, that the Papists do exclude Christ, when they
allow Prophets, to teach under him, Kings to reign under him, Priests to
sanctify under him, or no. As though there were no way for Papists to be
guilty of Antichristianisme, except they did exclude Christ altogether;
whereas it has been proved, that whosoever does not acknowledge the wholl,
and every part of his offices, is of Antichrist. As for Prophets, Kings, and
Priests, to teach, reign, and sanctify under Christ, is not the matter in
question, but to teach, reign, and sanctify beside Christ, to claim like
authotitie in teaching, governing, and sanctifying with him: as to be fellow
Prophets, fellow Kings, and fellow priests with him, to teach that Christ
taught not, to make articles of faith, to dispense against Gods commandments,
to make laws to bind the conscience of men, to sanctify them by their work,
whom Christ by his only oblation has made perfect for ever. They that hold
these points, deny Christ to be a perfect Prophet, King, and Priest. But these
be deep mysteries of puritanisme, says the answerer, Christ is a Prophet
alone, a King alone, a Priest alone: the overthrow of all government. No, sir,
no: to acknowledge Christ to be our only Prophet, king, and priest,
overthrows not, but establishes all power, that is ordained under him to
teach, govern, and sanctify. The scripture in deed Ephesians. 4. and Acts. 5. does
allow Prophets and teachers in the Church, but not authors of new doctrine, no
makers of new articles of faith, no traditions beside the Gospel of Christ,
which is written, that we might believe, and believing have eternal life in
his name. The scripture allows Ioh. 20. 31.
Kings, and rulers, 1. Pet. 2. Act. 2. but the scripture gives no authority
to any king or ruler, to dispense against the laws of God, nor to any Prophet
or priest, to discharge subjects of their oath made to their lawful Prince, to
bind the conscience of man with new constitutions, as necessary to salvation,
etc. But whereas you ask, whether Priests may not sanctify by the word of
god, 2. Tim. 4. you are near driven for proofs. For to omit that the
Chapter you quote, has never a word either of priests or sanctifying, and to
take your meaning to be of 1. Tim. 4. verse. 5. the Apostle speaks not of the
Priest, or ecclesiastical ministers power of sanctifying, but of every
Christian man, and woman, to whom every creature of God, in the right use
thereof, is sanctified, by the word of God and prayer: and against them that
forbid things consecrated and allowed by God (as matrimony, and meats
sanctified by his word, that has given them to be received with
thanksgiving, and by the prayer of the thankful receiver, as a mean to
obtain sanctification Apoc. 15. 4.
from God, who only is holy, and therefore has only power properly to
sanctify) and to inioyne, as more holy by their own making, and not by Gods
sanctification, virginity then matrimony, fish then flesh, yca take upon them
to sanctify Gods creatures in an other use then God has appointed them, as
water, fire, garments, boughs, flowers, bread and such like, for religion, and
sanctifying of Christian men.

Again he asks, what do the traditions of Christ and his Apostles (for of
those only they talk, when they compare them with scripture) impeach the
teaching of Christ and his Apostles? I answer, there are no traditions of
Christ and his Apostles, pertaining to a Christian Ioh. 20. 31. Luke 1. 3. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Act. 24. 14. Act. 26. 22.
man's duty to obtain erernall life, but those that be comprehended in the
holy scriptures, as the spirit of God in the scripture, which cannot lie,
does testify. And therefore, they are the traditions of men, and not of Christ
and his Apostles, that areso called, under which title all heresies and fancies
may be brought in, without testimony of the written word of God. Wherefore
such traditions do greatly impeach the office of Christ's teaching,
reproouing his Apostles and Evangelists of imperfection, if they have not
comprehended the sum of all that Christ taught, and did for our salvation
which Saint Luke in the beginning of his Gospel, does profess that he has
done and that very exactlie. And further it is false, that our answerer says,
they talk of the traditions of Christ and his Apostles only, when they
compare them with scripture. For they compare the decrees, of their Pope, and
of their general counsels allowed by him, to be of equal authority with the
holy scriptures, as well as traditions.

Secondly he asks: what does the spiritual authorttie of the Pope under
Christ, diminish the Kingly power, and authority of Christ? I answer, the
Pope has no spiritual authority under Christ, by any grant of Christ, but
he usurps authority above Christ, when he will control the laws and
institutions of Christ, as denying the cup of blessing unto the lay people,
and in taking upon him to make new laws, and to inioyne men to observe them
in pain of damnation, as be his laws of abstinence from marriage and meats,
for religions sake, which Christ has left free for all men, even for Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons of the Church, and in an hundred matters beside.

Last of all he asks, How does the priesthood of men, as from Christ, or the
sacrifice of the altar instituted by Christ, disgrace Christ's priesthood, or
his sufficient sacrifice once for all offered on the cross? I answer, the
priesthood of reconciling by sacrifice, does not pass from Christ to any man,
because he has by one sacrifice made perfect for ever, all that are
sanctified, and lives for ever to make intercession for us, therefore has (as
the Apostle says) (...), a priesthood that passes not to any other in
succession, Heb. 7. 24.
as Arons priesthood did, whereby he is able to save for ever, those that come
unto God by him. Again, I deny that Christ did institute that sacrifice of
the altar, whereof there is no word in all the scripture, and therefore a new
priesthood, and a new sacrifice must needs be blaspemous against the eternal
priesthood, of Christ, and that one sufficient sacrifice which he offered, and
therebie found eternal redemption.

The texts alleged by Master Charke. Heb. 7. and 9. he says do not impeach
this daily sacrifice of theirs, because they grant that sacrifice once
offered, etc. in that manner, as it was then done, meaning bloodelie, whereas
they offer it vnbloodelie, etc. But the wholl discourse of the Aposile
throughout the wholl epistle almost, excludes all repetition of that
sacrifice in any manner. For therepetition of the same sacrifice, should argue
imperfection in it, Heb. 10. 11. Heb. 9. 22. Heb. 9. 25. 26. Heb. (...). 25
as it did in the Jewish sacrifices, and without shedding of blood there is
noremission of sins. Is Christ should be often offered, he should often
suffer. All which being impossible, it remains that as Christ offered
himself but once, and not often; so no man has authority or power to offer
him any more: neither is there any need he should be more then once offered,
seeing by that one oblation, he has made perfect for ever, all that are
sanctified, Heb. 9. 12. Heb. 10. 14.
and has found eternal redemption for all that believe in him. But for proof
that there must be such a daily sacrifice in the Church, until the end of the
world, he alledgeiu the prophecy of Daniell. 12. and Malachie 1. whereas
Daniell speaks of the daily sacrifice of the Law, which should cease in the
persecution of Antiochus, and be Dan. 9.
utterly abolished by the death of Christ. And Malachic of the sacrifice of
praise and thankesgeuing, which by all nations is offered, as a pure sacrifice,
and Heb. 13. 15.
acceptable to him, through Christ. The former exposition is allowed by S.
Jerome to be verified of Antiochus in a type of Antichrist, who shall forbid
culium Dei, the worship of God, which does not require any Dan. 12.
such sacrifice, neither is the word sacrifice in the Hebrew text of Daniell.
And therefore it is an unlikely place to prove a sacrifice propitiatory of
the body of Christ in the Mass. The prophecy of Malachie by general consent
almost of all ancient fathers, is expounded as I have said, of the sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving, which is offered at al times by the faith full:
and especially in the celebration of the Lords supper. But most cleerelie
Instinus Martyr in his Dialogue against the Jews, speaking of the very same
text of Malachie, and the sacrifices that are offered in all places by the
gentiles, that is the bread of thanksgiving, and the cup of thanksgiving:
has these words, (...) etc. For I my self do affirm, that prayers, and
thanksgiving made by worthy persons, are the only perfect and acceptable
sacrifices to God. For these are the only sacrifices that Christians have
received to make, to be put in mind by their dry and moist nourishment, of
the passion, which God the son of God, is recorded to have suffered for them.
If prayers and thanksgiving be the only sacrifices, which Christians have
received to offer, and are the only perfect, and acceptable sacrifices to
god, as Justinius in plain words affirms, where is the unbloody sacrifice
of the natural body and blood of Christ, yea of Christ himself unto god his
father? If prayers and thanksgiving be the only pure sacrifice prophesied by
Malachie, then is not the natural body of Christ offered in the Mass;
neither has the Church any such sacrifice. And although the ancient fathers,
often times do call, the celebration of the Lords supper a sacrifice, yet you
see by the judgment of Justinius, how they are to be understood, of a
spiritual sacrifice, of prayer and thanksgiving for the death of Christ on
the cross, and our perfect redemption therebie: which also they called an
unbloody sacrifice Indeclar. Anath: 11. Orat. In Iul.
sometimes, as Cyrill and Nazianzen in the place by the answerer quoted, but
either in the same places, or some other of their works, they do evidently
declare, that they meant no sacrifice propitiatory of the natural body of
Christ, but of praise and thanksgiving, for tbe only insacrificable
sacrifice of Christ's In sanct. pasor at. 4.
passion, as Gregory Nazianzen does call it. Saint Augustine also in the place
by the answerer quoted, Cont. Faust l. b. 20 Cap. 21.
shows plainly, that this sacrifice of praise is celebrated, by the
sacrament of rememberaunce of the slesh and blood of Christ, which in truth it
self was offered in the passion of Christ. Sed quid agam, etc. But what shall
I do, and when shall I make demonstration to so great blindenes of these
heretics, what force that has which is song in the Psalms: The sacrifice of
praise shall glorify me, and there is the way where I will show my saving
health? The flesh and blood of this sacrifice, before the coming of Christ,
was promised by oblations of similitudes: in the passion of Christ by the
truth it self it was yealded: after the ascension of Christ by the sacrament
of rememberance it is celebtated. Who sees not here, a manifest opposition
between yealding by the truth it self, and celebrating by a sacrament of
rememberance.

But that the sacrifice of the Mass, is the same that was offered on the
cross, differing but in the unbloody manner of oblation, Saint Chrysostom
(says out answerer) does prove at large upon the epistle to the Hebrews.
Hom. 17. whom if Master Charke and his fellows would not disdain to read,
and believe, they would be ashamed to cavil and blaspheme gods mysteries, as
they do. The place of Chrysostom has been often alleged on both parts: by
the Papists, for a show and a color of the matter: by the other side, for a
manifest demonstration, that Chrysostom (as he does interpret himself)
makes nothing for the Popish sacrifice of the Mass, but altogether against
it. His words are these, after he has showed the imperfection of the legal
sacrifices, by the often repeating of them, Then what do we every day? do we
not offer? yes we offer, but we make the remembrance of his death: and this is
one sacrifice, and not many. How is it one, and not many? Seeing it was once
offered, it was carried into the holy of holies. This thing is a figure or type
of that sacrifice, and this sacrifice of that. For we offer the same always,
not now an other, but always the same. Therefore it is one sacrifice by this
reason: otherwise because it is offered in many places, are there many
Christ's? Not so, but one Chrisi every where, both here full and perfect, and
there full and perfect. one body. Therefore as being offered in many places,
it is one body, and not many bodies, so is it one sacrifice. He is our high
priest, which offered that sacrifice, which makes us clean. the same do we
offer now also, which then was offered, which can not be consumed. This is now
done in the remembrance of that which was then done. For do ye this (says he)
in remembrance of me: we do not offer an other sacrifice, as the high Priest,
but the same always: but rather we work the remembrance of a sacrifice. These
words of Chrysostom declare, that the name of sacrifice, is un properly given
to the celebration of the Lords supper, which is rather a remembrance of a
sacrifice, then a sacrifice indeed. Secondly, that reteining the name of a
sacrifice, there is great difference between it, and the sacrifice of Christ:
for the thing here offered, is a type of that which was offered there, and this
sacrifice, is a figure of that sacrifice. Thirdly Christ offered the only
sacrifice propitiatory, that purges away sins: this oblation is but a
remembrance of that, to stur us up to thankfullnes for that, and to confirm
our faith in our spiritual nourishment, by that body and blood which was once
offered for all, never to be repeated. So that Master Charke and his fellows
have not Chrysostom their adversary in this place, but receive great light by
this exposition of the name sacrifice, which is not properly so to be called,
but rather a remembrance of a sacrifice. And it is not to be doubted, but that
other ancient fathers used the name of sacrifice in the same sense that
Chrysostom did.

The answerer refers his reader further to Theodoret, and Saint Augustine,
who handles this question, why Christians do now use to sacrifice, seeing the
old law with all sacrifices were abolished, by the one sacrifice of Christ. You
may see by this that our answerer has more care to point his margent with
quotation of the Doctors, which the ignorant can not read, then he has
judgment to consider what the Doctors write. For this place of Theodoret is
clean contrary to the sacrifice propitiatory of the Mass. The words are
these of the translation of Gentianus Heruetus, a man not to be suspected of
Papists: Siergo and Sacerdotium quod est ex lege, finem (...), and Sacerdos qui
est secunduin ordinem Theodoret. (...) ep. ad heb. cap. 8.
Melchisedech, obtulit sacrificium, and effecit vt alia sacrificia non essent
necessaria, cur noui testamenti Sacerdotes, mysticam liturgiam seu sacrificium
peragunt? Scd clarumest iis qui sunt in rebus diuinis eruditi, nos non aliud
sacrificium offerre, sed illius vnius and Salutaris memoriam peragere. Hoc enim
nobis proecepitipse dominus. Hoc facite in meam recordationem, vt per figurarum
contemplationem, earum quoe pro nobis susceptoe sunt, perpessionum recordemur,
and in benefactorem beneuolentiam couseruemus, and futurorum bonorum
perceptionem expectemus. (...) therefore the priesthood which is of the law,
has received an end, and the Priest which is after the order of Melchisedech
has offered sacrifice, and brought to pass, that other sacrifices should not
be necessary; why do the Priests of the new testament celebrate a mystical
liturgy or sacrifice? But it is clear to them that are instructed in divine
matters, that we do not offer an other sacrifice, but do celebrate a
remembrance of that one and helthfull sacrifice. For this our Lord him seife
commanded us, Doyee this in rememberance of me, that by contemplation of the
figures, we might remember the passions that were suffered for us, and continue
good will toward our benefactor, and wait for the fruition of good things to
come. This saying of Theodoretus, is a full and large answer in deed to the
objection by him made, of the improper term of sacrifice, whereby the
celebration of the Lords supper was commonly called in his time, but it is
nothing favorable to the Popish sacrifice of the Mass, yea rather it shows
the right use and end of the sacrament, which is an holy memorial of Christ's
sacrifice, not the same sacrifice it self, nor any sacrifice propitiatory,
but only eucharistical, of praise and thanksgiving. The other author, to
whom our answerer refers his reader, is Saint Augustine. Ep. 23. ad
Bonifacium, who proposes this doubt (says he) how we sacrifice Christ every
day upon the altar, seeing he is said to be sacrificed once for all upon the
cross. But in deed the question he answers, is, how the godfathers in
baptism answer, that the infants do believe, whereas they do neither believe
in deed, and it is uncertain whether they will believe: for resolution of
which question, he brings in example of the Lords supper, called the body of
Christ, and a sacrifice, whereas it is not properly either of both, but a
sign, sacrament, and memorial of those things: so is baptism called faith,
and infants said to believe, when they are baptized: his words are these,
often alleged against the Papists: Nempe saepe it a loquimur, etc. Verielie we
do often times speak so, that when Easter is at hand, we say, to morrow, or
the next day after, is the passion of our Lord, whereas he has sufferrd so
many years passed before, and that passion was suffered but once in all. For
on the very Sondaie we say: This day our Lord arose again, whereas there
are so many years passed since he arose again. Why is no man so foolish,
that would charge us to have lied, when we speak after this manner, but because
we name these days, according to the similitude of those days, in which these
things were done. So that the day is called the same, which is not the same,
but in revolution of time like unto it, and the thing is said to be done on
that day, for the celebration of the Sacrament, which is not done that day,
but was done long before? was not Christ once offered in himself? and yes in
the sacrament, not only in every solemnity of Easter, but every day he is
offered for the people, neither does he make a lie, which being asked the
question, shall answer that he is offered? for if Sacraments had not a
certain similitude of those things, where of they are sacraments, they should
be no sacraments at all: And of this similitude for the most part, they take
the names even of the things themselves. Therefore even as after a certain
manner the sacrament of the body of Christ, is the body of Christ, the
sacrament of the blood of Christ, is the blood of Christ; so the sacrament of
faith is faith. And to believe is nothing else but to have faith. And by this,
when it is answered that the child believes, which as yet has not the effect
of faith, it is answered that he hathfaith, because of the sacrament of faith,
and to convert himself to God, because of the sacrament ofconuersion, because
the answer it self pertains to the celebration of the sacrament. As the
apostle, of baptism it self says, we are buried with Christ by baptism unto
death. He says not we signify his burial, but plainly, we are buried with
him. Wherefore he called the sacrament of so great a matter by none other name,
then of the very thing it self. This answer of Saint Augustine, how full and
large it is, in that sense the Papists defend their sacrifice of the Mass, or
rather how directly contrary to the same, I refer to the judgment of any
indifferent reader, that with any conscience will consider it. Neither has
Eusebius. Demonstr, Eua. lib. 1. cap. 6, or 10. nor Theophilact, although a
late writer, in cap. 5. ad Heb. any thing that may uphold the Popish
propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass. Eusebius verily has these words, to
clear him both of the heresy of transsubstantiation, and of the masking
sacrifice, after he has spoken of the dignity and sufficiency of the
sacrifice of Christ's passion. Having received to celebrate the remembrance of
this sacrifice at the table, by the tokens or signs of his body and
healthful blood, according to the rites of the new testament, we are again
instructed by the Prophet David to say, Thou have prepared a table in my sight
against mine enemies, etc. By which words it is manifest, that Eusebius
acknowledged no sacrifice of the natural body and blood of Christ in the
sacrament, but a memory of that only sacrifice celebrated in the symbols or
tokens of his body and blood. Likewise in the exposition of the prophecy of
Malachy he says, That God by the voice of the Prophet having refused the
sacrifices after Moses, does by oracle declare what should be done of us,
saying, For from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same my
name is glorified among the gentiles, and in every place incense is offered to
my name, and a pure sacrifice: wherefore we sacrifice to god that is above all,
the sacrifice of praise. we sacrifice a divine, reverent, and holy sacrifice:
we sacrifice after a new manner, according to the new testament, a pure
sacrifice: and the sacrifice to God is said to be a broken spirit, for a
contrite and humbled heart God will not despise: and we do burn also the
prophetical incense, offering to him the sweet smelling fruit of the most
excellent divine contemplation, by those prayers that are sent up unto him.
Thus much Eusebius of the sacrifice of Christians. As for Theophylact, in the
place by him quoted, wherein either his Printer, or his note book has
deceived him, has nothing touching this matter in question, but upon the 10.
Chapter, he has the very words of Chrysostom, which I have set down at
large before. Suboritur hic quaestio, etc. Here rises a question, whether we
also do offer unbloody sacrifice: whereto I answer that we do certainly: but
we keep a memory of the Lords death, and it is one sacrifice, and not mante,
seeing he was offered up once for all. For we offer up the same always, but
rather we keep the memory of that oblation wherein he offered him felfe, as
if it were done even now. Thus none of the ancient writers, to whom he does
refer the reader, for defense of his Popish sacrifice, do speak any thing
for it, and some of them do write directly against it.

And now the answerer thinks he might have ended his preface, but that he
promised to show, that they offer most reasonable means of trial, and that we
in deed admit none at all. Of both these parts we have spoken already,
sufficiently to the conscience of all reasonable men, yet must we further
answer to such matters, as he can object against us. And first he says, All
the controversy being not of the words, but of the sense of the scriptures, we
admit no Judge but our selves. To this I answer first, that all the
controversy is not about the sense only, but some about the words also;
where we allege the interpretation of them out of the original tongues, and
they will admit none, but the vulgar translation, which in many places is
false, in some places also corrupted from the integrity in which it was first
written. Secondly, that we admit no Judge of it, but our selves, it is false
of us, and true of them. For they admit no interpretation of the scripture, but
that which their Church allows, which allows nothing, but that the present
Pope allows, whom they make Judge of all interpretation, and to whose
Judgment they will all stand: Conttariewise, we take upon us no judgment, but
that which is common to all men, by reason and learning to weigh all things
that are brought unto us, the chief Judge or rule to Judge by, being the holy
scriptures, in places of them selves evident and confessed, or to be confessed
by right reason, of all that acknowledge the authority of the scriptures, by
them to find out the obscurities of such places as are hard, and have need of
interpretation.

But if they bring scripture (says he) never so plain, yet will we shift it
of, with some impertinent interpretation, whereof he brings two, or three
examples, in which you shall plainly see, how like a Papist he handles
himself, in all kind offalshood and treachery. The first example is this.
The most of the ancient fathers write books in praise of virginity above
wedlock, and used to prove it by the saying of Christ: There be Eunuchs which
have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven: he Math. 19.
that can take it, let him take it. Also by the words of Saint Paul, he that
joins his virgin in marriage does well: and he I. Cor. 7.
that joins her not, does better. Which words being alleged against M.
Luther, who preferred marriage (yea though it were of a vowed Nun) before
virginity, he answered it thus, That Christ by his words terrified men from
virginity, and continency, Lib. de vot. Monast. in (...).
and Saint Paul by this speech did dissuade them from the same. Now what could
be replied (says he) in this case trow you? He begins with a lie, and so he
holds on. For the most of the ancient fathers have not written books in
praise of virginity above wedlock, neither is he able to prove, that the one
half of them have wri ten books of that argument, although many of them have
in their writings mentioned that comparison. Secondly, in the state of the
controversy, he offers us shameful injury: for we all confess, that in
the respects named by our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, virginity is
better then marriage, in such persons, as have the gist of continency: but not
in all respects, and namely not in such respects, as the Papists do prefer
it, of merit for themselves and others, etc. nor in persons that lack that
rare gift of continency. For neither Christ nor Saint Paul do say, that
virginity meriteth more then marriage, or the profession of virginity in all
men, though they have not the gift of continency, is better then a chaste life
in holy matrimony. Wherefore that which we affirm against the Papists, is
against that which they affirm, more then Christ or S. Paull spoke, and is
more then by any lawful demonstration can be proved out of their words.
Thirdly, in rehearsing the text, against the plainnes whereof he brings
Luthers interpretation, he fraudulently leaves out those words, whereupon
the exposition of Luther is grounded, namely these words non omnes capiunt,
etc. All men are not capable of this saying, Math. 19.
but they to whom it is given. If you ask, of what saying? the text is
plain, his disciples said unto him, If the cause of aman and his wife be so
(that he may not be divorced but for adultery) it is not expedient to marry:
but all men, says Christ, do not receive, or cannot take this saying. For
there be three kinds of Eunuchs, or gelded men, the third only being
voluntary, and for an excellent end, is commendable, so it be given unto him,
that he may take it. He that can take it, let him take it. Is it not evident
by this text, that Christ terrifieth all such men from this high attempt, to
whom it is not given, and exhorts them only which have the gift to use it.
Now to come to Luthers interpretation: First he says, that Luther prefers
Marriage before virginity, yea though it were of a vowed Nun. This as it is
simply set down, is a loud lie: for Luther acknowledges the preferment of
virginity before marriage, in persons having the gift, and for the end and
respects by Christ and Saint Paull named, as by his own words in diverse
places of his works is manifest, and most plainly, Exege. ad. Cap. 7. Ep. ad
Cor. 1. Nam sicubi coniugium quis cum coelibatu conferat, praestantius certe
donum est coelibatus. For if a man compare marriage with virginity, virginity
verily is a better gift. Concerning the marriage of a vowed Nun, if she have
the gift of continency, and will renounce the superstitious and blasphemous
end, for which she vowed virginity, and use it to the glory of God, you shall
hear Luthers judgment. Nec ideo caelibatum and virginitatem reprobare mihi
(...) est, nec inde quenquam ad iugale vinculum inuitare: quisque pro dono suo
diuinitus impartito vt potest feratur. For all this my mind is not to reject
sole life and virginity, nor to allure any person from thence unto wedlock:
let every man according to the gift given him of god, be carried as he may.
But if your vowed Nun have not the gift of continency, Luther is not afraid
to prefer chaste marriage before unchaste sole life, or the vow of virginity
that is not kept: and this he learned of Saint Jerome and Epiphanius, against
Ad Demetriadem. Cout. Apostolic. H. 61.
whom you may take your action, if yon cannot away with Luthers opinion.

By this the indifferent reader may gather, how these words of Luther are to
be understood, out of which our answerer brings example of absurd
interpretation. De vot. mon.
At virginitas and caelibatus, etc. But virginity and sole life is a Counsel,
Christ himself plainly did not counsel it, but rather feared men from it:
he only showed it, and praised it, while he said to the mentioned Eunuchs,
he that can take it, let him have it: and again, all men are not capable of
this saying: are not these the words of him that rather calls back and
fraieth from it? for he does not inuit and call any man, but only shows
it. Yet Paul says, I give counsel: but neither does he inuit any man, but
rather deterreth and calls back while he says, but every one has his
proper gift of God, he does neither persuade, nor dissuade, but leaves it
indifferent and free. but our unclean wiuelesse men understand nothing else by
counselling, but inuiting, exhorting, calling, and persuading unto sole life,
also to dissuade, dehort, call away, fraie away from marriage, which thing
they do in all their sermons and writings. Understand Luther here according
as he expounds himself, that men void of the gift of continency are
dissuaded from professing of virginity, and other which haueit, be at their
liberty to use it without compulsion, and there is not any absurdity in this
interpretation, but the very pure and natural meaning of our savior Christ
and his Apostles sayings.

The second example he takes, is touching S. John Baptist, his being in the
wilderness, his apparel of Camels hear, his meat, locusts and wild honey, of
which the old fathers do gather a singular and great austeritie of (...), and
do affirm that Eremites and Monks and other religious people, did take their
pattern of straight living from him. In this example are two things, the
austeritie of S. John's life, and the pattern of Monks. The former we al
confess, the second can not be proved out of this place, because the calling
of S. John was singular, neither do all, or most of the old fathers in
exposition of this text affirm this pattern, and they that do affirm it,
speak of the solitary men of their time, not of the false and counterfeit
Eremites, Monks, and Friars of these times, whom proudly and schismaticallie
he calls religious people: who neither in austeritie of life, nor exercises
of godliness, nor in the end of their profession, are any thing like the
other, but in name only: and yet we can not defend the other in all points.
Now what says our answerer upon this example? For this cause (says he) Saint
Chrysostom does often call S. John Baptist, Monachum, and principem vitae
Monasticae, a Monk, and Prince of Monastical life, which Protestants being
not able to abide, do rage marueilouslie against Saint Chrysostom, condemning
him of rashness and falshoode for using those terms. I pray you note his
liberal speeches: Saint Chrysostom does often call John Baptist a Monk, and
Prince of the Monastical life, yet he notes not so much as one In Mar. ho. 1.
place where he so calls him. He quoteth in deed the Centuries, Cen. 5. C.
6. page 711: who note one place where he calls him the Prince of Monks, but
Monachum, and principem vitae Monasticae, I know not where, and I am persuaded,
that no where Chrysostom has these words of Saint John Baptist. But how do
the Protestants rage so marueilouslie against him? The words of the
Centuriastes be these: Similia, immo fere, etc, The like, yea more
superstitious things does Chrysostom report of Monks, and first he makes
John Baptist Prince of al Monks, in deed somewhat rashly, and against the
truth of the thing. H. 1. in Eua Mar. Again, H. 69. in 21. Mat. he comes
forth a (...) into great commendation of them. For he says, they dwell in
hills and valleys, and being unmarried, do lead an Angelike life, and talk
freely with God, that their soul is without all grief and passion, and their
body is such as Adams was, before his sin, and this contrary to the
doctrine of original sin. The rest that he reports of them are good and
godly, and not to be found in the bastard Monks of these days, yea he would
have all married men to lead their life in obedience of Christ's
commandments, saying, that Christ has not commanded men to seek godliness
in the mountains, and wilderness. Neque enim Christus it a praecepit, etc.
For Christ has not so commanded. But how? let your light shine, says he,
before men, not before mountains, nor before the wilderness or secret places
from the high ways. And this saying, I do not detract from them that keep
the mountains, but I lament the inhabitants of cities, because they have
banished virtue out of them.

But how do Protestants interpret the words of scripture against the austeritie
of John Baptist? Marie first, says he, by the desert, wherein he lived, until
he began to preach, is understood nothing else but his private life at home in
his fathers house. For this is quoted, Sarcerius in 1. cap. Luc. and Cent. 1.
l. r. cap. 20. How impudentlie he belieth Sarcerius, you shall see by his own
words in the place quoted, upon this text, Et erat in desertis. Tam de vita,
quam de loco, intelliges deserta: nam and certum est Iohannem in deserto
vixisse, fortassis vt vel loco ostenderet, atque ip sa vita, qualis suaforet
doctrma: alias Iohannem fuisse in deserto, est Iohannem priuatum vixisse, and
educatum fuisse. And he was in the wilderness, etc. Thou shall understand the
wilderness as well of his life, as of the place: For both it is certain that
John lived in the wilderness, peradventure that even by the place, and by his
kind of life, he would show of what manner his doctrine should be: otherwise
John to have been in the wilderness, is John to have lived and been brought up
privately. How say you? does Sarcerius understand nothing else but his private
life in his fathers house, when he expresselie understands the word desert
both of the place, and of his solitary or private education? But what say the
Centuriastes? even to the same effect. Adolesientiae and Iunentutis studia,
etc. The exercises or studies of his childhood and youth are not put in
writing: Only Luke does rehearse, that being a child he remained in the
wilderness, until the time of his open showing, which is not to be
understood of some den, altogether sequestered from the conversation of men:
as though he had lurked there like a bear, and an hater of mankind, estranged
from all humanity, as in latter times Eremites, and such like men fained unto
themselves superstitious service, but he was Luc. 1. 65.
brought up under the discipline of his parents, which dwelled in a place,
lying in an hilly region, which was commonly called the wilderness: as we
also speak in our vulgar language. To dwell by the forest Hercinia, am
hartzowonen, that is, to dwell in towns near to the mountains. So afterward
he baptizeth in the wilderness, that is, in places near Iordane, where the
mountains are not far of: and yet every where there were towns and
villages. Thus it is plain, that the Centuriastes do understand by the
wilderness, not only a private life in his fathers house, but also his
dwelling in the wilderness. Except our answerer (perhaps) does think, that as
soon as John Baptist was circumcised, he was cast out into a desert place, and
not nourished in his fathers house, nor by them instructed in godliness. The
words of Lake are plain, Immediately after his circumcision. The child grew,
and was strengthened in spirit, and was in the desert places, until the day
of his open showing unto Israel. by which desert places, if he will understand
none other, but a vaste wilderness, void of all conversation of men, he must
needs place him there in his infancy by the text, before he could go, speak,
or help himself any more, then a child of eight days old. Again, he
must tell us where this wilderness was, into which John was so translated: for
the land of Israel, as it had many wild and solitary places, as every
country has, yet had it no such wilderness, as is imagined, but that was
inhabited with towns and villages, and the grounds thereof occupied and
frequented. Finally, he is meanly read in the scriptures, which knows not,
that the word desert often signifies the country, as it is opposite to the
city, and frequence of men, and not allwaie a barren forsaken land, as the
desert of Arabia, through which the children of Israel passed from Egypt to
Canaan.

Now touching his apparel, how is it expounded by Protestants? The answerers
words are these. And for his apparel (say they) of Camells hear, it was not
strange apparel, but usual to Mountain men, that is vndulata, says another,
water-chamlet, handsome and decent, albeit somewhat plentiful in that
country. For this is quoted, Marlorate in cap. 3. Mat. and Chytraeus in cap.
3. Math. The words of Marlorate are these: Hoc Euangelista non memorat, etc.
The Evangelist does not rehearse this among his principal virtues, that being
addicted to a rude and austere form oflife, he avoided even mean and usual
neatnes, but becawse he had said before, that he was a man of the mountains or
wilderness, now he adds, that his victuals and his apparel was agreeable to
his dwelling. And this he recites, not only that we may know, that he being
content with rusticall victuals and apparel, sought after no delicacie, but
that in this base and contemptible habit, he was of great estimation, even
among them that were delicate and gallant. It satisficeth not the Papists, that
he used a garment of small price, and great hardness, except it were of a
strange and disguised fashion, such as no man used the like. And therefore in
stead of a garment made of Camells hear, they cloth him in their Imagerie,
with a camells skin half naked, sometimes with the tail hanging between
his legs, as Hercules in his Lions skin is pourtraicted of the gentiles:
although the express restimonies of the ancient writers are to the contrary.
Therefore the Centuriasts write thus ofhis apparel, to whom perhaps our
answerer would be referred, because his quotation is before, etc. Fuit and
vestitus and victus ratio peculiaris: His apparel, and manner of living was
peculiar: which as in Prophets sometimes has betokened the greatest matters,
so also in this John his garment was wouen of camells hear. Neither is it
agreeable to truth, thatraw hydesweere so joined together, as some think, but
he wore an usual kind of garment, such as they were clad in, which dwelled in
those hilly places, namely base and rusticall, lest any man should suspect,
that he desired the greatest honors or the life of noble men, and. Again,
Horridior quidem paulo, etc. His garment of Camells hear was somewhat rough,
but yet strong and durable. You see these men acknowledge his garment to have
been base, rusticall, and rough, far from the daintiness, and bravery,
that is commonly desired in apparel, although they think it was usual unto
poor bowers of the country, that dwelled in the desert mountains, where he
had his abode. But what is he, that says his garment was of water-chamlet,
handsome and decent, albeit somewhat plentiful in that country? Chytreus is
noted on the 3. of Matthew, whose words are these: vestis Iohannis er at
contexta ex pilis Cameli, similis ei quam hodie vulgo a camelis vocamus
Kamelet, vel Shamlodt, Latin vndulatum. Non fuit sordida vestis, neque etiam
valde pretiosa, sed mediocris, and (...) and in iis locis (...). The garment of
John was wouen of camelsheares, like unto that, which of camels we commonly
call chamlet, in Latin vndulata. It was no filthy garment, nor again veric
precious, but mean, and decent, and in those places easy to be gotten. Let us
examine this saying, which sounds most like to our answerers charge. First,
he says not simply, that it was water chamlet, but like unto that, which is
commonly called chamlet, because it is made of the same stuff, that is camels
hear, yet differing much in finenesse, and price, as hempen sackcloth
differs from silk sackcloth, and yet is wouen like unto it: or as course
cloth of towe, differs from fine holland and camebrike, and yet is made of
the same flax, and wouen after the same manner. For of the fine and soft
hears, of some called Non de lana camelina Chrysostom. in opere imperfect. in 3.
Mat. hom. 3.
the wool of camells, is made fine chamlet, grograine, and such like: of the
course, hard, and bristelie hears, is made a comse cloth, like to the other,
but ofsmall price, and for the use of rusticall persons. Such one means
Chytraeus, that the garment of Saint John was. That he says, it was not a
filthy, or ill shapen garment, but decent, he speaks it against the gross
devise of the Papists, which in their pictures, do apparel the Baptist, in a
raw camells skin, and that not shaped to cover his body, but that his
arms, and his legs are bate. Saint Hicrome in Marc. says, that by the camels
hears, the riches of the gentiles are signified. Euthinius upon Mark also
says, that he was clothed in camells hears, non simpliciter incompositis,
not simply disordered, but wouen together, which seems to argue, that
although there weere no costlienesse, or delicacie, yet there was decency and
comehenesse in the apparel of John Baptist.

Now comes our answerer to his diet with these words: And lastly, touching
his diet of locusts and wild honey, it was no hard fare (say they) for the
locusts were creuises, cast away by the fishers of Iordane, as unclean by the
law, but eaten of John by the liberty of the Gospel. First we will speak of
the locusts, and afterward of the wild honey. For the locusts he quoteth,
Magd. Cent. I. lib. I. Cap. 4. and. 6. where he reports the Protestants, to
say it was noe hard fare, he uses his accustomable boldness of impudent
lying: for the Magdeburgianes, whom he cites, say not so, but clean
contrary. For when they have spoken of his apparel, and diet of locusts, and
wild honey, Cent. I. lib. I. Cap. 10. p. 357: they conclude in these words,
Tendebant autem ea omnia huc denique, vt constaret, Iohannem non captare
imperia huius mundi, neque Christum: and vt haec vitae simplicitas and
austeritas testaretur, non ob corporaliahuius vitae commoda, Christum
accipiendum, qui spirirualia and (...) bona largiretur. All these things tend
to this end, that it might be manifest, that neither John nor Christ did seek
the Empires of this world, and that this simplicity and austerine of life
might testify, that Christ is not to be received for corporal commodities of
this life, which gives freclie spiritual and eternal good things. The
Magdeburgians do here acknowledge a simplicity, and austeritie of life: they
do not say, it was no hard fare. But if they interpret those locusts to be
creuises, which are a delicate fish with us, it could not be hard fare,
whatsoever they say, as our answerer thinks. Let us then hear their own
words: but where shall we find them? Cap. 4. which he quoteth, contains 50
great leaves, or more, which he that has leisure may read over, and tell
what he finds to the purposeithe sixth Chapter has even as much, saving that
in it they say, that, Albeit John Baptist lined in the wilderness by Iordane,
yet was he no Monk, neither did he institute any Monkish or solitary kind
of living. For he took his journey freely about those places whether he
would, and did preach the doctrine of Messiah to the people, that flocked to
him daily. That which perteineh to this purpose of locusts, is in the tenth
Chapter, where their words are these. Cibus erat mel siluestre, etc. His meat
was wild honey, which the woods near hand did bring forth abundantly, as
Samuel. 14. and locusts. But what manner of living thing this was, it is
doubted among learned men. Some think it was a kind of Crabbe, somewhat like
the locusts in shape, which the Jewish fishers at Jordan did cast on the
banks, as meat forbidden by God. Leuit. II. Such also are certain Crabbes
that are bred in the Sea, of mean bigness, having a shell armed with many
sharp pricks, wanting arms, and having somewhat longer legs. If that be
so, John also did exercise an example of the liberty of the Gospel in that
meat, which used fishes that were forbidden, that all men might know, that this
Law of Moses was now abrogated. Other understand it of the land locuste, the
eating whereof is expresselie permitted. Leuit. II. Dioscorides, lib. 2. cap.
44. writes, that there is a certain kind of locust, which is called Asiracos
or Onos, which the people called Aphei dwelling about Leptis, do eat
plentifully. Plinius li. II. cap. 29. says, that locusts are a pleasant meat
unto the Parthians, and that they are found in some places three foot long. It
is manifest the Centuriaters do not affime that these locusts were creuises,
but only they report the judgment of some men that so thought, themselves,
rather allowing the common opinion, that they were land locusts, and in the end
concluding, that whethersoeuer you take it, these matters declared a
simplicity and austeritie of his life. For admit they were fishes, yet to eat
nothing, but such fishes, and wild honey, though it were never so sweet
honey, would be compted but hard fare of my Lord fat Abbot, and his covent of
Popish Monks. And it appears by the testimony of Pliny, that the land
locusts are as pleasant in taste, as the shrimps or creuises. Saint in Mat. 3.
Jerome upon his diet notes no more but this. Habitatori solitudinis, etc. For
an inhabitant of the wilderness, it is meet not to follow the daintines of
meats, but to satisfy the necessity of the humane flesh. A small repast to
sustain nature, though it be of pleasant meat, and always the same, will
prove no delicacie in any man. The elder writets were not all agreed what
these locusts were. Euthimius reports that some affirmed, that they were the
stalks of herbs, some that they were a certain herb called locusts, and
other that they were the insect or flying vermin. Yet he himself holds the
first. It is, I ween, no wrong interpretation, sometimes to declare the diverse
opinions of learned men, upon matters whereof question may be: wherefore
neither the Magdeburgians, nor Chytreus, who reports the like opinion of the
creuises, are to be charged with absurd interpretations, when either they leave
the matter to the readers judgment, or else they declare their own, without
prejudice of other.

Now touching the honey, our answerers words are these. And the wild honey was
noe unpleasant thing, as the fathers do imagine, but it was (say Cossius and
Strigelius) that pleasant Manna, which Apothecaries use to keep in their
shoppes: so that according to these men, all that austeritie of life which the
scriptures so particulerlie do recount, and all antiquity does wonder at, in
Saint Ihon Baptist, comes but to this, that he was brought up privately in
his fathers house, cladde in Chamlet, and fed with creuises and sweet Manna.
what great hardness was this? First, where he says, the fathers do imagine that
the wild honey was an unpleasant thing, he brings none for proof, neither
do I think he can bring in any more then Euthimius, In3. Mat.
noe very ancient father, who says in deed that this wild honey was made
in the clefts of rocks, by wild Bees, and was bitter and unpleasant. But it is
against all experience, that honey (though of wild Bees) should be bitter or
unpleasant. Of honey that is Plin.
poisonous, we have read in them, that have observed the diversities thereof,
but not of bitter honey. And the most ancient fathers rooke this wild honey
to be sweet, and pleasant in taste, and thereof gather allegories, analogies,
and anagogies. As Hilarious, which says, that the locusts, are we the gentiles,
before flitting, In Math. ca. 2.
unprofitable, etc. But now are the food of the saints, and the filling of the
Prophets, being chosen together with wild (...), to give most sweet meat, of
our selves, not out of the hyues of the law, but out of the stocks of wild
trees. Likewise Chrysostom upon Mark says, that, Honey is a token Hom. 2.
of pleasure and sweetness, and comes not only of flowers, but of every
volisptuous thing, and therefore was not offered in the law, but now eaten of
John, not in the Church, but without the Church. The author of the imperfect
work has these words: Et qui agrestium gentiuns, etc. And he which teaching
the sweetness of faith of the wild gentiles Hom. 3. in 3. Mat.
that should be, etc. did eat wild honey. Saint Ambrose speaks of it thus:
Ecclesiae quoque gratia praefiguratur, etc. Also the grace of the Church is
prefigured in wild honey, In Inc. lib. 2. In cap. 3.
not found within the hiue of the law, of the swarm of the Jewish people, but
powered forth in the fields and leaves of the wood, by error of the gentiles,
as it is written, we have found it in the fields of the wood. And he truly
did eat wild honey, preaching that the people should be filled with honey out
of the rock, as it is written: he filled them with honey out of the rock.
Add hereunto Cyrillus Hierosolymitanus, whose words are these. Thou seeft how
excellent a man he has chosen to be guide of this graet, possessing nothing at
all, a lover of the wilderness, but not void of humanity, cating Catech.
illust. min. 3.
locusts and preparing wings for the soul, eating honey and speaking things
more sweet and profitable then honey. This testimony is the rather to be
noted, because this man, being Bishop of Jerusalem many years, might easily
know, whether there were any bitter honey made in the wilderness about Jordan,
where John lived. But he acknowledges none but sweet honey. Beda also is a
witness of good antiquity, for the sweetness of the honey, that John the
Baptist did In Marc. 1. lib. 1.
eat. Locustas and mel siluestre edebat, quia dulce quidem, etc. He did eat
locusts and wild honey, because his preaching sauoured sweetly unto the
multitude, while the people judged, and all men thought in their hearts of him,
whether he were not Christ. But this opinion soon had an end, when his
hearers understood, that he was not Christ, but the forerunner and Prophet of
Christ. For in the honey there is sweetness, in the locusts swift flying; but
some falling down. Last of all, as latest in time, I will join to these
Theophilacte: who upon Matthew shows, that wild honey is called that, which
is made of wild Bees, and is found in trees and rocks, which no man will
suspect to be bitter. But in the first of Mark he makes the wild honey to
signify the spiritual food of the people, which is the scriptures, etc.
Quodammodo igitur and mel. After a sort also the people did eat honey, which
being made by the Bees, the Prophets, not gotten with any husbandry, nor
domestical, which was well understood, sought out and comprehended. The
Hebrews truly had the scriptures, as a kind of honey, but they did not
husband them, nor search them. This cloud of witnesses does prove most
evidently, that the greatest part of the ancient fathers did not imagine
that the wild honey was unpleasant of taste, as our answerer would have it be
thought; but that it was as honey, naturally sweet of it self, although the
continual eating there of did make it not delectable, as experience shows,
that the most daintic meat often eaten, is loathsome. Now whether it were honey
made of Bees, or dewhony, called in the Apothecaries shoppes Manna, it skilleth
not much, seeing the one is as sweet as the other. But where our answerer
cites Cossius, either his notebooke deceived him, orels goodman corrector was
studying of his declension, when he should have looked to his office, wherein
he has failed in quotation, three or four times together. There is one
Lossius in deed, who upon Mar. 1. thinks the wild honey was this dew honey
which falls upon the leaves of trees, and at this day is brought from the
country near unto Jordan. Chytreus and others think the same, citing Gallen.
lib. 3. de alim. facult, and Diodor, Sicul. page 691. to show the plenty of it
in those parts. But what of this? does Lossius hereof gather that it was no
hard fare? his words are clean contrary in the same place. Describit
Euangelista singularem continentiam, and duritiem vitae Iohannis. The
Evangelist does describe (says he) the singular continency, and hardness of
the life of John. Last of all, are Lossius, Strigelius, and the Protestants of
this time (think you) the first authors of this opinion, that wild honey is
the dew honey upon the leaves of trees? No verily. For Ambrose (as we have
heard before) makes mention of honey spreadde on the leaves of the woods. And
In3. mat. lib. 1.
Beda upon Matthew is very plain that it was so. Porro mel syluestre, folia
sunt arboris, mirae dulcedinis, quod doctri nae Iohannis nimiam suauitatem
ostendit. Now the wildehonie are leaves of a tree of merucylous sweetness,
which shows the exceeding great sweetness of John's doctrine. So that
Lossius, and Strigelius, are not the first writers that brought this opinion
into the Church, which obtained many hundred years, before they were borne,
as our answerer might have known, if he had been as well read in the ancient
Doctos, as he is bold to crake of all antiquity, whereof he never tasted, but
in notebookes, Dictates, or common places, of some other men's partial
gathering, as it may easily appear, by many experiments of his skill in
ancient writers. But mark his conclusion: According to these men (says he)
all the austeritie of life, which the scriptures do so particularly recount,
and ali antiquity does wonder at in Saint John Baptist, comes but to this,
etc.

You have heard, that all these men, do acknowledge the hardness and
austeritie of John's life, which consists not only, in the place where he
lived, the kinds of garment, and meats which he used, but also in his great
abstinencie, and fasting, which the scriptures Mat. 9. Marc. 2. Luke 5. Mat.
11. Luke 7.
do else where record of him, and his continual thin and spare use, even of
those things which he received. John came neither eating, nor drincking, but
with a mournful song: wherefore though his honey was sweet, and his locusts
pleasant in eating, whether they were fish, the infect, or the herb so called,
or the buds of trees, his course garment comely, and his education from the
time of his circumcision, in rusticall houses, rather then in the open air, or
in the dens of wild beasts, yet was his bringing up veric hard, remaining
always in the wilderness, and not in the Cities, or civil places, considering
the nobility of his birth, being descended from the stock of the high
priests, and allied unto the famlie of the Kings: his apparel rough and
hearie, after the example of the old Prophets, his diet thin and unpleasant,
not in respect of the ill taste of the thing he did eat, but of the continual
use of them, without seeking of Luc. 1.
variety, and especially his great and often fasting, his perpetual
abstinencie from wine and strong drink, his daily exercise of prayer, and
contemplation, when he was alone, his diligent and zealous preaching and
baptifing, when the multitudes came to him, his free and earnest rebuking of
all men's sins, even those that were greatest in credit, the Pharisees, the
Saduces, the high Priests, and the King himself. All these joined together,
are such arguments of austeritie and severity of life, as not only all
antiquity, but all ages past, present, and to come, may worthelie wonder at:
as for the place, the garment, the diet, be not matters of so great admiration
of themselves, neither so wondered at of all antiquity, as he bableth, not yet
followed of his Mocke-monkes, and false Eremites, that either the wilderness is
their dwelling, or the Camels hear their weed, or the locusts and bitter
honey their diet, or any thing answering to these in hardness. Their Monks
dwell in palaces, their Eremites in fine houses, near to cities and great
towns; their apparel, though in fashion disguised, yet neither rough, nor
hearie, nor of smalest price; their diet like Princes, and noble men: the life
of the greatest part of them idle, and lascivious. Therefore to their own
shame, they may account Ihon Baptist the Prince or first author of their
Monkish order, whom they follow as near in austeritie of life, as they much
come behind him in course of time. I trust all reasonable men may now
understand, what these unlearned quarrels come unto, when they be discussed and
examined, howsoever they seem to be bolstred out with impudent asseuerations,
multitud of quotations, false cauillations, and unnecessary collections. In
the rest therefore, I will be more brief, because my purpose is not to handle
common places of controversies at large; but shortly to discover the vanity
and pride of this answerer, and leave such matters to other treatises, where
they be fully answered.

A third example he takes, of our impertinent interpretation, about the
controversy of the real presence in the sacrament: which is nothing else, but
a beggarly craving of a matter still in question, which can bear no show of
of any lawful example, except it were clear against us, that our exposition
were beside the text, or contrary to it. But peradventure this fellow will
bring some new matter, that has not been heard of in this cause, to convince
us of absurd interpretations. First he says, they have these words of
scripture repeated in four several places: This is my body. If we 1. Cor.
10. 1. Cor. 11. Mat 26. Marc. 14.
did vtrerlie denic the sacrament to be the body of Christ in any sense, it
were somewhat that he says against us: But we grant it to be the body of
Christ, in such sort as Christ did mean, by those words. Contrariewise we
show the one part of the sacrament to be six times called bread, after the
consecration, in the scripture, the other part, twice or thrice to be called
the fruit of the vine, yet your gare interpreters the Papists, do utterly
deny the one to be bread, the other to be wine in any sense, but monstrous
and imperceptible, and that against the judgment of all antiquity, and the
plain words of diverse ancient doctors. But all antiquity (to our
answerer, a great antiquarie, as you shall sec by and by) are so clear for the
Popish real presence, as no man might without great offense doubt thereof, as
the words of Saint Ambrose and Saint Cyrill are. These books that he quoteth
of lib. 4. de sacram. C. 5. for Ambrose, and Catech. 4. for Cyrill, are not so
without controversy acknowledged to be so ancient, as those fathers, whose
names they bear: and yet they say nothing in this cause, of not doubting, but
we are ready to say the same: Namelia, that Christ having said, this is my
body, no man ought to doubt, but that it is his body. They have also other
words to declare, that their meaning was not of the popish manner of presence,
but the spiritual manner of eating of Christ's flesh, where of the external
sacrament is a figure, and similitude: as Ambrose, de sacr. lib. 4. cap. 4. and
5. de iis qui my ster: init: cap. 9. The same Cyrill also, though much to be
suspected for his antiquity, as very lately come into light, yet says in
the same place, that the body of Christ is to be received by fatih, not as the
Capernaites imagined, which thought they had been provoked to the cating of a
man's flesh. But that same Cyrill, says our answerer in another place, proves
at large, that to ask only, quomodo, how it may be, is the part of an
vnbelecuing Jew, and quoteth lib. 4. in 10. cap. 13. In deed Cyrillus
Alexandrinus affirms, and we subscribe unto him, that to ask, how God can
do, that he said he will do, comes of Jewish incredulity. He says not,
that it is a part of an unbelieving Jew, to ask how Christ's words are to be
understood, figuratively, or properly, carnallic, or spirituallie. Neither
does he speak in the place alleged, of Christ's real presence in the
sacrament, but of the question of the Jews, how Christ could give his flesh to
be eaten, which we believe verily he does, not one lie in the sacrament, but
even to infants, which never received that sacrament, or else we must exclude
them from eternal life, according to his words, except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you.

But now you shall plainly see, how skillful this answerer is in all
antiquity, whereof he talks so often and so confidentlie (as bayard is
always the boldest horse) The same Cyrill says he (speaking of him under
whose name are carried those my stagogical catechesis) is he that wrote upon
John's gospel, etc. whereas the one was Bishop of Jerusalem in Palestine, the
other of Alexandria in Egypt: the one not much nearer in time to the other,
then the provinces where they were Bishops are in place. For Cyrill of
Jerusalem was a very old man, in the time of the second general
Constantinopolitane council. Cyrillus of Alexandria was president of the third
general council of Ephesus the first: between which two Councels there was
above forty years distance in time. By which note of gross ignorance, it is
manifest, that this scorneful proud answerer has never seen the works of
the one Cyrill, nor of the other, but one lie the quotations and collections of
other men, which he uses as vauntinglie, as they were all of his own reading:
yea, if they be not pregnant enough for his purpose, he will make no bones to
falsefie their sayings, clean contrary to their meaning, as he deals with
Epiphanius, whom he affirms to say, That albeit the host seems to us of
arounde form, and insensible, yet whosoever believes it not to be the true
body of Christ, is fallen from grace and salvation: whereas Epiphanius says
expresselie, it is of a round shape, and insensible, as concerning power, and
yet it is the same that Christ said it to be, and we believe the same. The whole
discourse of the Doctor in that place, is contrary to the error of the carnal
presence; where he shows, that the sacrament is the Image of Christ, as man
is the Image of God, though he be not equal with God, as the sacrament is not
equal with Christ, but an insensible thing: yet nevertheless by grace is
called, and believed to be that which Christ said of it. This saying of
Epiphanius do we allow, and use as an inumcible argument against
transsubstantiation, and the carnal manner of presence, as was well tried, when
in the conference at the tower, it was opposed unto your client Campian, who
had nothing but vain words to anoide it, being a place, which he neither
understood in the authors tongue, nor after it was expounded in English, could
tell the argument, or occasion of it.

To the places cited out of Chrysostom I answered, that albeit they be
sometimes hyperbolicall, yet as he understood them, and does many times
expound him self, we confess them to be true, and yet no carnal presence
proved by them, as In Mat. H. 83. which our answerer cites in these words:
Sed quoniam ille dixit, hoc est corpus meum, credamus, etiamsi sensui absurdem
esse videatur. Because Christ has said, this is my body, we must believe it,
although it seem absurd to our sense. The saying is good and catholic, but
yet it is not altogether Chrysostomes, neither in this homily, nor in the Hom
60. ad Pop. Antioch. which also he quotech for it. The words of Chrysostom in
Math. Ho. 83. of the translation of Trapezuntius, be these: Quoniam ergo ille
dixit, hoc est corpus meum, nulla teneamur ambiguitate, sed credamus, and
oculis intellectus id perspiciamus. Because then he has said, this is my
body, let us not be holden with any doubtfulnesse, but let us believe, and
behold it with the eyes of vnderslanding. And ad pop. Antioch. Ho. 60. of
Germanus Brixius translation, these are his words: Quoniam igitur verbum
dicit, hoc est corpus meum, and pareamus, and credamus, and intellectualibus
ipsum occulis intueamur. But because the word says, this is my body, let us
borh obey and believe, and behold him with the eyes of understanding. A third
place he cyteth out of this father in I. Cor. ho. 24. in these words: Hoc idem
corpus, cruentatum, lancea vulneratum, and quod in caelum extulit. This is the
very same body, whose blood was shed, and which was wounded with the spear,
and which he carried up with him. We grant as much, that we receive in the
sacrament, the very same body of Christ, that was crucified, wounded, dead,
and carried into heaven, yet not coming down to us, but we (as Chrysostom
says in the same homely) by faith made Egles, and ascending up into heaven,
where Christ is: yet the words be not altogether, as our answerer cites them,
for immediately after the word vulneratum, follows, Fontes sanguinis and
aquae (...) so orbi salutares scaturiuit: Flowed forth (...) of blood and
water healthful to all the world. But he were to be pardoned, that has nothing
of his own reading, but is feign to cite all out of other men's notes, if he
were not such a proud and malepert censurer of other men.

To proceed, after these quotations, and citations of the ancient Doctors, he
comes to his adversaries, to show how contrary they are, in understanding of
this text of scripture, This is my body: they have found out (says he) a new
exposition, affirming that it must be construed: this is only the sign of my
body, for which they have neither scripture, nor ancient father, for warrant,
or example. But which of your adversaries (good sir) gives this construction?
This is the sign of my body, some do interpret it, and for that, you may
have warrant of ancient Doctors more then ever you read, if you durst deny
it. but this is only the sign, by which you mean a bare sign, to exclude
all true feeding upon Christ in his supper, none of the Protestants your
adversaries, did ever affirm. What Libertines, Anabaptists, and other
fantastical heads have imagined, we have nothing to do with it, no more then
with the eight several expositions numbered by Luther, or those 84. gathered by
Claudius de Xanctes: from all which we disclaim, and from all other, saving
from one, which is the true interpretation. And yet it is certain, that
Luther, an enemy to this truth, streineth much, and Claudius ten times more,
the words of the Christian Protestants, to so great numbers of interpretations.
Among whom if eighty more do utter the same sense in diverse words, you will
make no less then 80. interpretations. But because M. Chark acknowledges
Luther to be illuminated singularly by the holy ghost, and he is compared to
Elias, by the common phrase of all Protestants, our answerer takes pains, to
repeat diverse bitter sayings of his, against our interpretation of those words
of Christ, as which he had revealed to him by his holy spirit. A wife matter:
as though Luther being singularly illuminated by the holy ghost, is made a
Pope, by M Charke, that he can not err in any thing, or being compared by
some Protestants, and in some respects (for it is a loud lie that he is
compared by all Protestants) to Elias, may not be deceived in any point, as
Eliashim-selfe was.

But does our answerer, trow you, cite more truly out of Luther, then he did
of late out of the old writers, that we might think, perhaps he has read the
latter more diligently, although he has been little conversant in the former?
I will give you a taste, by one or two places. and first, that which he cites
out of Luthers epistle ad Argentinenses: wherein he clippeth and geldeth out
diverse wholl sentences, at his pleasure, or rather as his note book did lead
him. So that it is plain, he has read no more in Luther, then in the ancient
Doctors. The words are these. Hoc diffiteri nec possum, nec volo, etc. This
can I not. nor will deny, but if Carlostadius, or any manels, could for five
years past have persuaded me, that there had been nothing in the sacrament,
but bread and wine, he should have bound me to him, by a great good turn. For
I have taken great care, and anxietie, in discussing this matter, and have
endeavored with all my power, and synowes siretched out, to rid my self of
the same. Seeing I did well perceive, I might very greatly and especially
hurt the papacy. ((...) (...) (...), etc. Moreover Papatui. Answ. the pope.
I had two men, which did write unto me of this matter more rightly and
sharply then Carolostadius, nor sowresting That which is enclosed in the
parethesis is left out by the answerer. ()
the words after the capacitis of their own (...)) But I do se my self
captine, no way being left to escape. For the text of the Gospel is too
plain and strong, and such as cannot easily be overthrown by any man, and
much less by words and glosses devised by a fantastical head. (Quod si et i
am bodierno die. etc. Yea and if at this date it could be, that any man by
strong testimony of scriptures were able to prove unto me, that there that
which is enclosed in the parethesisis left out by the answerer. ()
is not any thing in the sacrament but bread and wine, yet there is no need
that any man should set upon me with so bitter mind) for I am alas to much
inclining to this part, as far as I canperceiue the nature of my old Adam.
(But by such furies as Carolostadius rages and is mad about this matter, it ()
omit 1 by the answerer.
moves me so much, that in defending my opinion, I am made more stubborn.)
In these words Luther being in an heat against Carolostadius, a vain
tumultuous person, acknowledges his own weakness of both sides. But by our
answerer he is charged with his honesty, as laboring to pervert the
sacrament, thereby to hurt the Pope. Yet neither any desire of perverting the
sacrament, or end of hurting the Pope is confessed in those words. For Luther
labored not to pervert the sacrament, but to find out the truth, if he
might: not to hurt the Popes person, but to oueithrowe the papacy, which is
the Kingdom of Antichrist: although he acknowledges, that his affection is
carried sometimes on the one side, sometimes on the other side, contrary to his
persuasion. Wherein he is an honester man, to confess his own infirmity,
then the answerer is, to quarrel and cavil with him therefore. For the saying
which he cites out of his epistle ad Ioh. Heruagium, Printer of Argentine, he
sends us to seek it in Gesners Bibliotheca, where is only the title at the
most: but where it is to be found among Luthers printed works, neither he nor
we can tell: and therefore how honestly he has dealt with it, I can not say.
But to this he joins certain other sentences of Luthers, taken out of a
treatise called a defense of the words of the supper against the phanaticail
spirits of sacramentaries: in which treatise, it cannot be denied, but Luther,
as he erred in the matter, so was he carried far beyond the bonds of
charity, and modesty, in declaiming against the contrary part: yet not also
much, as the answerer would have men think, by falsifying his words, and
mangling his sentence, after his usual manner. As in the first clause, he
makes Luther to say, accursed be their char. tie and concord, where his
words be, Illa charitas and concordia, that charity and concord, under
pretense of which (as he untruly gathered) gods truth should be defaced.

The second sentence, in which he derideth the diverse expositiones of
Carolostadius, Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, more by hap, then by cunning, he
has hit upon Luthers words, who yet else where confesses, that the
interpretation of Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius came both to one end: As for
Carolostadius fantasy, is as much rejected of us, as of Luther and the papists.

Now come we to the third place, wherein it is somewhat long to show the
fooletie of this answerer, which will take upon him, out of another man's
notebooke to set down Luthers words, as though he had read the^ himself,
even as he plaieth with all other writers sayings almost, that come thorough
his fingers, old and new. Yet, to discover his vain pride, and to shame his
fellow papists, that boast of his great learning, and much reading, I will set
forth the matter somewhat more at large: this is the answerers saying. p. 22.
And again in the same work, he has these words. To expound the words of
Christ, as the sacramentaries do (this is the sign of my body) is as absurd
an exposition, as if a man should interpret the scripture thus: In the
beginning God made heaven and earth, that is, the Cuckoo did eat up the
titling or hedgesparow, together with her bones. Again, in S. John. And the
word was made flesh, that is, a crooked staff was made a kite. This says the
answerer: but in deed Luthers words are far otherwise, and to another end,
then to show the absurdity of our exposition, although he have the words of a
Cuckoo, and a crooked staff, a titling, and a kite, as you shall see plainly:
Age vero, audiamus quo pacto verbis Christi, etc. Go too, let us hear how
they take away our sense from the words of Christ, and thrust in their own.
They affirm, that the word (is) is all one with the word (signifies) as
Zuinglius writes. And the word (my body) is the same that (the sign of my
body) as Oecolampadius writes. The words therefore, and mind of Christ,
after the text of Zuinglius, do sound thus: take ye, eat ye, this does signify
my body. and after the text of Oecolampadius, take ye, and eat ye, this is
the sign of my body. Now they are as certain that these sentences are true,
and they do as steadfast lie persist in them, in their hearts, as a reed is
wont to do, being shaken hither and thither of the wind, as I said. Therefore
by and by they glory, that we have no testimony of scripture, that the body
of Christ is in the Lords supper, but a little while after, they humble them
selves again, and desire to be taught, and promise that they will follow us,
if we shall prove by scripture, that the body of Christ is present in his
supper. And truly they do a great and earnest matter: but the same thing
comes to pass, as if, when I had a little before denied, that God created
heaven and earth, and had subscribed to the opinion of Aristotle, Pliny, and
other ethnikes, of the eternity of the world, and some man setting himself
against me, should bring forth that saying of Moses: In the beginning God
created heaven and earth, and I now to confute mine adversary, should expound
the words of Mosesthus: God, that is the Cuckoo, created, that is devoured,
heaven and earth, that is the titling all and wholl together with the bones and
feathers, and so should feign this sentence of the words of Moses: In the
beginning the Cuckoo devoured the titling all and wholl together with the bones
and feathers, and should utterly cast away that, In the beginning God created
heaven and earth: would not this seem to be a piece of cunning? Yet truly,
not unworthy, nor unknown of Iesters. Also it should be like, as if I would
deny the son of God, to be made man, to him that should lay against me that
saying of Saint Ihon. 1. The word was made flesh: I would answer, the word
signifies a crooked stafe, and flesh a kite; and the sentence is, a crooked
stafe is made a kite. But if my conscience did reprove me, and cry against
me, Master Martyne, you expound the text too peeuishlie and crookedlie, but,
etc. and I should keep in that (but) until shame died my cheeks with read,
and yet would say, fie on the false traitor, take away thy (but) and hold thy
peace, that no man ever perceive, or smell out, that I have so evil a
conscience. And afterward should set forth my self lustilie, and clapping my
hands together with full mouth should sing: Hei, how, the Christians have not
any place of scripture, which affirms and proves that the word is made
flesh. And yet at the last, I should submit my self again, and desire to be
instructed and taught, how they could prove it out of the scripture, which I
before had rent in pieces. If this were leife and lawful for me to do, O
mortal God, how great business and trouble might I cause in the old and new
testament, as well to the Jews as Christians! These are the very words of
Luther in deed. Now the end why he uses these fond comparisons, he shows
afterward. Quisquis enim vult verba scripturae aliter quam sonant,
interpretari, is tenetur ex textu eiusdem loci, aut ex aliquo fidei articulo
probare. For whoesoeuer will interpret the words of scripture, otherwise then
they sound, he is bound out of the text of the same place, or out of some
article of faith, to prove it. Which rule in deed, or the like, if it be
notkept, there will be no end of vain, and licentious interpretations. But
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius out of the text of the same place, where the cup
is called the new testament in his blood, and out of the article of Christ's
incarnation, and true manhood unconfounded with his godhead, do prove, that
their interpretation must needs be true: therefore these similitudes do not
show, that their exposition is absurd: also Luther him self denies, that his
meaning was to deface them by those gross similitudes and absurdities. Deus
nouit, etc. God knows (says he) that with these gross similitudes, I
studdie not to deface Zuinglius, and much less Oecolampadius, unto whom God
has given many gifts above many other men whose case I do lament from my
heart, neither with such words do I bend my pen against them, but rather
against the Devil, proudly and bitterly (...) us, which has circumuenied
and deceived them, that I might fulfill the lust of my mind against him, to
the honor of God, etc. These sayings of Luther declare, that albeit he stood
too much in his own conccyt, touching this sacramentarie matter, and was very
hasty and rash of judgment, in condemning them, that held the truth against
him; yet he was not so void of charity, as the answerer gathers by some
vehement speeches of his, showing here how he means them, and would have the^
to be understood, namely, not against the persons of Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius, but against the devil, who, as he falselie imagined, had
deceived them in this matter. So that the controversy is still, between the
true Catholics and the Papists, which part provoke to the scriptures, in
their true meaning, as the only sufficient rule to decide all controversies
of religion.

But which part alleadgeih the true meaning (says our answerer) according to
the council of wise Sisinius to Theodosius the Emperor, we desire to be tried
by the judgment of ancient fathers, indifferent in this matter, for that they
lived before our controversies came in question. This he says, but as I have
proved before, and namely in the exampled of transsubstantiation, they will
not stand to the judgment of the ancient fathers, further then their Pope
shall allow them. As for us, we refuse not the judgment of the most ancient
fathers, except it be in such matters, wherein it is manifest by the plain
texts, and necessary collections out of the scripture, that they were deceived
as even the Papists will confess in some points that they were. This wise
Sisinius, whose counsel he would have followed, was a wise heretic, who
first gave the advice to Nectarius the Catholic Bishop, by whom it was
commended to the Emperor, and had good success against all other heresies,
save the heresy of the Nouatians, who by means hereof came in credit with the
Emperor, and had free liberty to use their conuenticles openly. By which it
appears, that it is no perfect kind of trial, which was first offered by an
heretic, and wherebie he could not be convicted of his heresy. Again it was
not used against the sufficiency of the scripture, and the trial that may be
had therebie, but only to cut of quarelous disputation of heretics, which
are always more ready to contend, then to learn the truth. Last of all,
where he says, the ancient fathers are indifferent, for that they lived
before our controversies came in question, it is no sufficient argument, seeing
the ancient fathers erred themselves in some points, and no man is an
indifferent judge in that case, wherein he is deeeiued himself. Again, the
ancient fathers are not all of one antiquity, but commonly the most
ancient, the purest and furthest from all smacke of Antichristian errors; the
later more sauouring of the infection of the times; drawing toward the
apostasy. Even as water, the nearer the spring, is purer, but running further
of, through vnpure soil, receives some taste thereof. So the Council of
Sisinius in respect of the most ancient fathers, that were before the heresies
of those times, was better to be used in his time, then in these days, when
they that lived five hundred years after Sisinius, may be counted ancient
fathers in respect of us, yet their judgment not so weighty, nor so meet to
be embraced, as those first fathers of the primitive Church, to whose
judgment, if all matters of controversy were referred, the Papists should get
but small advantage.

But our adversaries (says the answerer) will allow no exposition but their
own, wherebie it is easy to defeat, whatsoever is brought against them,
scripture, or Doctor. In deed this which he says, is most true of the
Papists, as I have proved before, but untrue of us: for we allow all
interpretations, that are not contrary to the analogy of faith, and are
agreeable to the plain words, and necessary circumstances of the place of
scripture, and not repugnant to any other evident text of scripture. According
to which rules, we must examine all expositions of all men, since the Apostles
time: yea the Apostles themselves were content that their doctrine should be
examined by the scriptures of the old testament: but so are not the Papists:
for they hold opinions, Act. 17. 11.
altogether beside the scriptures. But our answerer, to justify that, which he
has said against us, brings examples of shifting scriptures and Doctors:
all which (except one) are gathered out of diverse writings of Doctor Fulke,
for answer of which, seeing he has set forth a special treatise, I refer
the reader Confutation of Papists quarrels.
thereunto. page 38. 39. 40. That one example which he could father upon no
man, I will examine here. The like evasion (says he) they have, when we
allege the words of Saint Paull, Qui matrimonio, etc: he that joins his
virgin in marriage, does well, and he that joins her not, does better. Whereof
we infer, that virginity is more acceptable and meritorious before God, then
marriage, although marriage be holy. No say our adversaries, Saint Paull
means only, that he does better before men, and in respect of worldly
commmodities, but not before God. If you ask him, which of his adversaries do
say so, he is not able to name one: for in truth we never said so, not think
so. But that which he says, they do infer upon the text, that virginity is
more meritorious before God, the marriage, we do utterly deny, and we say
furthet, that all the Papists in the world shall never be able, by lawful and
true arguments, to infer so much, upon these words of the text, or to justify
this kind of inferring; virginity is better before God, ergo it is more
meritorious. for the antecedent, which we grant, does not prove the
conclusion, which we deny. Therefore when out of the circumstances of the text
he proves, that virginity is better in respect of God, as a more excellent
gift of God, he takes more pains then he needs. For we confess as much,
that he that joins not his virgin does better, not only in respect of
worldly commodities, or before men: but also that she may be holy before
the Lord, in body and spirit, etc. then he that joins her in marriage: but
that he does better in respect of merit, and reward in the life to come (as
the answerer says) it does not follow thereof. I mean for the merit. As for
the reward, which God bestows of his mere mercy, does not prove any
merit or desert of the party rewarded. For he which uses the gift of God
well, by the power and strength which he has of God, shall of Gods goodness,
not miss of his reward; but he cannot therebie claim reward of duty, or of
merit; neither does the text alleged by him prove any such thing: Some
Eunuchs Mat. 16.
have gelded themselves for the kingdom of heaven, therefore they have
deserved the kingdom of heaven therebie. Such licentious kind of inferring,
will not only make popery to stand, if it were lawful, but also might be
able to justify all heresies, that ever were, by scripture. But bring these
illations or inferrings to the judgment seat of Logic, and they will
easily appear to be voluntary glosles, and not true expositions or
necessary collections. Yet these new doctors (says our answerer) do contemn
and (...) all authority, antiquity, wit, learning, sanctity of our
forefathers, and of all men: yea of their own new doctors, and masters, when
they come to be contrary to any new devise, or later fancy of theirs. Because
we may not receive every interpretation, or opinion of every of the fathers,
he makes this hideous outcrie against us. And yet we are always ready to
show, and have often performed the same, that in the most and greatest
controversies, the ancient Doctors, are against them, and very clear on our
side. Therefore it is an impudent slander that we reject or contemn all
authority, antiquity, wit, etc. of our forefathers: as it is a ridiculous
argument, that he brings, of our dissent from our late doctors and masters,
as he terms them: because we follow not the error of Luther, about the real
presence, and the use of Images: as for the number of the sacraments, and
books of the Bible, we hold Cateth. Luther. edit. 1530. Surius some. (...)
1530.
with Luther in his last judgment, when he was best instructed in those cases.

The order of service is free for every Church, to use diuerselie, as may
serve best for edification. The popish Churches have diverse uses of service, as
Sarum, York, Bangor Hereford, in England they had: how many then diverse
orders abroad? But Calvin (he says) is rejected about the head of the Church
in England, which is a manifest untruth: for Calvin is even of the same
judgment, concerning the Princes authority in causes, and over persons
Ecclesiastical (as is evident in his Institutions) that we are in England;
only he misliked the term supreme head, as offensive, though not evil, as
it was understood of the godly: and that term is forborne in England, for the
same cause, and another of supreme governor used, which signifies as much, as
was meant by the other, when it was rightly understood. As for the government
of the Church in Geneua, Calvin did never bind all other Churches to use the
same: what other points are rejected in Beza, he has no leisure to tell us.
But that all the Churches of the Protestants, as he calls us, in Europe, do
agree in the chief and principal articles of Religion, the Harmony of their
confessions, lately set forth in print, does give full and most sufficient
testimony. Ceremonies and for me of external government, were never in gods
Church accounted necessary to be all one, in every particular Church. And
some men may have their private opinions, sometime perhapes untrue yet
retaining the unity of faith, in the chief grounds and foundation of
Religion, with them that dissent from them, either justly or unjustly.
Wherefore our answerers final conclusion does not follow, that Protestants
will have only that to be taken for truth, which they last agree upon, and
their words must be the one ie proof thereof. whereas the world can
testifye, that the holy scripture is our ground, and from thence we challenge
the best proof: not refusing any other lawful proofs, that will stand with the
judgment of holy scripture, where it is most plain, and easy to be
understood, even without any interpretations.

The books of the scripture we receive, which the Church of God, among the
Jews before Christ, and the most ancient Church of the Gentiles since
Christ, has received and allowed: the sense we take even out of the same
books, and bring no foreine sense unto them: all writtings of men old and
new, we examine according to the same, praising God for such help, as we have
by his gifts in them, to understand his word: yet leaving to them, without
reproach, such things as proceeded from them selves, without the warrant of that
word: and this have all true Catholics always done, and no heretic is able
to do, albeit he would profess never so much to do.

To the former slanders, our answerer will have us adioyne this, that our
adversaries (says he) notwithstanding all request, suit, offer, or humble
petition that we can make, will come to no public disputation, or other
indifferent and lawful judgment: but do persecute, imprisone, torment, and
slaughter them which offer the same. Touching any lawful request, suit, or
humble petition made in due manner, to them that have authority to grant, I
never hard of any, only the seditious challenge of Campian is all the
request, suit, offer, and humble petition, that he is able to prove, was ever
made by them, for any such matter, before the publishing of this answer of
his. As for them that persecute, imprisone, torment, and slaughter them which
offer disputation, which he calls their aduetsaries, it is well known, that
Master Charke, and the ministers of the Church, are none such, neither have
they any such authority. It remains then, that he accounts the Prince,
her council, magistrates, and ministers of Justice his adversaries; who
indeed have good cause so to be, not only in respect of their heresies, but
also in regard of their manifold, and almost infinite practices of treason,
against the Prince and realm; for which, some of them have suffered most
justly, and not for offering of disputation, as this traitorous heretic,
every where, most slaunderouslie, does avowe.

But now for their parts, he says, they offere the best, surest, and easiest
means that can be devised, or that have been used in Gods Churches, for
trial, and they are many in number. The first is, the books of Scripture,
received upon the credit of the ancient Church, of which we are content (says
he) to accept for canonical, and allow all those, and none other, which
antiquity in Christendom has agreed upon. But this is false: for to omit
that they receive for canonical, such as the Church of God before Christ never
received, they receive also such, as the greatest, and best antiquity in
Christendom received not: as the Church in Origens time, witness Eusebius,
more then the Hist. lib. 6. e. 18.
Church of Rome, received in Saint Ieromes, witness Jerome himself, prologo
Galeato. and Ruffinus in Expossymb. more then the Council of Laodicea did
receive for canonical, as is manifest by the 59. canon.

The second way of trial, is the express and plain words of Scripture,
wherein they must needs be far superior: for what one express plain text
have they (says he) in any one point or article against us, which we do not
acknowledge liberally, as they do, and as the words do lie? yes we have
many, but a few shall serve: for example, God says, Exodus 20. Thou shall not
make to thy selse any graven image, etc. thou shall not fall down to the^, nor
worship them. Again Matt. 4. Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve: Which are most plain, express, and manifest against
worshipping of Images, and other creatures, in any use of Religion. Christ
says, drink ye all of this, they be express and manifest words, against the
popish sacrilege of the cup. The 14. to the Corinthians the first Epistle,
is express and plain against public prayers, homilies, lessons in a strange
and unknown tongue. 1. Tim. 4. in express and plain words the spirit
pronunceth, the forbidding of marriage and meats, to be the doctrine of
deuilles. And Heb. 13. Marriage is honorable in all men. And 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1.
a Bishop, Elder, or Deacon must be the husband of one wife, beside a great
number more. But the papists (says our answerer) have infinite texts against
us, which we cannot admit without glosses, and fond interpretations of our
own. A bold speech, as always he uses: but it shall always be found, that
if we do in any text depart from the grammatical sense, there is necessary
cause why: as if it be a figurative spcach, which is tried either by
circumstances of the same place, or by other texts of scriptures, and for the
most part, has the judgment of the most ancient writers agreing with our
interpretation. But the most of these examples he brings, have nothing in
show, that the expresle words of scripture are with them, or against us, but
by their fond, false, unreasonable collections, and such as they can never
conclude in lawful and true syllogismes: as for example. We have it (says he)
(for the supremacy) expresselie said to Peter, that signifies arocke, upon
this rock will I build my Church. We answer, that we might follow the
interpretation of the most ancient and approved fathers, that the rock here
spoken of, is Christ, whom Peter confessed but granting them, that they could
never euict, we confess that the Church is builded upon the foundation of
Peter the Apostle, but not upon him alone, or more principally, then upon all
the Apostles, who are all rocks, or stones, upon whose foundation, as also
upon the foundation of the Prophets, the Church of Christ Ephesians. 2. 20. Apo. 21.
14.
is builded. Neither is it possible to prove the supremacy of the Pope, out
of those words of scripture, or any other. But they have further expresselie
(touching the Apostles) he that is great among you, let him be as the younger
Luke 22. We have no where, there is none greater then other among you. Neither
do we hold, that none ought to be greater then other among us, but that Mar.
10. 43. 44. 1. pet. 5. 3.
the greatest among the ministers, ought to be servant of all the rest, and
that none ought to exercise Dominion over the Lords inheritance: yet the
primacie of order we grant, even among the Apostles, according to which James
was president of the Council at Jerusalem, Peter the chief Aposlle of Act 15.
19. Gal. 2. 7.
the circumcision, Paull of the gentiles: all which will not serve one whit, to
maintain the popish tyranny. For Paul was nothing inferior to the highest
Apostles. But for the real presence, they have expreslie: 2. Cor. 12. 11.
This is my body: we have no where, this is the sign of my body. Neither do
we deny the sacrament to be the body of Christ, neither do we affirm, that
it is a bare sign. But that this is a figurative speech, we have expreslie.
This cup is the new Testament in my blood, and Luc. 22. 1. Cor 11. 1. Cor.
10.
as expreslie the Apostle speaking of the same sacrament, the rock was Christ:
which proves that it must be understood in a sigue, and after a spiritual
manner, and so do all the old Doctors interpretit, as has been often showed.
We have expreslie (says he) The bread that I will give you, is my flesh. John.
6. they have nowhere, It is but the sign of my flesh. And we confess as much:
for we never said, that the sign of Christ's flesh was crucified for us, but
his very natural body, which he promises in that text, to give for the life
of the world, which by faith and the spirit of God, is made the spiritual
food of all the elect children of God, and without eating of which, none can
be saved, Ioh. 6. 53. But they have expressly, A man is justified by works, and
not by faith only. James. 2. we have no where, a man is justified by faith
alone: no, nor that he is justified by faith without works, talking of works
that follow faith. First, we confess the text, that a man is justified by
works. As Abraham was, when he offered his son: and as Rahab was, when she
received the spies: that is, a man is declared to be just in the sight of men.
For Abraham was justified before God, by faith, before he offered his son,
whom God did not try, to inform himself, Genesis 15. 6. Romans 4. 3.
but to declare unto men, by the fruits of obedience, that Abraham was a just
man: even so by faith, the harlot Rahab perished not, with the unbelievers,
when the received the spies in peace, but by receiving them peaceably, she was
declared to be just, or justified in the sight of men. Therefore there are two
kinds of justification: the one by faith before god, the other by works before
men: therefore a man is not justified by faith only, but by works also: which
saying of S. Iamesis not repugnant to that we hold, that a man is justified
before god, sola fide, by faith alone, or by faith without the works of the
law, as S. Paul says, which is alone: which comprehends al good works,
Romans 3. 28.
as also the examples of Abraham and David, in the 4. Chapter to the Romans,
doc plainly declare, where the Apostle speaks expreslely of circumcision,
which was a work of obedience, following the faith of Abraham. And David
pronounces the blessedness of a man, to whom the Lord imputes righteousness
without works: which Romans 4. 6.
must needs be understood, even of works following faith, because David
speaks of himself, and of all men generally, that shall obtain blessedness
by the grace of god, without merit of works. For, to him that works, reward
is not imputed according to grace, but according to debt. Again, the Apostle
writing to the Galathians, Romans 4. 4.
which were faithful, speaks generally. It is manifest, that by the law no
man is justified before god: for the just shall live by faith. By which texts,
and many more, the conclusion Gal. 3. 11.
is most necessary, that before God, works following faith, do not
iuslifie, but faith alone without works: yet not a dead, but a living faith,
which works by love. Further (he says) they have expresselie for absolution:
whose sins ye forgive, are forgiven, whose sins ye retain, are retained.
John. 20. but we have no where, that Priests cannot forgive, or retain sins
in earth. But the controversy is not, whether the Ministers of God have power
to forgive, or retain sins; for we believe that they have such power; but
whether absolute power, properly to forgive sins, and how the same is to be
exercised, is the question. For we believe, that God only has power,
absolutely and properly, Marc. 2. 7. Luc. 5. 21. Job. 14. 5. Esa. 43. 12.
to remit sins, according to the scripture, man by declaring Gods will and
pleasure. Yet again, they have expresselie, The doers of the law shall be
justified. Romans 2. And we say even as much: but because none is found a doer
of the law, we say with the same Apostle, that Gal. 3. 11.
it is manifest, that no man is justified before God by the law. But our
answerer infers moreover, that we have no where, that the law required at
Christians hands is impossible, or that the doing thereof justifies not
Christians. yes we have it expressly, That which was impossible of the law,
Romans 8. 3.
in as much as it was weak by the flesh, God sending his son in the
similitude of sinful flesh, etc. If there had been a law given, that had
been able to give life, righteousness in deed had been of the law. but the
scripture has concluded all under Ga. 3. 21. 22.
sin, that the promis by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that belecue. Again, by the works of the law no flesh shall be justified
before him: therefore no Christians Romans 3. 20.
by the works of the law shall be justified before him. Moreover, we are saved
by grace through faith, not of works. Ergo Christians (for none else are saved)
are justified through faith without works. Yet again, they have expresselie,
Psalm. 75. Vow ye, and render your vows: we haut no where, vow ye not, or if
you have vowed, break your vows. we confess, the Prophet wills the people
to vow, yet he means only things lawful, and in their power to perform:
we bid no man to break his vow, if it be lawful and possible: but if he have
vowed to go a pilgrimage, which is Idolatry, or to live unmarried, which is
not able to live continentlie: we exhort him to repent of his wicked, or
unadvised vow, and Number. 30,
to serve God, as he has appointed, or to use the remedy that God has
provided. They have again expreslie, I. Cor. 7.
Keep the traditions which ye have learned, either by word or epistle. 2 Thessalonians. 2. we have no where, the Apostles left noe traditions to the Church
unwritten. Saint Paull wills the Thessalonians to keep the traditions or
doctrine, which he had delivered unto them, either by word of mouth, or by his
epistle. This proves not that the Apostles left any traditions, which are no
where written in the holy scripture, because they were not all written in the
epistle of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians. But we have expresselie, that the
holy scriptures are able to make us wise to salvation, to make the man of God
perfect, and prepared to all 2. Tim. 3. 15.
good works: which things seeing we have fufficientlie in the holy scriptures,
we neither regard, nor receive any other doctrine under name of tradition of
the Apo stles, or of Angels from heaven. Still they have expresselie: If thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: and (when he said he did that
already) if thou will be perfect, go and sell all thou have, and give to the
poor, and follow me. And we have no where, that either the commandments of
God cannot be kept, or that we are not bound unto them, or that there is no
degree of life one perfecter then another. We grant, that who so by good deeds
will seek to enter into life, as that young man did, must do the deeds of the
commandments, which if he can do, he shall live by them: but albeit he
boasted, that he had kept the commandments, yet it follows not, that he did
keep them indeed, and as god required, but was a blind hipocrite, and sought
to justify himself, according to the heresy of the Pharisees. That we are
not bound to keep the commandments, as near as God will give us grace, is
no article of ours, but a slander of his. Finally, we deny that any mortal
man's life is perfect, yet we grant, that some men's lives come nearer to
perfection then other some. Neither does our Saviors words include perfection,
in selling his goods, nor in giving them to the poor: for if a man bestow
all his goods, to feed the poor, and have not love, he is nothing: but he
adds, that he must follow Christ, and take up his cross: and so by Christ's
grace I. Cor. 13.
he shall attain unto perfection, which he falselie imagined, that he he had
obtained by a pharizaical observation Marc. 10.
of the law: this favors not Monks and friars, more then hipocrites, and
liers. Beside this: They have expresselie, work your own salvation with fear
and tremhling, Phil. 2. we have no where, either that a man can work nothing
toward his own salvation, being helped with the grace of God: or that a man
should make it of his belief, that he shall be saved without all doubt or
fear. The saying of Saint Paull we acknowledge, that men should work out
their own salvation with fear and trembling: together with the next verse
following: for Phil. 2. 13.
it is God that works in you, both to will, and to be hable to do, for his
own good pleasure. whereupon we conclude that though a man is willed to work
his own salvation, by walking in that way, which god has appointed for them
that shall be saved, yet he can do nothing by his own strength, but all that he
does, is of the grace of god: for by grace you are saved, through faith, and
that not of Ephesians. 2. 8.
your selves, it is the gift of God. To be short, we make not the grace of God
an helper only, but a wholl doer and bringer to pass in us of our salvation,
and of all things tending thereto. For we are not apt of our selves, as of our
selves, to think any thing belonging thereto, but our aptnes is of God. Nor
I, says Saint Paul, but the grace of God which is with me. Again, we 2. Cor.
3. 5. 1. Co. 15. 10 Romans 8. 38. 2. Cor. 5. 6. etc. 1. Ioh. 5 10. 1. Ioh. 4. 17.
etc.
have infinite places of scripture, to prove, that a man ought not to dout of
his salvation, in respect of the truth of Gods promises: although we ought to
fear, and trem ble at Gods judgments, and although we cannot be always void
of fear, in respect of our own weakness. Furthermore they have expresselie,
do ye the worthy fruits of penance. Luc. 3. we have no where that faith
only is sufficient, without all satisfaction, and all other works of
penance, on our parts. The fruits worthy of repentance, we acknowledge to be
necessaire, to declare unfeigned repentance, but not for satisfaction of Gods
justice, which is blasphemous against the satisfaction of Christ's death. But
that a faith which is fruitles, or void of the works of repentance, should be
sufficient to salvation or Justification, we do utterly deny, as a thing
contrary to the scriptures. Yet again they have expresselie, that every man
shall be saved according to his works. Apo. 20. we have no where, that men
shall be judged only according to their faith. We confess as the text is, that
every man shall be judged according to his works, and so perhaps he would have
said, if the corrector had done his part: neither do we affirm, that men
shall be judged only according to their faith: for trial of their faith shall be
made by their works. Once again, they have expresselie, that there remains
aretribution, stipend, and pay to every good work in heaven. Marc. 9. 1. Cor.
3. Apoc. 22. Ps. 118. we have (as he says) no where, that good works done in
Christ do merit nothing. In the 3. text, quoted out of the new testament, is
all one word (...), which signifies a reward, whether it be freely given, or
deserved by labor. To him that works, says Saint Paul, (...), reward is
not accounted according to grace, but Romans 4. 4.
according to debt. But God is debtor to no man. Neither is there any merit of
good works once named in the scriptures, but against the merit of good works,
Christ says epxresselie, when you have done all things that are commanded
unto you, say we are unprofitable Luc. 17. 10.
servants: and the pay, wages, stipend, merit or desert of an unprofitable
servant is showed, Matt. 25. 30. Cast out the unprofitable servant into utter
darkness: there shallbe weeping and gnashing of teeth. It is therefore the
grace, mercy, and truth of Gods promise, whereby we claim reward, and not
the merits, desert, or debt of our good works. To that he says, they have
expresselie prayer and sacrifice for the dead in the second of the Maccaebees,
We answer, that book of Macabes to be no holy Scripture, out of which he
might have expresselie a man commended for killing himself. Whether Angels
present good works and almesdeedes before God, and whether Saints departed do
pray for them that are alive, which he gathers out of the Apocriphal books
of Tobie, and the Maccabes, we make no question, as of matters not revealed in
the canonical scriptures. But if they were granted to be so. yet it follows
not, that men alive must, or may pray to Angels or Saints departed. Last of
all, out of the canonical scripture he says, they have expresselie, that the
affliction which Daniell used upon his body, was acceptable in the sight of
God. Dan. 10. and we have no where, that such voluntary corporal afflictions
are in vain. But which of us says, that such voluntary corporal affliction,
as Daniell used, and to such end as he did use them, are in vain? No man
verily. You see therefore that while he boasts of express words of
scripture against us, he is driven either to gloss upon the text, or to feign
some opinion unto us, which we hold not at all, and that all his bragges are
but wind and words, without matter, as of one that-fcareth no shame, because
his head is hidden.

The third way of trial is, necessary collections, made and inferred upon
the scriptures: which we are willing to acknowledge and admit, to be of as
great authority, as the express words of the scripture. But to discern, what
is necessary collection, and what is not necessary collection, when there is
no express words of scripture, there is no certain way, but the judgment
of Logic: for that only is necessary collection, which out of express
words of scripture, or articles of faith, or other grounds confessed to be
necessarily gathered out of the holy scripture, may be rightly concluded in a
true and lawful syllogism: and whatsoever cannot be so concluded, is no
necessary collection. But our answerer says, we must refer our selves to
the ancient primitive Church, for this meaning: and his reason is, For it is
like, they knew it best: for that they lived nearer to the writers thereof,
then we do, who could well declare unto them, what was the meaning of the
same: we do willingly yeald, to consult with the ancient primitive Church,
to be helped with their collections: but to admit all their collections without
examining them, were to admit many errors, that even the Papists do condemn
for errors, and which are reproved by the scriptures themselves. Let one
example serve in stead of many. S. Jerome collecteth out of this scripture, It
is good not to touch a woman, that therefore it is evil to touch a woman.
Every man does see that this is an unnecessary collection; and so are many
other in the ancient fathers writings. Wherefore we must use the gift of
knowledge of right gathering and concluding, which God has given, not to be
unprofitable unto his Church, but to be both beneficial, and necessary.
Again, mark the feeble reason, upon which our answerer groundeth his saying:
It is like they knew it best: he cannot say, it is necessary that they knew it
best: then how proves he, that it is like? because they lived nearer to the
writers, then we do, who could well declare the meaning unto them. In deed if
we had the writings of them that lived so near unto the Apostles, that they
might hear their meaning of their own mouths, it were some likeliehood, and
yet no necessary proof of necessary collection; For Logic would still
judge, whether such meaning could be necessarily gathered out of such words.
Seeing we are not bound to creditte any writings, since the divine inspired
scriptures, but so far, as they agree with the scriptures, and receive the
light of truth from them. But those ancient writers, to whom he would have
us to refer our selves, lived so many hun dred years after the Apostles, and
Evangelists, the writers of the new testament, as they could no more declare to
them, then to us, their meaning in their writings: and therefore those ancient
fathers, which ground purgatory, prayer to saints, sacrifice of the altar,
use of the cross, etc. (beside tradition) upon the scriptures (as the answerer
says) must show the necessary collection of them, by the judgment of
demonstration, seeing they never saw the writers, never heard them speak, nor
possibly could, living so long after them, or else they can carry no credit of
necessary collection, outof the express words of holy scripture. As for
tradition, without scripture, since God has given the holy scripture, is as
good as the credit of men may be, without a warrant from God.

A fourth way of trial of spirits with him is, Counsels, by which old
heretics have been tried, and they are content to refer themselves to all
the Christian Counsels, that ever have been since Christ died. We acknowledge
Christian counsels to be a godly mean to exa mine and try the spirits, but
according to the scriptures only, for matters of faith; as in the example of
the first Council of Christendom, Act. 15. where the question was determined
by authority of the scriptures. But that the Papists dare abide the trial by all Counsels, it is false: for they admit none, but by the Popes consent, they
admit nothing in them, but that the present Pope does allow. Many Counsels
in Aphrica forbad appellations to Rome: the general Council of Chalcedon, made
the Bishop of Constantinople of equal dignity with the Bishop of Rome: the
Bishop of Constantinople condemned and accursed a Pope sor an heretic: the
Pope of that time confirmed it, yet now it is not holden for Catholic. But I
will spare examples until this lusty gallant dare adventure the trial,
whereof he makes the challenge. But seeing there are many points of
controversies between us and the Papists, which in no ancient council came
in question, he bobs us with the last most learned, Godly, and general
Council of Trent, which was gathered of purpose for trial of hercticall
spirits, whereunto all safe conduct being offered, we refused to come for
trial. As though the Catholics would have come to the Council of Nice, if
nothing might have been therein determined, but that which pleased Arius; or
to the Council of Constantinople, if nothing might have been concluded, but
that Macedonius would allow; Or to the Counsels of Ephesus and Chalcedon, if
when all had been said, that which liked Nestorius and Eutiches, must have
been holden for Catholic. Such is our case, we accuse the Pope to be an
heritike, yea and to be Antichrist: the Pope will admit no council, but where
he him self is judge: nor any to have any voice determinatiue, but only such
as are sworn to maintain his heresies and ambition. It is great pity, but
the Protestants must come to such a council. Such were many counsels holden
of old time by heretics, but for the most part, not frequented by the
Catholics. Some of our profession were at Trent, but what entertainment had
they? even such as their adversaries could afforde them: they were not
permitted to have any speech, but as pleased their enemies, wherefore when they
saw noe equity used, as they could look for no better, before they came, they
left the heretics to consult among themselves, by example of ancient fathers
in like Chapters of heretics.

The sift way of trial, is to refer the matter to the old Doctors, which
lived before the controversies began, of which we have spoken lately, and this
we have often used, and still use against the Papists, in most controversies,
although the authority of man is no certain rule to try, which is the truth
of God. Augustine against Julian used this way rightly, first confuting the
Pelagians by the authority of the holy scripture, and then by the testimony
of the ancient fathers also. Theodosius also in a case determined by the holy
scripture, did politikelie circumuent the heretics, after the advice of
Sisinius the Nouatian, by the suggestion of Nectarius the Catholic, to put
them to a foil, which had good success, because the others cause was naught.
But Epiphanius has a hard saying against us (as our answerer thinks) It is
enough to say against all heresies, the catholic church has not taught this,
the holy fathers have not admitted this. But I wene Epiphanius does, not mean,
that it is enough to say so, except men can prove it to be so. For else it is
aseasy for heretics to say so against Catholics, as for Catholics against
heretics. And here out answerer voucheth Epiphanius, quoting only, lib. 2.
contra haere: but no Chapter of so long a book: wherebie, knowing him to be a
common foyster, we may well suspect his honesty in this voucher, until he
show us, in what Chapter we shall find it.

The sixtwaie of trial with him is, to consider which is the Catholic or
universal Church, or great multitude of Christians, out of which the other
part first departed. But to consider which is the Catholic or universal
Church, is no way of trial, but the matter to be tried. And the description
that he makes of the Church, is as uncertain: the great multitud of Christians,
out of which the other part first departed. For the Catholic Church is not
always the greatest multitude. When the East Church was divided from the West,
the one was as great a multitude, as the other; yea considering the number of
provinces of the East, and the largeness of them, it was the greater. And one
heresy some times departs out of another, as the Rogatians from the
Donatists, the Eunomians from the Arrians, the Iacobites from the Eutichians,
etc. Neither does Saint Augustine against the Manichecs, make the consent of
people, and the name of Catholic, of themselves, to be a sufficient way of
trial, but among many things, which altogether held him, beside the authority
of Cont. epist. Fund. cap. 4.
the holy scriptures, he accounts these, which with the truth, are a good
confirmation, but can be no prejudice against the manifest truth, as he
confesses in the same place. To the judgment of Vincentius we will subscribe,
to hold that, which every where, which always, which of all has been
believed: so has no point of Popery. Hoc est etenim vere proprieque
Catholicum (quod ipsa vis nominis ratioque declarat) quod omnia vere
vniuersaliter comprehendit. For that is truly and properly Catholic (says
Vincentius) which thing the very force and reason of the name declares, which
truly comprehends all things universally. These words in rehearsing the
saying of Vincentius, our answerer could not bear, and therefore left them
out, bragging of universality, antiquity, and consent, whereby his
adversaries spirit might quickly be tried. But let him once attempt to try
any one piece of Popery by this rule of Vincentius, and so show it to be
Catholic, as he describes Catholic, and he shall find it an harder matter
to perform, then to talk of, examining his point by the authentical writings
of the most ancient doctors, for. 200. years after Christ.

The seventh way of trial is, succession of Popes, in the seat of Rome,
wherein the successor always teaching the doctrine of his predecessor, it must
needs be a strong argument, to prove the descent and continuance of one and
the same faith from the Apostles time. This argument is used by Saint Augustine
and Optatus, against the Manichees and Donatistes. But this way of trial he
knows his adversaries will not admit. But he is deceived: for seeing he
joins succession in doctrine with succession in place, let him make trial
when he dare, and prove that Peter, and all the Bishops of Rome, that lived
for four, five, or six hundred years after Christ, did hold all points of
Popery, and had none other faith, then the Papists have now. Some of the later
mightholde some few, and of the best errors. But let them show all in every
one, and take all: but that shall thev never be able to do, brag they of
succession, as long as they list.

The eight way of trial is, to examine what part does hold any old
condemned heresy: for the true Church can never admit, or defend any heresy:
for otherwise she could not be the pillar of truth The true Church may err, in
matters which are not of necessity to salvation, and yet be the pillar of
trueh, so long as she holds al truth necessary to salvation, yea some true
Church may be 1. Tim. 3.
seduced for a time, with heretical opinions, as the Churches of Corinth, and
Galatia, but not obstinately defend them, nor continue in them. For of a
particular Church, as the Church of Ephesus, the Apostle speaks, wherein
Timothy had his conversation.

But we believe (says the answerer) with holy Athanasius in his creed: that
he which holds not the faith wholly in all points, shall perish eternally:
howsoever our adversaries do salve the matter in their Prophets, Berengarius,
Husse, Wicklife, and Luther, whom they say to have been holy men, and yet to
have erred in diverse points offaith, and to have held their errors
obstinatlie to the day of their death. And we believe with holy Athanasius,
that whoesoeuer shall not hold that Catholic faith (which he, or whoesoeuer
under his name sets down in that Symbol or creed) wholl and undefiled,
without doubt he shall perish eternally. But not every one that erreth in any
small point of doctrine or faith, which is not of the foundation of our
religion. For so does not Athanasius say, and our adversary falsisieth both
his words, and meaning, to draw him to that sense of his. Now if Berengarius,
Wicklife, Husse, Luther cannot be convinced of any heresy contrary to
Athanasius Creed (though they erred in other points) they are not subject to
his sentence of eternal damnation, more then Cyprian, Augustine, Hierome, who
erred also in some points of doctrine, yet are rightly accounted saints, and
elect of God, as they which held the foundation, and all articles of faith
necessary to salvation. But where he charge vsto say, that Berengarius,
Husse, etc. did err in diverse points of faith, meaning thereby diverse
articles of Athanasius Creed, he does us and them great injury: for that we
neither say, nor think: neither say we, that they did obstinately hold
those errors, wherein they were deceived, although they did stiflie hold them,
not as heretics which are condemned in their own conscience, but as men
deceived with zeal of truth, even in those points wherein they were deceived.
But we believe, says he, the contrary, by which belief he will condemn the
best and most ancient Catholic fathers, who, as men, held every one of
them, Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 2. in praefat. Epiph. H. 38 Epiph. H. 42.
for the most part, one error, as has been showed: But whoesoeuer could
show, says he, but one confessed heresy to be defended by our Church, there
needed no more disputation about the matter. It will be a hard matter to make
the Papists confess, that their Church holds any heresy: but it has been
often showed, that the Popish Church holds many things, of old time
condemned for heresy, as worspiping of the Image of Christ, in the
Carpocratites, and Gnostikes; Invocation of Angels, in the Caianes, licensing
of women to Baptize, in the Marcionites; worspiping of Angels, of men, and
women, that are dead, in the Collyridians, and such like.

But for the right use of this trial, he requires two conditions to be
observed: The first is, that the party do in deed hold that which is
objected, and not a certain likelihood of it: in which point he charge us to
slander them with the heresy of Pelagius, concerning free will, who held,
that men without the help of Gods grace, by the power and force of nature,
could work well, but they require that a man should be prevented, and helped
with the grace of God. In truth we do not object unto them, all articles of
Pelagius heresy, but yet they are not free; for Pelagius held that by the
power of nature men might keep Gods law, but more easelie by the help of Gods
grace: the, former the Papists hold not, but they hold the latter, that a man
helped with Gods grace, has freewill, and power to keep Gods law. Their
doctrine also of merit ex congruo, of works preparatorie before grace, and
such like, are nothing else, but branches of the Pelagian heresy. The like
injury, he says, we do them, in objecting the heresy of those that did
sacrifice to Epiph. h. 79.
our Lady, which they do not. A great injury, I promise you: the Collyridians
offered cakes only to her, the Papists offer candels, ouches, and brouches,
money and Jewels: The Collyridians did garnish a charret where her Image was,
the Papists adorn tabernacles (as they call them) yea chapels, altars, and
Churches, to worship her: Epiphanius condemns the study of making her Image,
and the Images of dead saints, as a deuellish attempt. He inueigheth most
severely, against the worshipping of the virgin Marie, of Angels, and of
saints departed, yetall this is Catholic among the Papists, and we offer them
injury, to charge them with this old heresy, because they do not offer
cakes, as the Collyridians did.

The second condition is, that the heresy objected, be accounted and condemned
for an heresy in the Primitive Church, and not only held by an heretic: for
heretics held many trueths together with their heresies. And here he
complains that Doctor Fulke does them wrong, in saying that prayers for the
dead, is an heresy, because the Montanistes, which were heretics, did hold
it. But he rather does offer manifest wrong to Doctor Fulke, whovseth not Page
41.
to reason so looselie: But rather concludes that prayer for the dead is an
error, because it was first invented and practiced by an heretic. For all
truth has an higher and more ancient spring, then any heretic or heresy.
But for so much as he has answered this wholl objection sufficiently, in his
confutation of Popish quarrels, I will send the reader thither, where he shall
find, that which may satisfy him in this matter.

The last kind of trial, whereof he will speak at this time, is to consider
the manner of old heretics, and to compare the same with ours. And here he
would have the two former conditions observed; To wit, that we consider such
qualities only, as were accounted heretical in them, and to examine them
truly in our selves. The manners of heretics, is no sure way of trial: for
heretics come often times in sheep clothing, pretending greater holiness in
conversation, then true Catholics do. But let us see how he will prove us
heretics, by this kind oftriall. For example, says he, Saint Augustine, does
note it, as an heretcall property in the Donatistes, to hate the sea of Rome,
and to call it the chair of pesttlence. Does this agree to the Protestants, or
to us? as also defaming of the said sea for the Cont. lib. (...). 2. c. 51
evil pretended life, of some particular men. But here he breaks his own
conditions. For Petilian did not hate the sea of Rome, as the sea of
Antichrist: For the Donatistes had their mock-Bishop at Rome also. But he
railed upon all the chaires or sees of all Catholic Bishops, and on the
Bishops them selves, that were not of his schism and heresy; and on the
Apostolic chair of Jerusalem, as well as on that of Rome. Again, the
Donatistes called the chair of Rome the chair of pestilence, when it was the
chair of a Catholic Bishop: we call it the chair of pestilence, now that it
is the seat of the beast, and great whore of Babylon, Esa. 1.
Antichrist. As Esaias calls Jerusalem an harlot, which yet sometime had been a
faithful city. Wherefore the example of the Donatistes makes nothing against
us.

Another heretical trick Augustine notes in them, to persuade the people,
that the visibie Church had erred and oppressed the true Church, banishing her
from the sight of the world. Do not our adversaries, says the answerer, say
the very same. No sir, we have nothing to do with the Donatistes, whom the
Papists do resemble, more then De^ vnitat. eccles. c. 12.
we. For in the place quoted, there is no talk ofthe visible Church, as you
note in your example. But this is the matter. The Donastites affirmed, that the
Church was utterly lost in all other parts of the world, and remained only
in Africa, and in the part of Donatus. So the Papists affirm, that the Church
was lost in all other parts of the world, and remained only in Europe, and
in the part of the pope. But we hold, that the Catholic Church of Christ is
dispersed over all the wholl world, where the name of Christ is called upon, as
Saint Augustine in the same place shows out of the scripture, that it must be
even among them, that either know not, or else acknowledge not the Bishop of
Romes authority. That he charge us, for condemning all the Church for the
faults of some, as the Donatists did, we do not. But rather the answerer
faulteth herein, with the Donatistes, who upon shameful slanders, invented to
deface the godly life, of Luther, Calvin, Beza, and such like, labors to
bring the truth of their Doctrine in discredit, as the Donatistes did, by
charging the Bishop of Carthage, and others with treason against Cont. lib.
(...). 3. Cap. 4.
Christ, in delivering the books of his Gospel to the gentiles to be burned.

But yet moreover he notes against the same heretics (says he) for hating,
and condemning the life of Monks, as also for drawing nuns out of their
cloistures, and joining themselves with the same, in pretended wedlock. To
reprove the life of them that were innocent, was a point of heretical malice:
but to hate, and condemn the life of detestable hypocrites, and abominable
livers, as the most of the Popish monks and nuns were, and are, is an
argument of Godly zeal: an hypocrite and an holy man, an heretic and a
Catholic, may do the same actions oftentimes, which differ not in the kind
of action, but in the end, purpose, cause, and manner of doing. But where
finds our answerer the Donatistes noted (as he says) for hating and
condemning the life of Monks, drawing Nuns out of cloistures, and joining
them with themselves, in pretended wedlock. His quotation sends us to the
second book against the epistle of Parmenian, cap. 9. and Ep. 169. ad
Eusebium. But in neither of both places, is this noted in them: for they hated
not the life of Monks and Nuns, which had such of their own, as in the
former place Saint Augustines words are. Annon cum match is particulam suam
ponunt, qui greges ebrios sanctimonialium suarum, cum gregibus ebri is
circumcellionum, die noctuque permixtos vagari turpiter sinunt? Do they not put
their part with adulterers, which suffer the dronken flocks of their own
nuns, with the dronken flocks of the circumcellions, day and night mingled
together, to wander about filthelie? This is all that he writes there, of
monks or nuns, which whether it do more neerelie touch the life of Popish
nuns, and lymiting friars, then the conversation of Protestants, let the
indifferent reader judge.

In the epistle to Eusebius, he complains of one (...), which sometime had
been a Subdeacon of the Church of Sanianum, who when he was forbidden to have
such access unto the nuns, as was against the discipline, and despised
orderly and wholesome precepts, he was removed from the clergy, and being
himself stirred up against the discipline of God, he removed him self unto
them, and was rebaptized. Also two nuns with their tenants, out of the ground
of the Catholic Christians, whether the same man removed, or whether they
followed him them selves, yet were they rebaptized, and were with the flocks
of Circumcellions, among the wandering flocks of women, which therefore would
have no husbands, lest they should have discipline. The proud fellow boasts
himself in the mad banquets of detestable drunkenness, rejoicing that a
most broad license of naughty conversation is opened unto him, from whence in
the Catholic Church he was prohibited. Here is neither the hatred, and
condemning of Monks lives, nor drawing of nuns out of cloistures, nor
joining them in pretended wedlock, noted in the Donatists. But two light
nuns, by a quondam clearke, either conuaied by their consent, or following
him out of the ground of Christian Catholics, into the sect and grounds
occupied by the Donatistes, etc. In the same epistle also, he speaks of the
daughter of a certain tenant of the Church, that was carried away by the
Donatists, against her parents will, so that she was among them baptized, and
took upon her the form of a Nun, whom her father would by force and
stripes have compelled to return to the Catholic Church, but he was forbidden
by S. Augustine to use such force, if she would not come with a good will. This
may touch Papists also, which have and do profess nuns, monks, and
Priests, young indiscreet persons, against the consent of their parents; but
how it should be applied against us, I cannot see. But here the notebooke was
to blame, to quote these places, for such purposes: the answerer, I hope, is
not so impudent, that if he had read the places himself he would for shame
have noted them against us, or else have added as he does. Finally, he notes it
as heretical in the Arrians, to appeall from traditions to only scripture
lib. 1. Contra Maximinum. In all which book there is no such matter: for
neither does Maximinus appeal from traditions, neither is he noted for so
doing, by Saint Augustine. In deed he often times boasts of the authority
of holy scriptures, and in that conference, he many times calls for
testimonies of holie-scripture, and professes that he is, and will be a disciple
of the holy scriptures. But for this, he is not reproved of Saint Augustine,
but still pressed with the authority of holy scriptures, whereof he falselie
boasted, and when he does but once call to witness the council of Ariminum.
Saint Augustine in his answer, tells him plainly, that he ought not to
allege with any prejudice that Council against him, as neither him self
the Council of Nice against the Arrians, but requires that Cont. Max. l. 3.
C. 14.
the matter be decyded by authority of the scriptures, which are common to
both parts. But Irenaeus in deed does note it as heretical in the
Valentinians, to appeal from the holy scripture to traditions, without the
which they affirmed, that the truth could not be found in the scriptures,
which they accused to be diuerselie or doubtfullie written, as the Papists do,
in comparing them to a nose of wax, or a leaden rule: So the contrary to that
he falselie says, was noted as heretical by S. Augustine, is in truth noted
as heretical by S. Irenaee.

But Optatus before Saint Augustine (says he) noted it as heretical in the
Donatistes, to break altars, whereupon Optatus. Con. Donat. lib. 6.
the body and blood of Christ were kept, as the words of Optatus are. You
must understand, that these altars were communion tables, made of wood and
remooueable, covered with a linen cloth in the time of celebration, of which,
in spite of Catholic Religion, some they brake, and some they seraped only:
for which folly they are derided by Optatus. So played the Papists with the
communion tables in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign, calling them in
despite oister bordes, and breaking them with as great fury, and without
lawful authority, as the Donatistes did. The like parts they played with the
communion cups, of which he also complains, as also challenging to
themselves the Church yeardes, that the bodies of the Catholics, might not be
buried in them. So did the Papists in Queen Mary's time. But the words of
Optatus are (says our answerer) that the body and blood of Christ were kept
upon those altars. He would have us think that the sacrament of the altar was
kept in a pixe, as among the Papists. But the words of Optatus are not so.
For albeit he calls the communion table an altar, as it was commonly called
at that time, yet he says not, that the body and blood of Christ was kept
upon it: his words are: quid est enim altar, nisi seeds, and corporis and
sanguinis Christi? For what is the altar, but the seat, both of the body and
blood of Christ? And lest you should think that it was a permanent seat,
wherein the sacrament was kept, as it is among the Papists, he says further,
speaking of the breaking, and scraping of these wooden altars; Quid vos
offenderat Christus, cuius illic per certa momenta corpus and sanguis
habitabat? what had Christ offended you, whose body and blood at certain
moments of time did dwell there? By which words he shows, that the sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ, tarried no longer there, then until the time
of the distribution of the same unto the communicants. As for breaking down of
Idolatrous altars, and profaning of all instruments belonging to them, we
have the word of God as a sufficient warrant, so that we cannot justly Deuteronomy.
7. 5.
be likened to the Vandales, that were Arrians, or to Julian the Apostata,
which defaced the Religion of the Christians, so long as our Religion, by the
scriptures, can not be convinced of heresy, or Apostasy. For as heretics and
ethnikes destroyed the Religion of Christ, with the places and instruments used
in the exercise thereof, so did the Christians serve the Tempells of Idols,
and all other monuments of gentilitie, and heresy. The Papists do no more
spare our holy Bibles, then we do their profane bables. They break our
tables and cups, as we do their altars, and challices: they burn our bodies,
as we do their Idols. Finally, it is the Religion that must justify, or
condemn these actions: the actions are no sufficient trial of the truth of
Religon.

Here again he appealeth to public disputation, or to any other indifferent
way of trial, that we dare afford him. As for public disputation, we dare,
if the Magistrates think it convenient: but a most in different way of
trial, by writing their arguments in syllogismes, Doctor Fulke offered for
certain years ago, before Campian crept forth with his seditious challenge:
the offer still remains, take up his glove, you Papists, if ye dare. As for
the seditious commendation of Campian, and Sherewyn, condemned and executed for
high treason, where with he has never done, I will omit. That all heresy is
beggerrie, which he labors to prove out of Saint Augustine, and that the
Majesty of the Catholic cause, is greater, then heresy can oppress, we do
willingly grant. Only let not the majesty of Christian religion be
esteemed, by the multitude, or wordlie pow er of them which profess it,
wherein yet the Protestants are not much inferior to the Papists, at this
time, but by the riches, and glory of Gods truth revealed in his holy word,
wherein Popery, whenever trial is made, shows it self like a most
filthy roge, and miserable beggar, though she seek cloakes of eloquence,
learning, authority of men, or any such like things to cover her. And among
all, that in these times have taken upon them to defend her, there is not a
more beggarly merchant, then this proud answerer, who having no reading of his
own, nor any other good quality of a defender, but a brazen face, and an heap
of scornful words, is feign to scrape all his patches of learning, out of
some other men's notes, or suggestions, in which he is as void of knowledge, as
a beggar is of honor or riches. The causes that he alleges of setting down
his proud censure, might seem somewhat probable, if he had set down Master
Charks reply also. Which seeing he durst not do, he cannot boast that all
things shall be made clear, by putting down the censure only, and joining
thereto his own defense thereof, when there is more lack of Master Charkes
reply between, then there would have been of his censure before it. But he
pleased himself (as arrogant fools do commonly) so much in his own brood,
that he thought it was never sufficiently seen, when all wise men were cloyed
with it already. How well he performs his brags, of answering all the
substance of Master Charkes reply, the thing itself would show to them that
shall read both the treatises together, without partiality.

AGAINST THE DEFENSE.
THe defender in the last words of his answer to Master Charkes preface,
promising, to omit nothing of substance, which Master Charke says, nor to let
it pass without due examination, does nevertheless omit more then two whole
leaves of Master Charkes reply, untouched, and that in the very beginning,
where there is more matter of substance, to discover the false and fraudulent
dealing of him, and his fellow papists, then he might abide to examine,
meaning to continue his lewd purpose, lest he should be driven to discover
some part of his own dishonest practices. And yet he is not ashamed to say,
that the replier, even at the veric entrance, lceseth his patience, for that
the papists require short trial in disputation. How so, good sir? for sooth
because he asks, who is Campian, or the seedemen, that they shouldpresume,
to make so short work, in auowing the popish religion, which has nothing
but tyrainnie, lies, hypocrisy, and rebellion, to defend it, or restore it.
Which, as it may be said with truth, so it may be said with patience, and
without any fear of the name of disputation: in which Master Charke by Gods
grace did quit him self so well against your Champion, as if ever a proud
hypocrite were apalled, you may have shame of your bragging Jesuit, howsoever
you would turn it over unto Master Charke, and say that Campians quiet
behavior cooled him with shame. Where contrariwise, Campian being put out of
his byas of loose and lavish talk, by that order which was taken (to have his
answers written, and read unto him, to be acknowledged of him) was so amazed
at the weight of Master Charkes arguments, which he perceived could not be
answered with bare words, wherein he used to applaude unto him self before,
that he was enforced to a quiet behavior, much like a quarelling Ruffian,
which when other men are quiet, is challenging of al men, but when he sees
himself ouermacthed, can learn to be quiet and calm enough. As for the
reproaches, injuries, and torments, that you say Campian took so patiently at
Master Charkes hands, al men may see how falselie you charge him, with such
matters as do nothing appertain unto him, while under the name of Master
Charke, and the rest of his fellow Ministers, you think you may more largely
rail against the Prince, and Magistrates, for execution of justice against
Campian, and his traitorous Accomplices.

Master Charke next to his question, Who is Campian, etc. adds another. Where
have these disputers stayed so long time? But to this you make no answer, and
yet a matter of substance, that after more then twenty years, staying from
challenge of disputation, now you come forth, on a soddaine, as though you
desired nothing so much as disputation. To the third question you would seem
to answer. What can they get by renewing the battelles, so often, and so
lately refused by their Captains and fathers, etc? Here, because the names of
Doctor Watson, and Master Fecknam, are noted in Master Charkes margent, you
conclude, that nothing else is meant, but that which is contained in the little
pamphlet of the conference in Wisbeach, for which, so much as concerns Doctor
Fulke, answer is made by himself, in his confutation of papists quarelles,
page 16. 17. 18. 19. etc. but that Master Charke means not only of that,
you might well enough perceive by his words, so often, and so lately refused.
That of Wisbeach was but one refusal, whereas to the same persons, and other
of like quallitie, the conference has been often offered, and never accepted,
whether they were challenged priuatlie, as in those Bishops houses, where
they remained dainty prisoners, or else by commandment from the Magistrates,
as at wisbeach more then once, they were offered to have conference, if it had
liked them to consent thereunto. And who knows not the most solemn and
public conference at Westminster, in the first year ofher majesty's reign,
with too too much shame of the popish prelacie, given over and refused. Yet you
say, that at the very same time (of Wisbeach conference) and both before and
since, both you, and they have sued by all means possible, to be admitted to a
lawful, equal, and free disputation, either in Cambridge, or any place else
that shall be appointed. Name the pesons that sued, and them to whom they
sued, and all the possible means you used, and bring good proof of your
saying for any such disputation, before the time of Campians challenge, or else
we must be feign to think, and bold to say, that you feign without color,
and lie without measure. Our offers, and your refusal have been public and
notorious, besides many private offers, able to be proved by sufficient
testimonies, and I think not denied by the persons them selves, while they
lived. You bring nothing but a seditious libell of Campian, of all the possible
mean of suit, and yet you ask Master Charke, what proceeding is this? Where
are now the lies and hypocrisy? As though they were not manifest one your part.

As for tyranny (being an odious word) you will say nothing, nor turn it to
us again. Let racking and quartering of those that offered disputation (say
you) be accounted scholasticall reasoning, with you. A pretty ieste, for men
wot well, that Campian was racked for nothing else, but for offering
disputation, and quartered for the same. Although his own letter convinced him
to conceal some secret, which he promised never to utter, come rack, come
rope, and much other plain evidence proved him to be a rank traitor, besides
his answers subscribed with his own hands to these interrogatories; Whether
he does acknowledge the traitorous writting of Saunders, Bristow, and Allen, to
be wicked, in wholl, or part? and whether he does acknowledge her Majesty to
be a true and lawful Queen, or a pretensed Queen, and deprived, etc. To the
first his answer was, that he medleth not to nor fro, and will not further
answer. To the second, that this question depends upon the fact of Pius
Quintus, whereof he is not to judge, and therefore refuses further to answer.
Let this be the answer of a loyal subject with you: if Campian or any of his
accomplices were racked and quartered for offering disputation, only, or at al.

But this you must say to us Ministers, for our good, that it were far better
we confessedour fear in plain words, then so much to manifest it in deeds,
and thereby io discredit the rest of our sayings. What fear (I pray you) and
by what deeds do we manifest it so much? be like the Ministers of England
racked and quartered Campian, for fear lest he should overcome them in
disputation, as the popish Priests torment, and burn them, whom they are not
able to stand against in disputation: we will confess in plain words, that we
are perilouslie afraid of you in deed, where you may practice your malice
against us, by massacres and martyring of our bodies, with all kind of cruel
torments, and bloody persecution, even unto death, and that by fire: but of
your learning, art of disputing, or any thing that you can bring in the way
of disputation, either to maintain your heresy, or to oppugn the truth of
our religion, we never showed our selves fearful, or made dangerous to join
with the proudest of your part in public disputation, though it cost some of
us their lives, for none other crime, but because you could not vanquish them
in disputation, to make them yeald unto your falsehood, or to deny the truth:
and therefore there is no reason we should be afraied of your disputers, when
we live under the protection of a most gracious Prince, who is ready to
defend both our persons from injury, and our Religion from contempt and
contumely: you must therefore seek out other manner of deeds, wherein we so
much manifest our fear of you, then the racking or quartering of popish
traitors (which all men, and your self do know, to be no acts or deeds of
the ministers, but of the Magistrates) as also that the same punishment is not
laid upon them, for any cause of religion, much less for offering
disputation, but for horrible and heinous treason, or else al men will account
you to be but a wodden disputer, to charge us with fear showed in deeds,
whereof you can show none, that is ours, or can argue the like fear in them,
whose deeds they are.

The rest of the matter contained in this defense, of the first section of the
Censure, and of the next, is so good stuff, that it needs none other
confutation, then Master Charkes reply, against which it defends the
Censure. Where the Censure said, there can nothing be had from them but words,
Master Charke for himself refers men to his answer, and for Master Hamner,
he says that he has brought more reason with his words, then the Censurer
will be able to answer. But that is not the Censurers purpose, in respect of
the desired disputation, and the disired disputation is a seditions challenge,
as has been plainly proved. For otherwise, what arguments so ever for your
part have been brought by the Censurer, have been by Master Charke, and
Master Hanmer, fully answered: which is a sufficient acceptance of
disputation offered (if no surther matters were intended) and a more profitable
kind of disputation, then that you desire, the printed books extending far
and near, and carrying a certain and undoubted relation, as well of the
arguments, as of the answers: whereas in your desired disputation, it may well
be thought, that you hoped to triumph rather in multitude of boasting words,
to be uttered with impudent audacity by your brabling sophisters, and in the
false reports, spread by your lying sicophants, then to obtain any victory
by sound arguments, or sufficient answers: which thing well appeared in the
disputation that was granted to Campian, and other of your sect, with Master
Charke and the rest of the Godly learned, that had conference with them.

But now because of that which Master Charke has said of Master Hanmer,
bringing matter with his words, you will bind him to defend every syllable
in Master Hanmers book, and are not ashamed to charge him that he will needs
take upon him the auochement of Master Hanmers doings, with what reason, every
man that has but a crum of reason, may judge. Therefore such matters as you
require Master Charke to answer for, he may if he think good in his next
writing, satisfy your request, although he have by no promise bound himself
thereto, and Master Hanmer is sufficient to answer for him self, and therefore
by me they shall be passed over with silence, being but quarrels and cauills,
what the Jesuits hold or hold not. The like I say to your collection of the
effect of Master Hanmers book, which is performed so wisely, and pithelie,
that you seem to have found out a very compendious and easy kind of
confutation of any book that misliketh you.

Although the same brief kind of declaring the effect of Master Charkes
book, does not satisfy your mind, and therefore you pass over his reply
without examination, promising to verify all that you have said and he
denies, in their particular places, because in deed M. Charkes reply does so
clearelie discuss the smooke of your vain cauillations, that you are ashamed
to bring them again into open light, and therefore refer them to several
corners; nevertheless, I wish that all indifferent readers, as in all places,
so in this, will vouchsafe to read M. Charkes reply, between the censure, and
the defense, or at lestwise, after the defense, in which for the most part,
they shall see the defense overthrown, touching the substance thereof, before
ever it was written, or devised.

Touching the order, and division of the book, that you will needs make, we
must be content to follow you, although no wise man doubts (whatsoever you
pretend to the contrary) but it had been more easy both for your self, and
for the replier, of whom you would seem to have a friendly care, and most
of all for the understanding of the reader, that you had followed Master Charke
from point to point, ash followed Campians challenge, if your bad cause could
have abidden the light of so clear a method. As for the long and bitter
inuectiues of spiteful and contumelious speeches, odious accusations, light
suspicions, insufficient collections, vain surmises of treasons, rebellious
dissimulations, practices, etc. which you pretend to have been the occasion of
changeing the order, in so short a treatise as Master Charkes is, could be no
reasonable cause thereof, but rather if any such had been, they had ministered
great advantage to you and your cause, if you had orderly confuted them.

How indifferently, and without choler, you offer your four points to be
examined, both in your censure, and in the defense of the same, each man of
what humor soever he be, may with a mean judgment be able to consider.

The first part, touching the society of Jesuits, and the first section,
entitled by him, Ofrailing.
YOu would convince Master Charke of railing, by his own confession, because
he acknowledges his labor employed in certain vehement speeches, by you
gathered together, to bring the Jesuits in discredit, whose infections are
well known abroad, and are now entered to work treason in the land. Also,
because he grants the speeches, which in all hatred of Popish practizes, so
directly attempted against the majesty of God, and the peace of this noble
kingdom, he uttered, in diverse places of his answer. But if you had not
omitted the reasons, which he sets down, of his acknowledging, and
granting of those vehement speeches, they had been sufficient in any
reasonable man's opinion, to discharge him out of that crime of railing. For you
your self confess afterward, that every hot word, uttered in Catholic
books, by occasion of matter, is not to be taken for railing. Now Master
Charke stands to the defense of his book, to be Christian and Catholic, and
him-felfe to be a true member, and Minister of the Catholic Church of Christ,
and for occasion of matter, he alleges the infections of the Jesuits, well
known abroad, and their late entry to work treason in the land: Also those
Popish practices, against which he uttered those speeches, to be directly
attempted against the Majesty of God and the peace of this noble kingdom, so
that such sharp speeches (and yet but sparingly uttered, in comparison of so
many reproaches, as you have belched out against him and our religion) are not
to be charged with the prejudice of railing, neither in regard of the person,
who did use them, or of the matter, that did occasion them. At the least wise,
until you had disprooued him to be a Catholic, or discharged your Jesuits of
the crimes of heresy and treason, intended against them: neither does he with
slander devised against their persons (as the manner of the Papists is) seek
to discreditte their doctrine, but in detestation of their false doctrine,
attribute such terms unto the men, as for their doctrines sake they deserve.

But you are gracious to grant him pardon, for that he confesses hatred to
have been the cause: as though hatred, not of the persons, whom he wishes to
repent unto salvation, but of the practizes, which he knows to be against
God, and the peace of the realm, may not be a just cause of more vehement
inuectiues, then he has any expressed. And yet you see not how any learned,
or common honest man, and much less a preacher, can justify such uncivil and
outrageous terms against his brother, by any pretense of Christianlike or
tolerable hatred. I will not say how many foul re proches be included in this
one sentence, taking it according to your meaning: for I will grant that you
say to be true, if it may be understood, of him that is a brother in deed.
But that Jesuits are brethren to Master Charke, and such preachers as he is, I
think neither the Jesuits, nor you your self (if you be demanded, when you
are awake) will acknowledge. Therefore being such as M. Charke had before
described them by their infections, treasons, practizes against God and the
realm, he was not to embrace them as brethren, but to detest them, as
heretics and traitors.

The turning back of the crime of railyng, which he uses unto you, was not
for any excuse of the crime committed by him self, for he does not at all
excuse, but justify and defend those speeches (which you call railing) as fit
words against the wicked Monkish friars, or fryerlie Monks, affirming, that if
he were disposed to place your ordinary and extraordinary railing in a rank,
he might gather of your reproaches, more then can come into ten leaves: but this
you say is neither to the purpose, nor true: not to the purpose, because you
were provoked by his example, and injury, who began without example: He might
answer you, that he began not with you, but you with him: neither did he
provoke you by any private injury, but if you count the cause of the Jesuits
to pertain unto you, as a public injury, then judge in differentlie, whether
the heresies and treasons of the Jesuits, do not minister just cause to him,
of his hatred, and bitter speeches against them.

But that he could gather ten leaves of your railing, you say it is a
licentious lie: For as Printers count leaves (that is wholl sheets) there are
but half ten in your book, and albeit they be counted as they are folded, yet
ten leaves are a greater part thereof, then can be filled with railing terms
only. So you say and seem to say somewhat to your purpose; but Master
Charke having told you before (unto which your silence may stand for a
confession) that almost every line sounds loud with some foull reproach, who
cannot see that it were easy to gather almost out of every line so many foull
reproaches, as would fill more then ten of your folded leaves. For of Printers
large count, no reasonable man would understand him, except you would allow him
also, to make as large letters, and as few lines, as Printers sometimes use to
do, in such large leaves of their account.

But this matter you may not so soon pass over, for that you think it of
importance, to descrie she spirits of us, that are adversaries in this case.
Railing in deed is a fault, in whomsoever it be found: but it had been
requisite, that you had first defined what is railing, that we might have
agreed upon the matter in question. You tell us afterward, what is not railing,
namely, every hot word, uttered in Catholic books, by occasion of matter,
is not railing, nor the thing in question: for both Christ and his Apostles,
and many holy fathers aster them, used the same sometimes upon inst zeal,
especially against heretics. So that vntilyou have proved Protestants to be
noe true Catholics, and discharged papists from being heretics, every hot
word in our books, uttered against Papists, can not justly be accounted
railing. Naie, if Catholics by heat of zeal in a just cause, or in a case
that they think to be just, be carried sometimes in vehemency of speech beyond
the bands of modesty, as they may be justly reproved therefore, so they
may not straightwaie be condemned for heresy in so doing. James and John were
so far deceived with zeal, and in a cause that they thought to be clear,
and just, that they would have prayed, that fire might come down from heaven,
by example of Helias, and destroy the Samaritanes, that resused to Luke 9.
receive their master Christ, and were otherwise heretics, for which they
weere reproved, but yet as they which knew not, or had forgotten of what
spirit they were, yet not by and by rejected for heretics. The contention was
sharp between Paull and Barnabas, Act. 5.
and there was a fault between them, yet both holy Apostles. Saint Jerome is
misliked of many, for immoderat vehemency of speech against Rusfinus, as good
a Catholic as himself, yea he is not to be excused in heat against Saint
Augustine. Vigilantius and Iouinian he handles more hardly in terms, then
the cause of either of them did deserve; although the one were in some fault,
the other for saw the seeds of superstition and Idolatry then in sowing,
better then he: yet are not Saint Paul, Barnabas, Jerome, hereby noted for
heretics. But for railing (say you) and foul scurrilitie, such as
Protestants use ordinarily against us, and among them selves, when they
dissent, I dare auow to be proper to them and their ancetora only. All this
while, you tell us not what you call railing, and foul scurrilitie, except you
mean, that the very same odious terms, which are lawful or tolerable in
you, be railing and foul scurrilitie in us, only because you account us
heretics: and then we must account you to be trifling sophisters, which to
convince us of railing, can bring none other arguments, but that which is the
wholl matter in contro uersie between us, namely whether we or you be the
heretics; and yet you dare auow railing and foul scurrility, such as
Protestants use against you, not only to agree to us, but also to be proper
to us and our ancetors, by whom you un derstand none but heretics. Oath modesty
of Papists! among whom no one person can be found, that ever used railing or
scurrilitie, if this be true, that you dare auow of the property of heretics,
and of all them whom you take for such.

But it is good to examine your reason, by which you would prove railing to be
proper unto gospellers (as you term them) and thereby easily take a scantling
of the diversity of their spirits from Popish Catholics. First, the mouth
speaks according to the abundance of the heart, which is true, in such
sense, as it is spoken of by our Savior Christ: for wickedness is first bred
in the heart, before it break forth of the mouth: but it follows not
thereof, that you conclude, when you say, I mean a man may be known by his
speech: for then the wickedness of every hypocrite might appear by his talk,
which is untrue. But Saint Peter said unto Simon Magus, upon his only speech
(say you) I see thee to be in the very gall of bitterness, etc. yet was it no
railing speech, which Simon Magus uttered, nor dissembled speech: for he
plainly professed, that he was desirous to buie the gift of the holy ghost;
and last of al, it was not only speech: for the text says, he offered Act. 8.
money for his march andise: for otherwise his only words, as they are
reported by Saint Luke, were not sufficient to discover so great wickedness of
his heart: give unto me also this power, that upon whomsoever I lay my hands,
he may receive the holy ghost: it might have been thought, upon this only
speech, that Simon lately baptized, was desirous to have been a Minister of
the dispensation of the holy ghost, to the benefit of gods Church, by the
grant of the Apostles, if he had not proffered money also, by which his
covetousness, and other wicked blasphemous opinions of the holy ghost, were
plainly discovered. You show your self therefore to be a man mighty in the
scriptures, that can bring no better example or proof, that one, by his only
speech sometime, may be sufficiently convicted, of the wickedness of his heart,
then this of Peter, and Simon Magus; where only speech was not used, and the
speech that was used, was not of it self able to discover the heart of him
that spoke. In matters of greater controversy betwixt us, perhaps you are
better exercised, or else we are like to find feeble arguments on your behalf.
To proceed, you say, the scripture is plain in this point. what point? that
a man may be known always by his speech: for that he may sometime thereby
be abundantly convinced, we doubt not. well, what says the scripture? he Romans
8.
that has not the spirit of Christ, appertains not to Christ. This is most
true of the spirit of adoption, which also shows it self in the fruits of
mortification, and renouation. But hereof we may not conclude, thatall things
in them, that have the spirit of Christ. are perfect, so that they never
offended, no not in words; or that in whomesoeuer appears any thing, which
proceeds not from the spirit of Christ (as in the best there do many
things) they are therefore to be judged void of the spirit of Christ. And
therefore we may see what sound divinity you teach, and how well you
understand the scriptures, upon which you conclude as follows: Now then if we
consider the quiet, calm, and sober spirit of Christ, and of all godly
Christians from the beginning, and the furious, reproachful, and unclean spirit
of Satan, and all heretics from time to time, and do compare them with the
writings of both parts at this day, we may easily take ascantling of the
diversity of their spirits. Verily it shall be found as hard a matter, as it
was before you made this demonstration. for notwithstanding we acknowledge the
quiet, calm, and sober spirit of Christ and Christians, yet you confess, and
the scripture is plentiful, to prove, that Christ and his Apostles against
the wicked and obstinate enemies of the truth, used most hott, vehement, and
sharp speeches, and they which have truth on their side may use the like in
like causes, by their examples: So that by vehemency of speech, the cause can
not so easily be discerned, neither is your scantling right to be taken
thereby. Those kind of speeches, for the most part, are to be accounted
furious, reproachful, and unclean, which are uttered of malice against the
truth, when the same being spoken of zeal against falsehood, may well stand
with the quiet, calm and sober spirit of Christ. Yet are there also certain
unclean, reproachful and scurrilous speeches, which serve not so much to
describe falsehood and sin, to the detestation thereof, as they seem of
themselves to bewraie the hatred, and intemperate heat of them that use them
against the persons of other; and these in no case are commendable, but to be
reproved, whether they be found in Papists, or Protestants, as neither of
both perhapsmaie be cleerelie excused of this falt. By this it may be gathered
what railing is properly, not every hot word (as you say) but such as are
used in an evil cause against truth and justice, of malice commonly,
sometime of immoderate zeal, and such as be offensive, in what cause soever,
or of what zeal soever they be used, and such railing I dare avouch you shall
not be able to prove, that it is proper to Protestants, no nor to heretics.
For there be heretics which not with railinges, and reproachful speeches, make
divisions in the Church, beside the Doctrine of Christ, but with fair, smooth,
and flatering Romans 16.
talk deceive the hearts of the simple: therefore railing is not a proper, and
perpetual note of heretics.

Now as concerning your examples, first you begin with Master Charke, asking
what more venomous words can be imagined then these of scorpions, poisoned
spiders, and the like used by Master Charke against reverend men. Here except
you can first discharge your Jesuits of herisie, and treason, the words of
scorpions, and venomous spiders, are no railing terms, but apt to express
their venomous and poisonous practices: for they are used in scripture to
describe the like mischeuous works, as Apocal. 9. Esa. 59. 5. The rest of his
speeches, have either the same, or the like phrases justified in the
scriptures, against corrupters of Religion, and enemies of public peace, as we
show your Jesuits to be, for the former, and their practices, to the
confusion of some of them, have been discovered for the latter. With Master
Hanmers terms I will not meddle, who is to answer for himself, when you have
confuted his arguments, or else when he shall see it convenient. Doctor Fulke,
the next man, whom you condemn to be of a ruffianlike spirit, because he says
( show me Allin if thou can for thy guts) as though you rail not more of
him, in your ruffianlike term, then he in speaking of Allens guts,
whatsoever the cause or affection were, has answered already in his own
behalf, and in such sort, as more shame redowndeth to you that have gathered
together his vehement and sharp speeches, uttered in many books, and to
those whom you complain by him to be abused, while he gives a reason of his
speeches, then all the eloquence you have will be able to wipe away in a larger
treatise, then your defense of the Censure as yet appears to be. Confut. of
Topish quarrelles: page. 20. and so forth in 16. or 17 pages. If it were no
more but your marginall note, Docter Fulkes talent in railing, wherein you
abuse an holy phrase of scripture, like an Italian Atheist, to move
Sardonicall laughter, it were much more able to convince you of a ruffianlike
spirit, then any term that D. Fulke uses, seeing such vnreligious allusions
unto the terms and matters of holy scripture, cannot be defended in any man,
cause, or manner. The like you have of Primitias spiritus, and Luthers lying
with a Nun in the Lord, all which argue a profane spirit and a licentious,
intemperate, and almost blasphemous tongue, or pen, in any that use them or
the like.

When you have almost done with Doctor Fulke, you take upon you to show the
like railing in the Masters (as you term them) that you have done in the
scholars, and beginning with John Calvin, you say that his ordinary term,
especially against Bishops and such like, as are his superiors, is to call
them Nebulones, knaves: which beside the foull gall whence it proceeds, is
unseemly. For this you neither note nor quote any one place, where he uses
that term in such sort, as either his gall might thereby be espied, or the
same signfying light persons, might not fitly be applied unto them, upon whom
he bestowed the term. As for your popish Bishops, are not his superiors,
but for the most part deserve sharper terms, then Nebulones, even such as were
fit for Annas, Caiphas. Ananias, and the rest of that race, which were as
great prelates as they? Having nothing more against Calvin, you pass over to
Luther, who in his book against King Henry the eight of England, ministers
unto you larger matter to triumph against him: where in it may be doubted,
whether you had greater pleasure in discovering of Lu there is intemper at style;
then in displaying those odious and long since buried reproaches, against that
noble Prince, so great an enemy to your Romish Antichrist; which as they were
unseemly in respect of either of their persons, him that did write, and the
Prince against whom he did write; so they were afterward misliked of Luther
himself, who in as great humility, as before he did write in disdain, craved
pardon at his hands, not for the matter and substance of his book, but for
his vnreuerent Ep. ad Reg. Angl.
handling of the same, against a King of so great nobility, and of so good
expectation. the cause that moved him to such destemper was, for that he
supposed, that the book was not endited by the King him self, but by some
enemy of his, to procure his dishonor, as he writes in the same book,
Crederes ab insigni host regis hunc librum editum in perpetuam regis
ignominiam. You would think, that his book was set forth by some notable
enemy of the Kings, to the perpetual shame of the King. And in his Epistle
of submission he declares, that he suspected cardinal Wolsey to be the author
thereof, which made him the bolder to write as he did against it. And in the
story of Sir Thomas Moors life, written by his son in law Master Roper
(which I have seen) it appears, that King Henry took great displeasure
against Sir Thomas Moore, for the edition of that book, by which he received
more dishonor, then by any thing in all his life. Luther therefore writing
against him, that did abuse the name of the King, in defense of an evil
cause, thought he was not bound to spare him, because of the Kings title, but
that he might so much the rather be free to inueigh against him. But this, to
say the truth, might be some part of an excuse, though not a sufficient
defense of his doing nevertheless it follows not here of, that he could not
be an elect vessel of God, or that he had no part of Gods spirit, or that he
was herein worsse then any russian or rakehell, as our severe Censurer says,
without either malice or railing spirit, I warrant you. For Gods elect
children, and they that have a great part of his spirit, do sometimes fall into
far greater crimes then this, and yet by his grace are brought to repentance,
as Luther was for this intemperate style, and thereof made open confession in
his epistle of submission. again, he erred by immoderat zeal, yet in defense
of the truth, which is not the cause that moves ruffians and rakehelles to
rage. Wherefore it is well with Luther, that has already answered the matter,
before a more wise and merciful judge, and stands not at the courtesy of our
solemn Censurer.

But it is more to your purpose, that you bring in Luther inueighing against
the Caluinistes, where he had not (by our own confession) a good cause, and
the Caluinistes again as bitter against him: a taste whereof though you refer
the matter to another place, you will needs give us here, by citing of one
place in stead of all the rest, and that is, of the Church of Tygurine against
Luther, Tygur. (...). 3. contra supermam Lutherij confessionem: whole words
you promise to rehearse, out of what edition I cannot tell, for the edition of
Tigure by Froshere. 1545. of Gwalters translation, reports their words
somewhat otherwise, and therefore I think in this place, as in diverse other,
you are but a broaker of other men's ware, to put forth that you never saw your
self, but gather out of some other man's notebooke, which reported not al
things either with such diligence, or faithfullnes, as had been requisite, to
be found in so glorious a Censurer. The very words indeed of the edition
beforesaid are these: Nos damnatam and execrabilem sectam vocat, ipse viderit
ne iracundis istis and a Christiana religione alienissimis sermonibus sibi ipsi
damnationem acceleret, and ne sectarum authorem vel consortem sese faciat, dum
cum iis conuenire non vult, qui Christum and fatentur and docent. Quam
admirabilem vero Lutherus hic quoque cum Diabolis suis sese praebet? quam
impuris verbis, quae Diabolis farcita tument, vtitur? Sic enim ait: Inuisus
ille Diabolus in ipsis agit and nunc, and in posterum, si habent (quis enim
latinis verbis haec exprimat) ein y ^geteiiflet, iiberteiiflet, vnd
durchteiiflet lesterlich hertz, vnd Lugenmaull. Blasphemum. n. cor and o^
mendax habent, in quo, super quod, and per quod diabolus diffufus est and
regnat. Multa huius generis ab omni Christiana religione aliena verba non sine
grauib. and justice causis praeterimus. quis vero vnquammortalium istiusmodi ser
mones exratione vtentibus, no^ furiosis and Demoniacis audiuit? He calls us a
damnable and execrable sect. Let himself take heed, lestwith those angry
speeches, and most far from Christian Religion, he hasten condemnation to
himself, and lest he make him self an author or a companion of sects, while
he will not agree with them, which both confess and teach Christ. And how
wounderfull a man does Luther here also show himself, with his deuilles, how
vnpure words, which even swell, being stuffed with devils, does he use? for
thus he says: that hatfull devil works in them both now and hereafter. they
have (for who can express these terms in latin words (an indeuilled,
ouerdeuiled, and through deuilled, blasphemous heart, and lying mouth; that is,
they have a blasphemous heart, and lying mouth, in which, upon which, and
through which the devil is diffused, and reigns. Many words of this kind
far from all Christian Religion, not without weighty and just causes we
pass over: now what man ever heard such speech of men that use reason, being
not man and possessed with the devil? In stead of these words you bring us an
other report, and say, their words are these. Nos condemnatam and execrabilem
vocat sectam, etc. Luther calls us a damnable and execrable sect, but let him
look that he do not declare himself an archhereticke, seeing he will not,
nor cannot have any society with those which confess Christ. But how
marueilouslie does Luther here bewray himself with his deuilles? what filthy
words does he use, and such as are replenished with all the deuilles in hell?
for he says, that the devil dwells both now and ever in the Zuinglians, and
that they have a blasphemous breast insathanized, supersathanized,
persathanized, and that they have besides a most vain mouth, over which satan
bears rule being infused, perfused, and transfused to the same: did ever man
bear such speeches pass from a furious devil him self? Hitherto (say you)
are the words of the Tigurine Caluinistes, which how faithfully they are
reported, by comparing them with the latin, and the true English of the same,
every simple reader may perceive. Now touching such matter as you gather out
of them: first where they say, how wonderful does Luther show him self with
his deuilles, you conclude in the margent, Ergo Luther had deuilles, which
Master Charke denies: a fine and proper conclusion. The Tygurines speak of
the term of deuilles, which Luther so often repeateth against them, therefore
he was possessed of deuilles actuallie: which is the thing that Charke denies.

Secondly you say, these words of the Tygurynes may easily confute Master
Charkes shameless lies in defense of Luther, as after shall be showed: well
hereafter comes not yet, and therefore you might have spared your courteous
term of shameless lies, until you had showed us what they are. Yet I may not
say that you have a railing spirit: but that even as your Pope, though he be
never so great an heretic, has a prerogative that he cannot err; so you have
a privilege that you do not rail, though you use never so foull reproaches,
and give no reason of them. More then this, here you wouldhaue the reader to
consider with what conscience Charke does call Luther a holy and divine man,
and M. Whitaker a man of holy memory, seeing the Tyguryne Caluinists (who are
their Masters) do call him an arch-heretike and a furious devil. Peter was
justly reprehended of Paull for dissimulation, and as one that did not tread
rightly according to the truth of the Gospel, and of Christ himself Gal. 2.
he was called Sathanas, and told that he was an Mat. 16.
offense, and that he sauoured not those things that are of God, but of men:
the same Peter did thrice deny Mat. 26.
Christ, yea swore and forswore, curse and banne, that he knew him not. Think
you then that M. Charke and Master Whitaker, with any conscience might call him
an holy and divine Apostle, or an Apostle of holy memory? verily I would
have the Reader consider, both here, and almost every where, what a subtle
Logician (for I will not meddle with his conscience, wherofperhaps he has small
feeling) we have to be our Censurer, which makes such infallible conclusions,
as no man, except he had more ouerweening of his wit, then use of his reason,
would make in a sophisme among children in the university. And yet when you
have cried out; Is not this open dissimulation and blinding of the people?
where do the Tygurynes call Luther, an arch-heretike, and a furious devil?
For although Luther in deed did break all Christian modesty, as one carried
away with immoderate zeal, and that in a wrong cause; yet do the Tygurynes
thoroughout all their wholltreatise speak both charitablie of Luther, and as
reverently as was convenient, to one which so much forgatte his own creditte,
while he inueieth against them. They bid him take heed that he make not
himself an author or a companion of sects. Ergo by your Logic, do they
call him an arch-heretike? Nay let us use your own friendly translation, let
him look that he do not declare him self an arch-heretike: who but you may
conclude of these words that they do call him an arch heretic? They admonish
him of the danger, wherein he was like to fall, if God did not keep him, while
he will not agree with them, which both confess and teach Christ in all
necessary points unto salvation, as well as he. Secondly I ask, where they
do call Luther a furious devil? They ask in deed who did ever hear such
speeches uttered by men that use reason, which are not mad, or possessed with
the devil? whereof you can gather no more rightly, but that such speeches,
wherein the devil is so often repeated, are more like to proceed from mad men
or demoniackes, then from a modest Christian: yet do they not call him either
mad man or demoniacke, much less a furious devil: yea in the end after they
have protested their hatred of the devil, and al his ways, they conclude, Deus
faxit ne Listhero iuxta domini verbum eueniat, Ex abun dantia cordis os
loquitur, God grant that it may not come to pass unto Luther, according to
the Lords sayings, Of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Now
whether these be shameless lies, that the Tygurynes do call Luther an arch
heretic, and a furious devil, let the readers judge.

The second section, entitled Of sects and sectaries.
FIrst you complain, that the answer is somewhat confuse, and vnorderlie,
because Master Charke says, the examples of Elias, Elizeus, Daniell, and Saint
John Baptist are no less wickedly, then unlearnedly alleged, to auow the
Jesuits order, which hot entrance (say you) is joined with a manifest cauil,
because these examples are not alleged to auow the Jesuits order absolutely,
but in one point of differen: life, from the common sort, which makes them no
sectaries. But in deed Master Charke keeps good order, speaking first of the
name of a sect, then the definition of sectaries, and thirdly to such reasons
as are alleged, to prove the Jesuits to be no sectaries, namely these
examples, which without any cauil (as you surmise) he denied to be sufficient,
to auow the order or company of Jesuits to be no sects, and so follows the
matter of confusion until the end of it. And now we will mark his reason, as
you bid us. He demands what you are able to bring out of the word of God,
why Elias should after more then two thousand years be brought in for a patron
of friars? you answer, these examples are brought by the censurer, to prove
that different apparel, diet, or straight order of life, do not make
sectaries, as Master Charke has affirmed, and now cannot defend, and therefore
having nothing else to say, makes these vain and idle interrogations in stead
of proofs. Hear you not how confidentlie he speaks what Master Chark has
affirmed? how boldly he pronounces, that he is not able to defend, that he
has affirmed? and last of all how scornfullie he concludes, that he has
nothing but vain and idle interrogations, in stead of proofs? would ye not
think, that he which so lately charged Master Charke with shameless lies
(though he showed none) had a care, that he himself should speak nothing but
the truth? And which in the end of the former section was so busy with the
conscience of Master Charke and Master Whitaker, that he burdened them with
open dissimulation, and blinding of the people, is it like, that in the
beginning of the next section he would make an open and most impudent lie him
self? for believe me reader if thou will, or else read over Master Charkes
answer to Campians seditious pamphlet thy self, and thou shall find my
words to be true, that Master Charke does no where affirm, in all that book,
that different apparel, diet, or straight order of life, do make sectaries: I
say, neither in this form of words, nor in any other to this effect or
sense. Then judge according to thy conscience, what a sincere Censurer this
Papist is to Master Charke, and what a doughtie defender he is of his own
Censure.

But now to return to you, sir defender, whom I may not accuse of lying, lest
you charge me of railing, although I take you in a manifest untruth: was this
the cause why ye found fault with M. Charkes method, to iumble together things
that were in good order, that you might fumble out such an open slander, and
be covered with the dust of disorder, that you your self had raised? you show
now of what spirit you are, even of his that was a lier, and a false accuser
from the beginning, and the father of the same things. But to that idle
interrogation of Master Chark, as you term it, what was there in Elias,
Elizeus, or Daniel, that may liken them to Jesuits? you answer there was to
your purpose now in hand a different sort of life from the common sort, which
made them no sectaries, as Master Charke would have the Jesuits to be for that
cause. I have said before, for that cause only Master Charke would not have
them, neither does he therebie go about to prove them to be sectaires,
although there is great difference in the singular examples of those Prophets,
and in multitudes of men, that sever themselves from the common sort of true
Christians, and that for religions sake, therefore those examples were idlelie
brought in by the censurer, to prove that lesuites are no sectaries. But to
this you add, which is more then you need (as you say) and in deed more
then is for your purpose, to justify the Jesuits that dwell commonly in the
greatest cities, That Saint Jerome proves plainly, that Elias and Elizeus
were the beginners, captains and patrones of Monks, and monastical life,
whom he calls for that cause Monks of the old testament, ep. 13 ad
Paulinum, and ep. 4. ad Rusticum. For Saint Jerome in the former place proves
not at all, but only says. Noster Princeps Elias, etc. our prince is Elias,
ours is Elizeus, our guides are the sons of the Prophets, which dwelled in
the fields, and desert places, and made them tabernacles near the streams of
Iordane. The like he says of the sons of Rechab, which drank no wine, or
strong drink, and dwelled in tents: and this he says, to approve the
dwelling of solitary men that were given to study, and contemplation in desert
places, by example of these holy men commended in the scripture, which
extends not to Popish Monks, or Jesuits, which thrust in them selves
especially into places of most frequencie of people. In the epistle to
Rusticus, he speaks neither of Elias, nor Elizeus, but exhorts Rusticus
likewise to leave the city, and to get him into some solitary place, if he
will be in deed, that he professed him self to be called, Monachus, a
solitary man. He brings in deed the example of John Bap tist, and the
sons of the Prophets, Filij Prophetarum (quos Monachos in veteri testamento
legimus) aedificabant sibi casulas propter fluenta Iordanis, and turbis vrbium
derelictis polenta and herbis agrestibus victitabant: the sons of the
Prophets whom wereade to have been Monks or solitary men in the old
testament, did build themselves litlecoteges near to the streams of Jordan,
and having for saken the throng of cities, lived with potage and wild herbs.
In the same epistle he says, mihi oppidum carcer, and solitudo paradisus est:
quid desideramus vrbium frequentias, qui de singularitate censemur? unto me the
town is prison, and the solitary place is a paradise: what do we desire the
frequencie of cities, which have our name of being solitary? These words of
Saint Jerome do show, that in the principal point of profession there is great
odds betwixt your Jesuits, and the solitary men, of the old testament.
Sozomenus in lib. bist. 1. cap. 12.
the place by you cited, after he has commended the Philosophy or
contemplative life of the solitary men in those days, has these words: of
this excellent Philosophy was the beginner (as some say) Elias the Prophet,
and John Baptist: so that it is not so absolute as you set it down, but as
some say, and it is of a Philosophical study and life, in which if
comparison be made with Popish Monks, for one thing which they have like, they
have three things unlike, or contrary to the profession and practice of those
ancient Monachi, which might have some resemblance with the manner of Elias
life in some things, and were more agree able to the example of the sons of
the Prophets which were students in divinity, as those old Monks of the
primitive Church, ready to serve in the place of teachers, whenever they
were called.

That antiquity only should let the Prophets to be examples of monastical
life, it is your own vain collection, and as vain is your comparison of
Adam, to be a pattern of marted men, Abel of sheepherdes, Caine of husband men,
etc. For M. Charke asks what you are able to bring out of the word of God,
why Elias should after more then two thousand years be brough in for a patron
of friars, which for so many years could never be espied in the Church,
either of the Jews, or of the Christians. As for the estate of married men,
sheepherds, husbandmen, citizens, Tentdwellers, musicians, smithes, etc. is
either necessary or otherwise commendable, then by the examples of those
ancients, of which some in respect of their antiquity are not to be followed
at all, as Cain, and the rest of his cursed line, who yet were inuenters of
profitable arts by the gift of God, and not by the worthiness of the persons.
As for the slate of the Munkes and friars, such as we strive about, is neither
necessary, nor profitable to the Church, but a great infection, and poison of
the same. Now whether John Baptist were a president to Monks, whom Master
Chark says to have been an extraordinary, and perpetual Nazarite, whose
example is not now laid upon them that teach in the Church; you answer, that
he does wilfully mistake the question; for that you affirm not, that such
extraordinary austeritie is laid upon any man of necessity, but that it is
lawful, and makes no sect, when it is voluntarily taken and used. You do
wilfully omit the pith of Master Charkes argument, who is not ignorant of your
pretense, of voluntary, but adds that the several offices of those that
teach in the Church are expressed in the word of God, and therefore there can
be no new order of Ministers by any title or voluntary assumption: but it is
a suspicious sect, howsoever several persons may as they see just cause more
or less, prescribe unto themselves, some extraordinary austeritie of life
for their private exercise or chastisment. That Saint John's austeritie was for
the most part voluntary, and not of necessity of the vocation of a
Nazarite, it is fondly proved of you, by example of the superstitious sect of
the Essenes described by Pliny, and Josephus, of which Pliny speaks very
little, but Josephus at large, and in some points of austeritic notes them to
exceed any thing that we read in scripture of Saint John Baptist; as of their
continual exercise in labor of their hands, their forbearing to spitte in
the assemblies of men, their forbearing to ease their bodies on the sabbath
day, and such like superstitious toies.

Now the austeritie of Saint John, in that he did willingly, and not by
compulsion undergo it, may be called voluntary: otherwise, in that it was
appointed by the wisdom of god, whose spirit directed him, it was necessary,
and especially for the forerunner of Christ, to sing the doleful song, and to
call the people to repentance, and therefore, not without presumption, drawn
into example by them that are neither led with the same spirit, nor called to
the same office and so no example nor platform for the superstitious order of
Monks, and friars, albeit they alwares kept as great austeritie in deed, as
they profess in words. But it is a wonderful argument for your Monks, that
the Nazarites did make a religious vow for their dedication to God, as your
religious people do also use. For it were somewhat Number. 6.
that you say, if you could bring as good warrant for the vows of your Popish
votaries to be prescribed and accepted of God, as you bring for the vow of the
Nazarites: otherwise it may be said unto you by God, as he speaks by the
Prophet, quis requisiuit, etc. who, required these things at your hands? which
if it were said Esa. 1. 12.
of those things, which in some manner, and to some end were required, how
justly may it be spoken of these, that in no manner, nor to any end, are by
God required at your hands? but that Saint John was a Monk of the new
Testament, and a patron of monastical life (although you confess it to be
more then you were bound to prove) so many fathers as you name, do testify
with one consent. And what if he were an example followed of those Monks, that
lived in most of those fathers times, is he therefore a patron to your Popish
Monks, of these late days, and new orders? it will be more then hard for you
to prove that. Now let us consider your authorities, which you affirm to
testify, that Saint John was a Monk of the new testament, and a pattern of
monastical life.

First, Gregory Nazian. orat. de. S. Bas. 1. has this testimony. only he
compares Basil with Saint John Baptist, as resembling him in some things, as
he does with Peter, Paul, John the Evangelist, and Stephan: except you will
say these were all Monks. Chrysostom in deed, Hom. 1. in Mark. calls
Saint John prince of the Monastical life, but not a Monk of the new
testament, as I have showed before in answer to your preface. Neither does
Saint Jerome epist. ad Eustoch. say that Saint John was a Monk, and pattern
of Monastical life, but speaking of the life of an Anachoret, which lived by
himself alone in the wilderness, he says: huius vitae auctor Paulus,
illustrator Antonius, and vt ad superior a conscendam, princeps Not the
Apostle, but the Hermit.
Johannes Baptista fuit. Of this life Paul was the author, Anthony the
beautifier, and that I may ascend higher, the Prince or chief was John
Baptist. Where is John Baptist the Monk, or pattern of your Papisticall
monkish life, when they lived not in the wilderness, but in cities, and populous
towns, not in caves, and tents, but in gorgious palaces? Although Saint John
be the chief of them that lived in the wilderness, the same Jerome in the life
of Paul the Heremite whom before he calls the author of the Anachorites
life, has these words: Inter multos saepe dubitatum est, a quo potissimum
monachorum eremus habitari caepta (...) quidam enim altius repetentes, a beato
Helia and Iohanne sumpsere principium, quorum Helias plus nobis videtur fuisse
quam Monachus, and Johannes ante Prophetare caepisse, quam natus est. alij
autem, in quam opinionem vulgus omne consentit, asserunt Antonium huius
propositi fuisse caput, quod ex part verum est. It has been often douted
among many, by which of Monks especially the wilderness began to be inhabited:
for some fetching the matter somewhat high, have taken the beginning of blessea
Elias and Ihon, of which two Elias seems to us to have been more then a
Monk, and John to have prophesied before he was borne: but other (into which
opinion all the common sort consents) affirm that Antonie was the head, or
chief of this purpose, which is partly true. By these words it is evident,
that Saint Jerome counts Helias and Ihon Baptist to be of a higher calling,
then that they could be called Monks or patterns of Monastical life:
ascribing the beginning of them rather to Paul and Antonie, then to Helias, and
John Baptist, although they both, for some time, did lead an austere life in
the wilderness. the same does your next author Cassianus, Collat 18. Cap. 6.
neither does he once call John Baptist a Monk, or pattern of monastical
life, but only shows that the Anachorites desiring to encounter openly
with the devil, feared not to pearse into the vast solitary places of the
wilderness, ad imitationem scilicet Iohannis Baptistae, to the imitation of John
Baptist, who ledd his life in the wilderens: so do not your Popifh Monks, but
lie in their warm nests in the cloisters.

What Sozomenus says, I have showed a little before. Isodorus agrees with
Saint Jerome, and Cassianus, that the Anachorites which live alone do follow
Elias, and John Baptist, where as the Coenobites, which live in companies (in
that point more like your Monks) do follow the Apostles. As for Theoph. in c.
1. Lu. which you note next, has nothing sounding toward the name of monkor
monastical life, except you mean where he says that John lived in the
wilderness, as Elias did. The last author you quote, Nicephorus Hist. li. 8. c.
39. has nothing more then the very words of Sozomene, that some men said that
Elias was the beginner of that solitary life of Christians, some that John
Baptist. And among all your authors, there is not one that says, John Baptist
was a Monk of the new Testament, or a pattern of such monastical life, as you
defend, that there should be so great consent there, of that matter, where of
you brag so much. But names, and quotations of Doctors are sufficient, either
for you, that by all likeliehood never turned the books your self, or for
your sottish scholars, that accept all your words without examination and
trial.

After this follows a vain strife of words concerning the signification of
this term sect, which of M. Charke is taken for a schism, as it is manifest
by the example he brings of the 1. Cor. 1. The Censurer sometime takes it in
good part, and sometime in evil: sometime he makes it equal with the term
of heresy, sometime more particulare: which contention seeing it is
unprofitable for the readers, I do willingly omit, referring them that list to
understand ofit further, to the comparison ofboth their writings, where they
shall find, that Master Charke in effect preuenteth all his cauillations, by
saying that the names of heresy and sect areoften times confounded: which to
prove, the Censurer busieth himself in vain. It is somewhat material that
he says, the Corinthians erred in a point of faith, esteeming the virtue or
power of Baptism, not to depend only of Christ, but of the dignity of the
Baptizer. And surely there must be some opinion touching faith, where there
is a schism, in the Church, though there be not a dissent in the necessary
articles of faith: but a schism or sect may be, where neither the general
doctrine, nor the society of the Church is forsaken, as inthe example. 1. Cor.
1. which is contrary to the descriptionof the censure. Sectaries are such as
cut themselves of in opinion of religion from the general body of the Catholic
Church: for so did not the Corinth. 1. Cor. 1. (howsoeeur they had an opinion
of some excellency in the minister of Baptism) nor the 1. Cor. 11. 18. where
Saint Paul likewise charge them with schisms, when they came together to
celebrate the communion, which text being likewise quoted by M. Chark, is
clean omittedby the defender. But now you would clear your sects of Monks
and Friars from the example of the Corinthian schismatikes, by a fond
similitude, supposing our ministers should say in a contrary sense of
liberty, I will luie unmarried after the order of my Lord of Canterbury. I
will bem aried after the platform of my Lord of London: I will have two wives
together, after the fashion of Master Archdeacon of Salisburie: I will have a
wife, and a wench, after the custom of some other Archdeacon and preahcer.
Concerning your example, if any Archdeacons be of such fashion, as you describe
them, I would they had such punishment as to such fashions belongs, and if
you be hable lawfully to convince them thereof, I doubt not but they shall. As
for the other 2. of being married and unmarried, be matters in deed of Christian
liberty, that every minister may choose that which he finds to be most
expedient for him, but if any minister should glory of his continent life out
of marriage, by having my Lord of Canterhurie for his pattern, or of his
chaste life in marriage, by following my Lord of Londons platform, he might
justly be noted for a schismatike, as Saint Paull does the Corinthians when
they said, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, I of Cephas, and I of Christ. For the
platform, order, pattern, or example of men in these cases, must not be their
warrant, but the word of God; which text is plain, that in profession of
Religion we may not be called by the names of men, no nor by the name of
Christ, or Jesus, therebie to make a division or separation of our selves in
excellency from other, to whom Jesus Christ is common, as well as to our
selves.

For every one of your sects termed of Benedict, Augustine, Frauncis,
Dominike, Jesus, etc. although in the general doctrine of Popery they al
agree, yet have they their several opinions each one of the excellency of
their orders, and patrons, which makes a schism, and often times has broken
forth into great brawling, and open contention. It is too manifest, that the
Monks commonly hated the Friars, the Dominicans and Franciscans were at
deadly feed, the not obseruants envied the obseruants, and they despised the
children of their own father Frauncis, as bastardes in comparison of them
selves: and now the Jesuits are hated and inuicd of all other sects of Monks,
and especially of Friars, whom they bring into great contempt, wheresoever
they plant themselves, in so much that the Friars in some places have slirred
up sedition against them, and caused them to be expelled. It remains
therefore that the Jesuits are a sect or schism even in Popery, as they are a
detestable kind of heretics against the Catholic faith, which is common to
al obstinate Papists, and it is true likewise, which Master Charksayeth, that
the Pharisees were a notorious sect, ver did they not cut of themselves from the
religion of the Church, nay they bare the greatest sway in the Church: and
albeit some of the^ held great heresies, yet they professed to imbraceal the
doctrine of the Church: and so did the Saduces, in so much that some of them
climed up even to the high priests office: yet were they a detestable sect, but
of a bastard Church, as the Jesuits are of the Popish Church of Rome.

His definition also (if you did not cavil and trifle about words) is true,
that a sect is a company of men, that differ from the rest of their religion,
in matter, or form of then profession. Whether you derive the Etimologie a
secando, of cutting, or a sequendo, of following, although I think Master
Charke means it of cutting, the absurdities you gather are wilful
cauillations For Bishopes, ministers, lawyers, judges, etc. though they differ
in authority, apparel, state, and form of life, yet they differ not in form
of profession of religion from the rest of our religion. They be diverse
offices, and lawful callings in one profession of religion, but so are not
Jesuits, and other orders of Monks, and Friars: for they, albeit they hold
one religion with the rest, yet do differ in the sorme and profession of that
religion, being no necessary offices or callinges instituted by God, but
several professions begone by men, whose imitation soever they pretend.
Therefore no wise man, but such a quarreling Censurer, would have made the
cases of Bishopes, judges, lawyers, like in this point with Dominicans,
Franciscans, Jesuits. Like wisdom and gravity you show in flouting of.
Master Charkes definition, with your ridiculous comparisons, where he says, a
sect is a company of men. For when, you have sported your self, until you
have wearied your self, and your reader, in the end you confess that you are
not ignorant, that in common speech this word sect may improperly signify the
me^ also, which profess the same, but not in a definition, where the proper
nature of each word is declared. Whether it be properly or improperlie so
taken, because it is a brable of words, I will not contend, but if you exclude
all improper or figurative speeches, whose sense is commonly known, as this
of sect, from definitions, you will drive them into a straight room. For we
may not say, Logic is a science, or art been disserendi, which in common
speech signifies to dispute well, because disserere in latin, does properly
signify to sow, or set in diverse places: and seeing the word sect in common
speech, may signify the men that profess such a separation, why may there not
a definition be given of the term according to that signification?

Now whether the Jesuits be a sect, according to Master Charkes definition,
you will examine: after you have told us, that his conclusion is like that he
made in the Tower against Campian, which was to dispatch him at Tyburne,
nothing following of the premises: which fond comparison I pass over, seeing
all men: know that conclusion was not of Master Charkes making, by which
Campian was hanged at Tyburne, and all men may see what was Master Charkes
disputation in the Tower, and how it was answered by Campian.

But to the matter in hand, you ask what is in M. Charkes illation, that can
make the lesuites a sect, if it were all granted to be true? the Jesuits
receive a peculiar vow to preach as the Apostles did, every where of free
cost. First, to dedicate a man's life by vow to Gods service, you say it is
allowed in scripture, Numbers. 6. and. Ps. 131. yea, that is every man's duty:
but Master Charkes illation is of a peculiar vow, which by no scripture is
allowed, but of such things only as God accepts to his service, and are in
our own power to perform, as the vow of a Nazarite, the vow of sacrifices, of
thanksgiving, etc. Other be either superstitious, or unlawful vows.
Secondly, to preach every where and at free cost, you think he should be
ashamed to say that it makes a sect, seeing Christ commanded his Apostles to
preach every where freely, and Saint Paul glories, that he had taught the
Gospel of free cost. Yes Sir, this makes a sect, for them to vow to exercise
the office of Apostles, which are not called by Christ to be Apostles: the vow
is unlawful, and the votaries are sectaries, not of the Apostles, but of that
pseudo Apostle Laiolas, that was of his own ordination. Again, where you say,
that the Apostles were commanded to preach the Gospel in all places freely,
it is false, for that precept, Mat. 10. give freely, as you have received
freely, either is meant of the graces of healing, or if you join it with the
other precepts that follow, of not possessing gold, nor silver, nor money,
garments, etc.and other provision for the journey, it is as they are particular
for that viage, and not general for all time of their Apostleshippe. For
otherwise the Apostles should have greeuouslie offended, in not preaching in
all places of free cost, and Saint Paull in taking of double wages of sum
Churches, that in some other he 2. Cot. 11. 8.
might preach freely. Therefore as upon good consideration in some place the
Apostles did preach of free cost, and so may men at this day: yet for any man
to vow, that in all places, and at al times, he will preach at free cost, the vow
is unlawful, because it is contrary to the ordinance of God, which has
ordained and appointed that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 14. And it cannot, but be to the injury, and such as will
procure contempt, and neglect unto them that preach the Gospel, and live
according to the ordinance of the Gospel, in taking the stipende for them
appointed, that there should be a sect or company of men, which should profess
always and in all places to preach of free cost.

You proceed and ask, what then makes them sectaries? to whippe and torment
themselves, if it were true? seeing Saint Paull chastened his own body, and
carried the bonds of Christ in his flesh: and the scriptures talk much of
mortifying our members, of crucifying our flesh, and the like, and never a word
of pampering the same. As though there could be no chastening of the body,
bearing of Christ's marks, mortifying the members, or crucifying the flesh,
except men whippe and torment themselves: or that whosoever does not whippe
himself, does pamper his flesh. Saint Paull did chastise his body, with
abstinence and fasting: he did bear in his body the marks of Christ, by
suffering imprisonment, stoning, whipping, not of his own hand, but of the
persecutors of the Gospel. As for mortifying our members and crucifying our
flesh, be higher matters, then any voluntary exercise: and extend much farther
in ouercomming our whole corrupted nature, which it seems you little know or
practice, for all your whipping, and tormenting of your selves, by your
comparing of them to exercises of bodelie chastisement. Moreover, the severity
of S. John Baptists life, and of other Saints of the new Testament, and the
old, mentioned in the scripture, favors not your superstitious whippings.
For albeit they did willingly sometime abstain from pleasures that are
lawful, and were tormented by other, yet none of them was a tormentor of
himself. And as for the great store of examples, that you promise the reader
in one Chapter of Marcus Marulus, lib. 3. cap. 10. of Saints chastizing their
bodies with whippes, there is in deed some store of examples of voluntary, not
only chastening, but also tormenting of the body, but we have small warrant
either that they were all Saints, or that any Saints in such examples of
tormenting their bodies pleased God: yet is there very few examples of them
that whipped them selves. The first is of Frauncis, the father of graie-
friars, which being assaulted with the thoughts of marriage, being angry with
him self therefore, did beat himself very hardly with the cord wherewith
he was girded. But when stripes little prevailed, he tumbled himself naked a
great while in the deep snow, and afterward binding to his wholl body the
shapes of men made of snow, he spoke unto himself, by the way of rebuking,
and said, lo Francis, here is thy wife, lo, here be thy children; either
cloth them, that they be not so frozen for cold, or else forsake al things,
and serve the Lord only. So (says your author) at length he tamed the
wantonness of his flesh with whipps, and quenched the burning fire of lusts by
embracing cold snow with his naked breaste. But the holy ghost, wiser then
Francis, prescribes marriage, which he did fight against, and not Images of
snow, which he embraced, to be a remedy to quench burning Just. I. Cor. 7. But
of whippers there are three more examples; Elizabet anunne of Comagie, whipped
her self certain hours every day. Maria Decegnies, that was married
against her will, by often prayers, fasting, and whipping of her-selfe, moved
her husband to vow chastity with her, where your author says Naufragium, etc.
she had made shipwreck of virginity, being committed to the waves of
Matrimony: but while she leans to the board of fasting, prayer, chastisment,
unhurt and untouched she swamme out unto the haven of salvation. But the holy
ghost gives an other Portum salutis.
rule to them that be married, that the wife be not separated from her husband,
except it be for a time of fasting and prayer, and then to return again
together, lest Satan tempt them through incontinencie, and that they which are
married, should not seek to be loosed. 1. Cor. 7. ver. 10. 5. 27. Beside these,
there is a Dukes wife of Thuringia called Helizabeth, that commanded her
maids to whippe her in her privy Chamber: and these are the goodly examples
of Saints that used whipping of themselves. Many of the rest are wearing of
haireclothes, as Thomas Becket, Maiorus, Bishop of Sarina, I wot not where, in
the i will of Britanie. Medericus Eduensis Abbas: Jews the 5. King of France:
Cecilia, and Radegundis wife of Clotharius King of France, until she had
obtained the dissolution of the band of marriage, by binding her-selfe to
chastity, agreeable to the doctrine of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. as well as
white and black resemble each other. Edmunde of Canterbury ware a coote of
maile, wouen with lead. Macharius Abbat of Alexandria bare on his shoulders a
sack full of sand. A Monk in Saint Hierome, being commanded by his elder,
carried a great stone eight years together, twice in the day, by the space
almost of five miles. Hierome to Eustochium testifyeth, that he cried often day
and night together, and ceased not beating of his breast until by the Lords
rebuking, quietness returned. An example more meet to be followed of them that
seek the like cause, then any we have had yet, which is confirmed by
authority of the Scripture, Psalm. 22. Psalm. 32. and 42. Bonifacius Archbishop
of the nether Missia, ryding barefoot in winter, his feet were frozen to the
stirop, and thowed with hot water. Hospitius Monk of Nuceria used an Iron
girdle: Philoramus a Priest lived enclosed in a stony den, being bound hand
and foot with iron bands, and the last day of his life confessed (if you will
believe the story) that he omitted no moment of time, in which he thought not
somewhat of God: he had been better occupied, to have attended on the flock
of the Church, whereof he was a Priest or elder. Martin a Monk of Massick in
Campania had bound his foot in a chain fastened to a rock, but being bidden
by the Abbat Benet to beware that the iron chain did not hold him there more
then the chain of Christ, he unloosed the bands, but would never depart
further. John a Monk stood three years under a hollow rock of a mountain,
that his legs thereby swelled, and broke into ulcers. Pacomius an Abbat walked
barefoot thorough the brambles and thorns, and returned into his celle with
his feet all bloody. Simeon a Monk took a rope from a bucket, and wound it
about his body, until his flesh were eaten with it, and putrified, till
stink betrayed the secret: then the rope being loosed, he was expulsed out of
the Abbey for his folly: but afterward being sought for by his Abbat, which
was troubled with terrors in the night, he was found in a dry pit in the
desert, and brought back again. Last of al, Sara an Abbess in Scithia, by the
space of 60. years, would never look out at a window to behold the water
that ran by, or the pleasant meddow. I pray God she were not worsse occupied
within, then she might have been in beholding Gods creatures a broad. And
these (except Saint Paul's chastening of his body, which he names first) are
all the store of worthy examples, gathered, as you say, out of all
antiquity: and yet Paull being the first, Thomas Becket is the next: and
although there be some of greater antiquity, yet, out of all antiquity, you
would not have said, if you had read the Chapter your self, except you care
not what you say.

You add further that Saint Hierome testifies of himself, by an occasion
given to a secret friend of his, that his skin was well near as black, with
punnishment, as the skin of an Ethiopian, Epist. 22. ad Eustochium: And that
Johannes Cassianus, that lived about the same time, has infinite examples of
the practice of the fathers in this point. Saint Hierome in deed writing to
the noble virgin Eustochium, testified how little he prevailed with such
immoderate austerity, to subdew the lust of his slesh, until by importunity of
prayers, he obtained rest of his unquiet mind from Christ. Although his words
be not, as you have set them down, that his skin was as black as an
Ethiopian: but his deformed skin was grown over with the hearines, or
scurffe of an Ethiopians flesh, squalida cutis situm aethiopicae carnis
obduxerat. In the margent you note that we will say, Saint Hierome was noe
Protestant. I answer, although we cannot allow Saint Hierome, or any man, that
by hurting his bodelie health, with immoderate rigor of austere life, brings
his natural life in danger: yet do we embrace S. Hierome, as a member of the
true Church of Christ, who trusted not in any merit of such chaistisment, but
only in the mercy of God by Jesus Christ. The like we say of any examples of
godly men, that are brought by Cassianus, who is not altogether so old as
you make him. Your railing, and seoffing at Peter Martyr. I omit, as meet
for such a Censurer: but where you charge him to jest at Saint Basil and Saint
Gregory Nazianzen, for hard handling of their own bodies, in cap. 16. lib. 3.
Reg. your note book deceived you: for in his comment upon the Chapter he has
no such matter. His judgment else where may be to this effect, That
notwithstanding the examples of the ancient godly fathers, yet it is neither
lawful nor expedient, for a man with such rigor to handle his body, as it be
not able to serve him in his calling. For as chastisement of the body to bring
it in subjection, is sometime necessary: So weakening of the body, to make it
unable to serve the spirit in such outward actions, as require the use of the
body, is neither wisdom, nor godliness, what examples soever be pretended.
For as it is not lawful for a man, under any pretense of mortifying his flesh,
to kill him self; so it is not lawful for any man to torment his body, above
the strength thereof; whereby sickness must needs follow, and death may ensue.
For against all examples of godly men, that can be alleged to the contrary,
we will oppose the wisdom of the holy ghost, in his elect vessel S. Paul, who
calls Timothy from such austeritie, wherebie his health was impaired, unto a
moderate use of gods creatures. Drink no more water, says he, butvse a little
wine, because of thy stomach, and often infirmities, 1. Tim. 5. 23. According
to the proportion of which rule if many of the examples before remembered were
exacted, they may perhapes declare a zeal in the persons, but such as is not
guided by knowledge of Gods will, revealed in the scriptures.

Where you say, If the Ministers of England would use this cooling physic,
there should be fewer Eatons, and Hynches openly punished, or fly the
country, for incest and rape, you would insinuate, that for lack of
chastisement of men's bodies, so great enormites break out, and in part it may
be true, so you touch none but such as are guilty, who when they be discovered,
by your own confession, are not winked at in our Church, but openly punished,
what discipline soever you use when any of your Jesuits are overtaken with
such offenses. The number God be thanked of such offenders among us is not
great, how small chastisement soever you think the Ministers do use, and
therefore no cause why you should amplify them in the plural number, as
though for one Eaton, or one Hynch, there had been ten of each sort at the
least. Too many, we confess, of one, but fewer then one there could not be,
except there had been none. Howbeit we praise God that so few have given such
offense in so long peace of the Church, and pray God they be the last. Yet are
they a small matter for you to insult against us, if you look homewarde, where
for two, you may easily find two hundred, and for two poor Ministers, many
of your great prelates, yea your Popes, by confession of your own historians,
have not been behind any examples of incontinencie, and filthiness.

But if we will not practice this remedy our selves, for contristing, or
making sad the holy ghost within us (which you say is our phrase) yet you
will us not to impute it as schism, and heresy to them, which use it
moderatlie, as we may imagine the Jesuits will, being not fools, nor having
iron bodies, but sensible as ours are. Hereto I answer, that the remedy of
incontinencie we learn out of the scriptures, and have no need of your
instruction for such matters, if God give us grace to practice that which we
learn out of his word. The phrase whereat you scoff, is not ours, but used by
the holy Ghost himself, though in a Ephesians. 4. 30.
far other sense, then you ascribe it to us, in which meaning you will sooner
be hanged for a traitor, then you are able to prove, that any approved
Minister of ours has ever used the same in speech or writing. Among the
family of love perhaps, which are catercosins with you Papists, you may
find such blasphemous abusers of holy phrases of scripture. The imputing to
schism or heresy, arises of the Jesuits profession, and practice, which in
such doings pretend a greater merit, and perfection, then God requires of
Christians. Otherwise we doubt not but many of the Jesuits can favor
themselves well enough in their voluntary whipping, especially those of our
nation, or of any other, except the Spaniardes, among whom the relics of
the old whipping heretics have continued so rank in some, that they have
been seen in England to endure grievous whipping for other men's sins, that
liked not to suffer such penannce in their own persons. The following of one
man's rule (you sat) can make no division, because it is but a particular
direction of life, and manners, grounded one the seriptures and practice of the
fathers, and allowed by the superiors of the Church. But here you assume more
then will be granted: for neither is the rule of Laiolas grounded one the
scriptures, neither have the governors of the Church authority to allow any
such rule: and last of all, it is so new, that it has no practice of the
ancient fathers to shadow it. The first is proved before, the second
depends upon the first, and the last of the newnes is manifest of it self.

But all this while you have supposed, that Master Charkes reports of the
Jesuits life and vocation, were true, which is false: for there was never any
that took a vow to whippe themselves, and much less to do it after the
example of a sect, called by the name of whippers, condemned long ago. Here,
beside a double cavil, is nothing worthy the answering, for Master Charke
means not, that their vow is to follow the condemned whippers: but that
this whipping is after the example of that condemned sect, in that they wippe,
and torment themselves. Whereof if there be no particular vow expressed, yet
seeing they vow to follow the rule of Layolas, which includes whipping of
them selves, as you cannot deny, Master Charke has not belied the Jesuits,
as you note in your margent. And as concerning the sect of heretics, called
whippers, you refer us to Prateolus and Gerson, to prove that they held
many wicked opinions, for which they were condemned, and ask what does this
make against the sober and moderat chastisment which good men use in secret,
upon their own bodies, at such times, as they esteem themselves for
mortification to need the same. I answer, there is no need that any man for
mortification should whippe himself, or else it is need for all men so to
whippe themselves, except Jesuits have more untamed bodies, then all other
men. And therefore it is but ethelothreschia, a voluntary Religion, or a
superstition, after the precept and Doctrine of men, in color of humility,
and not sparing the body, described by Saint Paul Col. 2. 23. and as for
Gerson, to whom you send us, does not Tract. cont. slagiliantes.
only condemn the heretical opinions of those whippers, but also their
whipping of themselves, and that for diverse causes, of which I will rebearse
some. First he accounts it a tempting of God, to lay such a burden upon men,
as you do, which make whipping needful for mortification: Act. 15.
whereby it follows that it is needful for all men, as mortification is, and
not for Jesuits only. Secondly he says, that the law of Christ, ought no
less in his service, to avoid the superstitions of the Gentilles, and
Idolatours, espiciallie these that are cruel, and horrible, then the old law,
in the which yet there is express prohibition, Deu. 14. where it is said, be
ye seruers of the Lord your God: you shall not cut your selves: where the
gloss is, you ought not in any thing, to be made like to Idolatours: and in
the hebrew it is, you shall not tear or rend your selves: Again he says,
(for I do but translate his words) lex Christi, etc. the law of Christ is
given sufficiently in the ten commandments, the keeping of which good
simplicity, and plain faith, is enough to salvation, especially of lay men
and common people, without any new imposition of most grievous burdens,
according to the saying of Christ: if thou will enter into life, keep the
commandments. Neither is it any thing worth, if it be said, that the people
do voluntarily take upon them such whippings, without any other
commandment, while it is found that there-vpon they do more licentiously
contemn Gods commandments in many things. For the nature of man is
stubburne, which since it is forsaken of the state of originalliustice, it is
carried more greedelie unto those things that are of man's invention, then those
that are of Gods bidding. And this is one degree of pride, which Bernard says
is found among Religious men, while they rejoice more in abstinence, or
particular voluntary prayer, then in all the regular discipline. Again, the
law of Christ, being set forth sufficiently, by the Apostles and holy Doctors,
is not found to have appointed such novelties of men, whipping themselves,
either by preaching, or otherwise, but rather to have reproved them, as most
suspect and dangerous, and which may grow to the slander of Christianes
among the Jews, Saracens, and Paganes, as though the law of Christ were
austere, cruel, and nourished in blood, not in mercy,

Afterward he sets down reasons, to dissuade this superstition, as he
calls it. Let diligent and earnest exhortation be made, touching the praises
of patience, which has her perfect work, preferring it before such voluntary
whippings, as Augustine says agreeablie to Seneca, that the adversities of
this world, are not so much to be laid upon us, as when they happen, patiently
to be suffered, making thorough patience a virtue of necessity. I am not so
mad (says Seneca) that I would be sick, but if I must be sick, I will bear
it patiently. Therefore there must be reckened up diligently, and severally,
the diverse tribulationes, sometime temporal, sometime spiritual, which
daielie do give and offer to us, whether we will or nill, matter of patience,
such as are sickness, poverty, etc, and who is able to number all such
tribulations? which are such and so many, that we must not bring upon our
selves new sorrows: for the valiant suffering of such daily tribulations is
enough for the purging of greater sins, especially if contrition be
increased, and humble confession, in deed, or purpose, etc. Yea the same
Gerson says farther, Imo sicut non licet, etc. As it is not lawful for a man
of his own authority to mayme, or gelde himself, except it were for the
health of the whole body. So it is not lawful, as it seems, that a man
should violently draw blood of himself, except it be for bodelie Physic: or
else by the like reason a man might burn himself with an hot iron, which no
man has held or granted hitherto, except perhaps idolaters, or false
Christians, such as are found in India, which think that they ought to be
baptized with fire. Finally, Gerson allows no whipping, except it be
enjoined as penance, and that it be executed by another man, and that
moderately, and without offense giving, or ostentation, and last of all
without drawing of blood. And this book of Gerson, as you wotte, is in print,
to answer your question, was there ever honest man but Master Charke, that
would have objected so impertinent a thing in Print, as is the whipping of men
by themselves, upon any falselie pretended need of Mortification? But
Master Charke makes you laugh, when he says the sect of whippers was
condemned long ago. You ask how long, and by whom? For they began anno 1273.
under Pope Gregory the 10. and were condemned both by him, and his
successors, by which authority Luther and Calvin are likewise condemned. An
high point in a low house: as though the authority by which men are condemned,
is all the matter, not the cause for which. Adultery is condemned by Mahomet,
and by the same authority the Gospel of Christ: is it not lawful to approve
the one condemnation, except a man allow the other? No marvel though you
laugh at this matter: for indeed it is very ridiculous, as most of your
collections be. And whereas you affirm, that Pope Gregory the 10. did
condemn these Flagellantes, I suppose you are not able to bring any author of
credit, that so does write. For in his time they sprang up, and continued
almost fourscore years, without any solemn condemnation. For any thing
that Prateolus, or who so writes most diligently of here sies, can testify.
Prateolus out of Carrion shows, that 1343. they came to Spire in Germany,
when the diet of the Empire was kept, and through opinion of great holiness, had
good entertainment. Tandem vero damnata est. At length, says he, this sect was
condemned and extinguished with fire and sword.

Concerning the name of Jesuits, it is a frivolous quarrel of your censure,
seeing you confess it to be given to them by common speech, and think it
lawful for your self to use, yet you tax Master Charke for using it. That
the Jesuits are not only a sect, but also a blasphemous sect, Master Charke
proves, because they abuse the most blessed name of Jesus, for a color of
their blasphemous practice, which is to root out the Gospel of Jesus, and to
bring in the heresy, and superstition of popery. For this you will call him
an angry gentleman, with whom every thing is blasphemy, though it be but
the wagging of a straw. But hear his reason (you say) They draw to them
selves alone the comfortable name of Jesus, which is common to all. But his
reason I have set down before, gathered truly out of his own words: that
he speaks of the name of Jesus, is after this sort. This also increases the
offense, that they draw to themselves alone the most gracious, and comfortable
title of our fellowshippe and union in Christ Jesus, which is (...) to all that
do believe, without any division or distinction. You answer; no (Sir William)
you may have your part, if you exclude not your self. In deed we doubt not
but we shall have our part, notwithstanding the Jesuits praesumptuous claim.
But yet you will justify their claim by an evident example, as you term it.
For when any man (you say) leaves all other cares and business, to serve the
Queen only,. and professes the same by some special name of her Majesty's
(...) seruante, does he injury other subjects hereby? or does he take from
them any interest in her Majesty? It is somewhat you say, if the man whom
you speak of for examples sake, have his name lawfully regestred in her
Majesty's checker role, or can show good testimony of her Majesty's appointing
him to such special office, as he takes upon him to exercise. But if any
man, or specially if any company of men, should arrogate unto themselves
without lawful appointment the special name of her Majesty's servants, and
take upon them to exercise such an office, as her highness has not committed to
them, I suppose they deserved rather to have their ears cut of on the
pillarie, then to receive any honor, that is due to the Queens ordinary
servants, or officers. And this is an evident example of the vsur pation of
the Jesuits, who have not received the calling of Apostles, which is immediate
from Jesus himself, and yet profess to exercise the office Gal. 1.
of Apostles in preaching the Gospel every where, and of free cost, which is
more then the Apostles did at all times. As for Eldertons jest of raising the
dead, curing the lame, blind, etc. I marvel you do not answer by the
Iaponical miracles, which are done so thick in another world, in both the
Indies, by your Jesuits, rather then in this point to make them of no greater
power, then any, that are called Christianes. But it is an easier matter, to
lie of things far of, then to show a wonder in presense of them that can
examine such a matter.

The third section, entitled, Of religious men, and their vocation of poverty.
YOu defend the title of religious, claimed, and given to Monks, and Nuns,
because they were not called religious by antiquity, for that they only had
religion in them, but that they made profession of more perfect following of
Christian religion, then others, by remooving worldly impedimentes, according
to the counsel of Christ touching perfection, Mait, 19. 16. and Esaias. 56.
where chastety, voluntary poverty, and abnegation of our own will, are
commended, and counseled to perfection, and the contraries thereof in other
places of scripture showed to be great impedimentes. But first you prove not,
that they were so called of the first, and reverend antiquity, by any such
singular name of religions, as they are called in the Popish Church. Secondly,
where you count abnegation of our own will to be only commended and
counseled to perfection, you declare what a profound divine you are, when the
very text which you cite, is manifest, that it is necessary for all the
disciples of Christ, and that in pain of damnation: If any man will follow
me, says he, let him deny himself, and take Mat. 16.
up his cross, and follow me: for he that will save his life, shall leese it,
etc. Thirdly, I say that the perfection of Christian Religion stands not in
virginity (for that you mean by chastetie, as though the marriage bed also
which is undefiled, were not to be accounted chastetie) and wilful poverty.
For all men are in scripture commanded to endeavor unto the perfection of
Christian Religion, but no man is commanded to live unmarried, or to renounce
his worldly possessions, Mat. 5. 48. 2. Cor. 7. 1. Ephe. 4. 13. Phil. 3. 12.
Col. 1. 28, etc. Neither is marriage, or private possession of earthly goods,
of it self, any impediment unto the perfection of Christian Religion. And if
it were granted, that the perfection thereof did stand in such profession as
you speak of, yet does it not follow, that such professors should have that
praerogatiue, to be called absolutely Religious: seeing they that make no such
profession, may be nevertheless sufficiently Religious unto salvation:
neither do your examples justify this proud usurped term. For the name of
learned men does truly agree to them that are so in deed, whereas to them
that have but small learning, it does not absolutely agree, but with addition
of something, smallie, meanly, prettily, or such like. For no man can say
truly of him, that knows only a little grammar, latin, logic, etc. that
he is a learned man: but of every true Christian man, we may truly say,
that he is a Religious man, although some be more religious then other. The
name of Clergy also, as it was used by the Fathers of old time, may be
defended, and warranted by example of the scripture, in respect of the
especial lot, whereunto the Ministers of the Church are called, as the tribe
of Leui was, notwithstanding that all true Christianes Luk 6. 13.
are the lotte or inheritance of the Lord. The name of Apostles, being given by
our Savior Christ himself, unto his special embassadoures, he were a mad
man that would control, though other also were sent. What like warrant have
Monks, and Nuns to be called religious? verelie by these examples it
appears, that which you say of Master Charke to be verified of your self,
this man waieth not what he says, so he say somewhat.

Concerning the second point, Master Charke writes plainly, if you were
disposed to understand him, that he misliketh Popish Monks, and Nuns, not
only for the abominable life of the greatest part of them, but specially,
for their superstitous, hypocritical, and Idolatrous profession, wherein they
differ from the virgins of the primitive Church, as much as in their lewd
life, and loose conversation. And therefore neither he nor Doctor Folk do use
any heretical sophistry, to condemn all for the ill life of a few, or to
condemn a lawful calling, for the misbehauiour of them that are in that
vocation, and much less, for that men live not so perfectly in the same, as
they did in the primitive Church, about which heretical consequences many
words are spent in vain.

But now let us hear what you answer to such difference, as Master Charke
makes between the old monks, and the new. His words you recite in this
manner. It is a plain injury, says he, to match those ancient Monks of the
primitive Church, with those of the popish orders: for the old Monks lived in
their house without vows, as students in divinity in Colleges: they were
holy, painful, learned, they labored with their hands. Their societies
were nources of good learning and godly life, to furnish afterward the Church:
whereto being once called, they ceased to be Monks, and left their
monasteries. Here first you charge him with bold slaundering, as though he
said that all Monks and sriers are unlearned, vnpainfull, and unholy, whereas
he says not so, knowing that some are unlearned, though neither all, nor the
most part, no not in this learned age: many friars also take pains in
preaching, which with more commendation and credit might hold their peace. Yet
few Monks labor that way. As for laboring with the hands (say you)
though it be not necessary to any, if they be occupied in greater matters,
yet their is no monastery wherein some do not exercise that function. But
Saint Augustine in his book, deopere (...), holds it to be necessary for
all Monks to labor, and admits not the excuses of praying, singing of
Plalmes, reading, or preaching the word of God, for any to be privileged
altogether from not laboring with his hands, cap. 17. 18. That some in every
monastery with you are appointed to that function, as you say, it is but a
mockery of the old labor of Monks, and left for a shadow of some similitude
with antiquity, and not taking away the difference set down by Master
Charke. That many Bishops are chosen out of monasteries, and that Pius 5.
chose 70. Bishops out of one order, it is little to the purpose. For the old
monks were not only chosen to the office of rich and stately Bishops, but
to serve in the painful office of teachers, and pastors, and were, as Master
Charke says, the nources of good learinng, of the ministry of the Church, as
your popish orders are not, out of which they may not depart to serve the
Church, without a dispensation, and capacity, as they call it. Your jest of
his poor benefice by London, and the barbarres shop, are both a like, and
the latter as well agrees unto him as the former, seeing it is well known he
never had any benefice, rich or poor, in London, by London, or far from
London.

The first difference you confess to be the greatest; although you speak of
it last, where you say he affirms, that the Monks of the primitive Church
made no vows, the contrary whereofyou prove by many testimonies of the
ancient fathers, and in the end you conclud against Master Charke, asking what
he will say to this, and much more that mighr be brought for this matter? And
may he not blush (say yon) to have made (In saing that the religion of the
primitive Church made no vows) so open and manifest alie? But may not all
modest Papists blush in your behalse, seeing your own forehead, as it seems,
is hardened against shamefastnes, for that you have made so open, and manifest a
lie, in saying that Master Charke affirms, that the Monks of the primitive
Church made no vows? whereas he says not so, but far otherwise: for these
are his words, they lived in their houses without any superstitious vows. Is
it all one to say they made no vows, and to say they made no superstitious
vows? the like impudence you show, in charging him with cogging, and foisting,
for placing his quotations of Saint Augustine in the margent, right over
against the matter of vowing, which is both false, and unjustly laid to his
charge: the Printer had set them a little wrie. For the quotation begins
right over against the name of Austen in the leaf, or text, although the tail
of it extend to the line in which he speaks of vows. The places that are
quoted for vows are specially against the marriage of them that have vowed
sole life, yet have we good testimony of the fathers, that such as are not
able to keep those vows rashly made, ought to betake themselves to the
lawful remedy of marriage. Epiphanius Cat. Apostolic. Haer. 61. Hieronymus ad
Demetriadem, etc.

Where M. Charke denies Saint Augustine to be a Friar; First you cavil, which
Austen he means, the Bishop of Hippone, or of Canterbury: and both, you
say, were Monks, and the later you make our first Apostle in England, yet was
he an Apostle from Gregory, not from Christ. What Doctor Fulke has written of
him, he answers in his confutation of Popish quarrels, Page 43. But how
prove you that the elder Austen was a Monk, as monks were termed in his
time? you cite, Ep. 89. and tract. 1. de com. vita clericorum, and Possidius,
or Possidonius in his life. To the first quotation I answer, that Saint
Augustine in that epistle confesses not that he was a Monk; only he
acknowledges that he once sold all that he had, and gave it to the poor. But
that he had private possession when he was Bishop, Possidonius does plainly
declare. The second quotation is of no work of Saint Augustines, but of I know
not what babble rule, of some impudent counterfeiter, whose style is as like
Augustines, as an ass is like a Lion. To the third I answer, that the writer
alleged says, that Austine when he was made priest, or elder, of the Church
of Hippo, did institute a college or monastery of students, with in the
Church, which were especially appointed to serve afterward in the Church, as
they also that were afterward brought up in other monasteries, set up by his
scholars. But nevertheless he neither calls Augustine, nor any of his
scholars Monks. For these Monasteries by Augustine himself, are called
diuersoria, hostelles, or Innes, Demoribus eccl. Cath. lib. 1. cap. 33. being
distinct from Monks, which in those days were only Anachorets, or
Caenobites, both living in the wilderness, whereas these lived within cities,
yet in streighter discipline, then the common sort, under the government of a
very Godly, and excellent learned man, in Christian charity, holiness, and
liberty, not in superstitious vows, and are called by Augustine none
otherwise, but a laudable kind of Christianes. And all this makes him neither
Monk nor Friar. You say he was not called so in English, but in latin,
Frater, and Monachus. For the name of Monachus, I have answered, that you are
not hable to prove it by authentical author or testimony. And I doubt not,
but he was called brother, as all Christians are called one of an other, but
not as Friars are called fratres. You add further out of Saint Ambrose, that
he ware a black hoode, and a girdell of lether, Ser. 94. so that nothing
wanted in him to the very habit of an Augustine Friar. But seeing there are of
Ambrose his sermons numbered in all but 93. this bastard babble where this of
the hood and the girdle is written, must be set out for a wrangler, and he had
been worthy to be set one the pillerie, that feigned such a sermon under the
name of Saint Ambrose, to give creditte to the Augustine Friars. Possidonius
testifies that his apparel, shoes, and bedding were of moderate, and
competent habit, neither too fine, and costly, nor too very abject, or
contemptible; In which he kept the mean. As for the black hoode, and lethern
belte, he that lived 40. years with him (as you say) can tell us nothing of
the^, so that you have neither the weed, nor the profession of Friars in S.
Augustine.

Where the example of Christ is alleged, to uphold the institution of
Jesuits, which Master Charke affirms to be blaspemous against his Majesty,
you confess that Christ did not whippe him self, because he had no rebellion
in his flesh, as you have, and therefore use mortification of your body,
according to Saint Paul's counsel, Coll. 3. You show how wisely you
understand mortification, which you refer to the body only, where Saint
Paul commands us to mortify our members, which are upon earth. And least you
should think he means your head, your arms, or your shoulders, he adds,
fornication, uncleanness, lust evil concupiscence, covetousness, and such like,
which be the members of the old man, that must be mortified, and not the
natural body of man, or the parts thereof. But though you have no example of
Christ whipping himself, yet you have of long fasting, praying, and lying all
night one the ground, which notwithstanding you think we ministers will not
imitate: for prayer, and fasting we know it to be our duties, having not one
lie the example, but also the commandment of Christ for it. But for lying all
night on the ground, we find no example of Christ. The Evangelist Luke. 6.
which you quote for it, says, that Christ continued all night in prayer: but
that he lay all night on the ground, he says not so: you declare your self,
as well by this, as by many other things, to be very well studied in the
scriptures. Where Master Charke says that Christ came eating and drinking, did
frequent the public assemblies, and was sometime entertained at great
feasts, he shows the form of Christ's life, differing from John's the
Baptistes, which was more austere, whose example is more like your profession,
then that example of Christ, although your vocation be nothing answerable to
his.

Concerning poverty, Master Charke asks, what worldly blessing given unto
Christ by his father, did he at any time abandon? how does his example
recommend wilful poverty to you Jesuits, or to any, except you would by
virtue of the example have all men be of your order, because all should be
followers of Christ, and hold it as commanded or recommended for an example
to be followed of all, whatsoever he has done before? And then the Pope above
all other by his own claim, must be the poorest of all, and become a brother
of your beggarly order. To this you an swear, by asking, if it were not
wilful poverty, for him the was Lord of all to live of alms? Yes verily he
did willingly 2. Cor. 8. 9.
forbeate, to challenge that which was his own: nevertheless it was necessary
for his office, to become poor, that he might enrich us with his grace: so is
it not for Jesuits, or any other to whom God has given such benefits, as
they should not need to live of alms. You ask further, if he that counseled
men, torenounce all they possessed, for his service, and to give all to the
poor, that would be perfect, did not he recommend voluntary poverty, though
he commanded it not? Surely if the necessitte of his service do require it,
there is no doubt, but that it is every man's durie to renounce all that he
possesses. But what necessity compels the Jesuits to any such service of
his, but that they may live of their own, and ear their own bread? As for
the place you quote Luke the 14. is very Anabaptisticallie applied to actual
forsaking of men's possesons: whereas it is manifestly to be understood, of
renouncing in affection, and is not counseled only to some, but commanded
of necessity to all: every one of you (says he) which renounceth not all
that he possesses cannot be my disciple. For even as bearing his cross is
necessary for all Christians, so is wilful poverty: and it is impossible
for any rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: which places if they be
understood against (...)
actual possession of worldly goods, what follows but Anabaptisticall
confusion? For they are express commandments, and denialls, to all, not lost
to the choice of a few. It remains therefore that they be understood of the
mind, love, affection, and trust in wordlie riches, not of budelie use, or
having eiuill propriety in them. Neither does it follow that the perfection of
a Christian life consists in wilful poverty, because our savior said unto
the rich young man, that boasted that he had fullfilled the (...)
commandments, If thou will be perfect, go sell all that thou haste, etc.
For by perfest, he means such a one as the young man professed himself to
be, in whom nothing wanted. Again, he was further commanded to follow
Christ, as his Apostles did, and to take us the cross. Therefore it was no
general counsel to all that desire perfection, but a special discovery of
that man's worldely affection, and hypocrisy, which preferred temporal things,
before eternal felicity, and yet boasted that he had kept the commandments
from his youth. And Luke. 12. where he wills his disciples, to sell their
possessions, and give alms, he shows the duty of all men, which is not to
spare their own patrimony, but even to sell their possessions, rather then
the poor shoud perish for lack of necessaries, yet not to make our selves
beggars, or to be pinched, that other might have ease, but that equality might
be observed, as the Apostle says, 2. Cor. 8. 13. So that hitherto we have not
wilful poverty, such as is that of the Jesuits, by Christ's example or
counsel, commended unto us.

But you add further, If the Apostles left all propriety, and did live in
common, as the seripture notes, etc. But the Apostles left not all propriety,
allthough they forsook all things. For Peter retained the propriety of his
house. Matthew made agreat feast, of his own Mat. 8. 14. Luke 5. 29. Ioh. 19.
27.
goods I warrant you: John received the virgin Mary into his own, to provide
for her. Neither had the Apostles and Christians in the primitive Church any
other community of goods, then ought to be among all Christians, always,
namely that no man should account any thing to be his own otherwise, then the
necessity of the Church requiring, he should be contented to sell, even his
lands, and possessions, to relieve the poor. Neither was Ananias and Saphira
punished, for breaking of their vow of poverty, but Act. 5.
for lying against the holy ghost, as the text is plain, whatsoever any man
say to the contrary. And yet Jerome ad Demetriadem, whom you cite, says not
that they were punished for breaking their vow of poverty, or that they vowed
poverty, but that after they had vowed the wholl price of that land, they did
retain part, as if it had been their own. In Basil I find nothing to such
intent. Sermon. 1. de inst. monach. vel de iudicio Det Praefat.
But that Ananias, and Saphira were punished so severely, because they sinned
with an high hand, and proudly contemned the Lord in their hypocrisy. Neither
does Master Charke affirm that the Apostles forsaking of their goods is
Anabaptisticall, condemning of propriety, as you slander him, but that the
example of Christ's voluntary poverty, if it be to be followed, binds al men
alike, and specially the Pope, who claims to be Christ's own vicar general,
and therefore ought most to follow Christ. It is to no purpose therefore that
you will him to read the places of the doctors, to change his opinion. For
first Hierome in the 19 of Matthew, is not content, that he which seeks to be
perfect, sell all his goods, but he must give them to the poor: and then, not
live idlelie of other men's goods, but of his own labor, as the ancient
Monks did, with many other conditions, that are wanting in Popish votaties.
Basil. inter. 9. in reg. fus. expl. has nothing to this purpose, but that men
which forsake their goods to profess monastical life, must not leave them
negligentlie, but dispose them to the glory of God. What Saint Chrysostom
says upon the saluting of Prilca, it were good you read over your self, and
then tell us wherefore you would have Master Charke read it; for I find
nothing to alter his judgment therein Last of al, Saint Augst. de ciu. lib.
17. cap. 4. says not, that the Apostles votum paupertatis vouerunt. For these
are his words, Dixerunt enim potentes illi, Ecce nos dimisimus omnia, and
secuti sumus te: hoc votum potentissimi vouerunt. Sed vnde hoc eis? nisi abillo
de quo continuo dictum est, Dans votum vouenti. For these mighty had said,
behold we have left all, and followed thee: this vow those most mighty had
vowed: but whence came thie to them, but from him, of whom it is said
immediately, giving the vow to him that (...). Now I have proved before that
the Apostles leaving all things to follow Christ, was not a renouncing of any
property in their goods, except in such case as they could not retain them,
and do the service of Christ: wherein if you will not believe me, you are an
obstinate heretic, by the sentence of Pope John. 23. which declared al them to
be obstinat heretics, that affirmed Christ and his disciples to have had
nothing private or proper. He condemned also a gloss of Friar Peter, a
minorite, which had encouraged a certain covent of a third order to follow the
poverty of Christ, of which number many were condemned and burned. Platin. in
Joan. 23. How your doctrine and his does agree, look you unto it, for one of
you is greatly deceived. That you conclude the use of al wordlie blessings to
be lawful, it is well. That you charge Master Charke or our ministers to
allure, dandle, or smooth men in them, to serve their own belly, etc. it is a
slander that needs no confutation, seeing their open, and zealous preaching
of repentance, and mortification is a sufficient discharge for them before God,
and all that hear them.

The forth section, which he intituleth, of Loialas and Luther.
IN this section, you say, little defense needs, because the replier has
nothing, beside a railing sentence, or two against the Jesuits, saying that
they eat the sins of the people, Whereas these men, neither taking any
charge of souls upon them, nor receiving any tithes, or other commodities for
the same (both which things M. Charke does) the reader may judge whether he, or
they stand in danger of the sentence. But that which M. Charke says, of
eating the sins of the people, he means not of the Jesuits only, or
chiefly, but of them that give pardons for money, of which the Jesuits are
sometimes merchants, wherein they may with the Pope, eat the sins of the
people, although they have no benefices, which you mean by charge of souls,
and tithe taking. And sure it is, they live not all of Angels food, neither
are they maintained altogether by pure alms, but by an artificial kind of
cousonage, under pretense of restitution; as their predeceslours, the
Pharisees, under pretext of long prayers, devoured the houses of poor widows:
and if no man eat the sins of the people, but they that have benefices,
Master Charke is out of danger of the sentence: for he neither has charge of
souls, nor tithe, or commodity for the same, as you understand the matter.

Whether Paull the third, or Paull the fourth, did first allow the sect of
Jesuits, it is a trifling matter, not worth the strife about it. It is
sufficient for Master Charkes report, that Paull the fourth did confirm it,
and there is no more reason that we should believe Andradius, then that you
should credit Kemnitius. you have little to do, that prosequute such fruitles
contentions.

The fifth section, entitled, Of Luther and his doctrine.
MAster Charke first charge you, with plainevntrueth, in that you say, he
does contemptuously, or contumeliouslie call Loialas a soldier, where as he
does neither with honor, nor with disdain, nor any ways in all his answer,
call him a soldier: to this charge you are mumme, And whereas he does vnioint
your two arguments, and manifestly discover the insufficiency of them, you
deny that you made such arguments: whereby you acknowledge, that you brought
in these matters, of the life of Laiolas, and Luther, vainlie. The slanders of
Papists against Luthers life you think must be credited, because they be
matters of fact: As though the testimony of enemies, must needs be taken in a
matter of fact. And that they which are obstinate enemies to the Gospel, will
care for fear, either of damnation, or open shame in the world, to invent, or
brute abroad most impudent slanders, against the professors of the truth.
Concerning Sleidans eleven thousand lies, there is no wise man, but laugheth to
hear of the number of them. And if one Sleydan a Protestant, having public
records, and writings to justify his story, could yet write eleven thousand
lies against the Papists, as you affirm, is it not possible trow you, that
Coclaeus, Hosius, Lindanus, Xanctes, Staphilus, Bolsec, and such like, being
Papists, might write eleven score lies against Luther, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Calvin, Beza, and the rest?

Concerning the report of Prateolus, that Luther should be begotten of a
devil, you say Master Charke greatly bewraieth his fasehoode, and after you
have set down the report of Prateolus vnperfectlie. you praise his modesty,
and blame the bold impudency of William Charke, in saying he avouches that,
which he avouches not. But where does William Charke faie, that Prateolus does
avouch it? his words are of a slander laid down against Martin Luther, how
he was begotten of a devil, which you confess, that Prateolus reports, as
he does in deed out of Coclaeus; and Cocleus out of other men's writings:
whether Prateolus himself does credit it altogether, or no, it skilleth not;
this slander among other he lays down against Luther, and favors the
report of other so far, that he would have it seem credible: but as for
saying that he avouches it, Master Chark speaks not one whit. Let the Reader
therefore judge who bewraieth his falsehood in this point, and upon whom the
reproach of bold impudency may justly be laid. But Master Charke shows as
great fully, as impudency (if we believe you) in making mention of such a
foul matter, whereupon at the least remains a shameful suspicion. In deed
it is the triumph of slaunderers, if they cannot kill with their stroke, yet to
leave a scarre where the wound is healed. Although the slander of a matter so
impossible, leaves no suspicion in any man's head, that has any wit or
understanding in it, but discovers the malice, and folly of the inuenters of
such monstrous slanders; yet you affirm that the probability of the thing
seems to have been so great in those days, as Erasmus believed it. But here
you go asfarre beyond the modesty of your author Prateolus, as ere while you
charged Master Charke to be run. For his words are these. Adhans historiam
alludere alicubi Erasmum non est a vero alienum. to this story it is not
altogether unlikely or strange from the truth, that Erasmus does in some
place allude: he says not that Erasmus did believe it; No he is not able to
prove that Erasmus did object it. For the speech of Erasmus is, only of
certain unclean speeches. where with he complains, that he was unjustly
charged by Luther, in that immodest epistle which you translate drunken.

Now (say you) if Master Charke will stand upon the denial, not so much of
the fact, as of the nature of the thing it self, as impossible that spirits
can so abuse lewd women, that will consent to their lusts; you will oppose
against him S. Augustine, Lib. 15. de ciu. det, c. 2.
which says it were impudency to deny it, and Ludouicus viues upon the same
place. Sir Cauiller, the thing in question, is not, whether foul spirits may
abuse the bodies of lewd women: for beside the authority of Saint Augustine,
who stands most upon testimonies, we have the testimony of Wierus, a man
very expert in such matters, who makes report of diverse Nuns so abused, by
unclean spirits, yea of diverse Nunneries, in which many were so dealt with
all, and namely a notable nunnerie in the borders of De praest. dae. lib. 3.
c. 9. tertiae editionis.
the province of Collene; where the devil in the likeness of a dog in the
day time, was seen to fall upon them in most beastly manner, about 26.
years ago. Also the Nunnerie of Nazareth in Collen, Anno. 1564. where the
Nuns in most filthy manner Cap. 11.
suffered the same illusion, oftentimes in the presence, and sight of many.
But the matter in controversy is, whether Luther were begotten of a Devil: in
denial where, of Master Chatke does stand, becuase it is impossible, that
although the Devil should abuse the body of a woman; yet that a man should be
borne, or gotten by such illusion, which neither, Augustine affirms, nor
Ludouicus Viues. And if you dare avouch that the devil can begette a child
(as it seems you would draw your argument to prove the probability of
Luthers conception by such deuillish abusement) we will be bold to say, that
you are worthy to be whipped out of the Schools of Philosophers, Physicians,
and Divines: if you dare not abide by it, to what end do you oppose Saint
Augustine and Ludouicus Viues against him?

Touching the matter of the thunderbolte, you say Master Charke denies it
stoutly, confidentlie, and I know not how. But in truth Master Charke says,
that it is of it self incredible that you say, Luther was stricken with a
thunderbolte, which would have taken away life, or left a mark behind it.
Nevertheless you williustifie your saying by testimony of Malancthon; who says
he suffeted great terrors that year, in which he lost his com panion, slain I
know not by what chance; and by Luthers own confession, that he was called by
terrors from heaven, and for fear of death vowed to be a friar: yet neither
of these do prove, either that he was overthrown, or stricken with a
thunderbolte. The reports of Lindane, Prateolus, and such like, you cannot
enforce us to believe, who sought by all means to deface both the person, and
doctrine of Luther. But whether he were overthrown, by lightning, as Prateolus
says, or by fear, seeing his fellow flaine by the same, and so vowed a
superstitious vow, it is not greatly material. That the devil cried out of
his mouth, we hold it still for a very fable, until you bring better proof,
then the report of Luthers adversaries, Lindane, and his fellows. Your
ribaudrie terms of Luther coping with a nun, and your blasphemous scoffing
ofhis lying with a nun in the Lord, I commit to the vengeance of him, that is
the instituter of holy matrimony. That many of the ancient fathers judged it
unlawful, for vowed persons to marry, it is not denied of our part; but then
it is to be understood of them, which married not for necessity, but for
wantones; and for such as made vows advisedly, not rashly; voluntarily, and
not by compulsion. For of them that could not contain, after they had vowed
virginity, I have showed before the plain testimonies of Saint Hierome and
Epiphanius.

Now are we come to those nine articles of Doctrine, with which you have
charged Luther: how justly, we shall see by and by. The first is, that you
affirmed Luther to teach, that there is no sin, but incredulity, neither can
a man damn himself, do what mischief he can, except he will refuse to
believe. To this Master Hanmer answers; that all sins proceade of the root
of incredulity, as al good works from the root of faith: but this you will
not understand, and bring in a contradiction of Master Charkes, which does
pronounce, that in words and matter, you report an open untruth. And so you
do, for any thing that you bring in your defense. For Luther says not
absolutely, but in comparison, that there is no sin, but unbelief, as our
savior Christ says to the Pharisees, if you were blind, you should have no
sin; and of Ioh 9. 41.
the obstinate Jews; If I had not come and spoken unto them, they should have
had no sin. If I had not done those works, among them, which no other could
do, they should have had Ioh. 15. 22. 14.
no sins. Luthers meaning is therefore, that unbelief is the greatest, and
only sin, that damneth a man, because all other sins are forgiven to him
that believes and is baptized, according to the promise of god. Secondly,
where Luther speaks expresselie of a Christian baptized, you say simply, a
man: where he says, with any sianes, how great soever; you sat, do what
mischief he can. And as for your blasphemous collection, that a man cannot
leese his salvation, if he would never so feign, etc. and that he may do what
he will, so he fall not into incredulity; Luther himself in three words,
shows how far it is from his meaning, in his answer to the gatherers of
errors out of his doctrine, which dealt more honestly with him, then you. For
they said, Baptizatum etiam volentem, etc. that the baptized man, though he be
willing. cannot leese his salvation: Luther answers, Quia fides tollis omnia
peccara, and facit volentem non pecca re. Romans 1. because faith takes away
all sins, and makes a man willing not to sin. For even in his book de
captiuitate Bab. he adds this condition, which you do fraudulently omit.
Siredeat, vel (...) fides, if faith do return or stand. For by the same faith
or rather the truth of Gods promise, all other sins are swallowed up;
because God cannot deny him self, if thou shall confess him, and cleave
faithfully unto him that promises. To conclude, faith and good works be
inseparable: and the faithful man, although by corruption of nature, he is apt
daily to fall away from God, into most grievous sins, yet by grace he is
either preserved from heinous sins, or else he is brought to repentance, and
sorrow for the same. So that Luthers doctrine of faith and unbelief, if it be
understood rightly, as he does often expiicate himself, is full of comfort to
a troubled conscience, yet gives not bridle to sin or carnal liberty. And
therefore, howsoever you wrest his words from his meaning, you show yourselfe
no less an impudent liar, then the false witnesses, that deposed against our
savior Christ, that he said: destroy this temple, and within three days I
will raise it again: which words in deed he spoke, but not in that sense,
they deposed: and therefore are condemned by the holy ghost, as liars, and
false witness bearers. Luther says, only infidelity is the trouble of the
conscience: because there is nothing but sin and damnation, where there is no
faith: you conclude, that nothing is sin, but unbelief. whereas in unbelief
there is nothing but sin: and being justified Romans 14. 23. Romans 5. 1. Romans 8.
1.
by faith, we have peace with god. And there is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.
Again, where 'Luther says, that nothing makes a wickedman, but infidelity,
because it is the root of all wickedness, and brings with it all wickedness,
you conclude, that no other sin makes a man wicked: which is true, if it be
understood of him that has faith. and is truly penitent for his sin, and
has it pardoned by Gods mercy. For to such one, though his sins were as Esa.
1.
red as scarlet, they are made as white as wol, neither is he to be called
Prauns, a wicked man, but rectus, or iustus, a right or a just man, who shall
live by his faith.

The second doctrine is so manifest a cavil, that you do in a manner
acknowledge a satisfaction, both by Master Hanmer, and Master Charke, only
you would have it considered, how these words of Luther do sound in the ears
of the people. The: enne commandments appertain nothing to us. As though
Luther did set down this Aphorism so barelie, that he did not plainly
declare his meaning. For this he says in his sermon, entitled, how the books
of Moses are to be read with fruit. Doctorem sane, etc. truly we do receive
and acknowledge Moses as a teacher, of whom we learn much profitable
doctrine, as after shall be said: but we do not acknowledge him to be a law
giver or a governor, sith he himself restrained his ministry to that
people only. Again in answer to this question, Why the ten commandments
are to be observed of us, Seeing Moses pertains not unto us, he says. Sed
inquis, etc. but thou say, certainly the commanndements of Moses (that is
of God) are these, not to have strange Gods, to fear god, to trust him, and
obeie him, not to abuse his name. to give honor to parents, not to kill, not
to steals, not to commit adultery, not to bear false witness, etc. is it not
necessary that we observe these things: I answer, they are to be oserued of
all men, and they pertain to all men, not because they were commanded by
Moses, but because these laws, that are rehearsed in the ten commandments,
are written in the nature of men. For God has imprinted these notices in all
men, even in their creation. Wherefore even the gentiles, to whom Moses was
unknowen, and to whom God has not spoken, as to them, do know that God is to
be obeyed, God is to be called upon, parents are to be honored. men must
adstaine from murder and injury of others, etc. because these things
displease God, and are punished of him. In the end he concludes thus: Dico
igitur seruanda esse he (...) decalogi, etc. 1 say therefore, that these ion
commandments are to be observed, not because Moses has (...) them (which
thing pertained to that people one. lie) but because all men have these
knowledges imprinted in nature, with which Moses also agrees. If this be not
sufficient, to declare his judgment to be far from abolishing of the moral
law, I reporre me to you. Now whether the ten commandments appartaine more to
Christians, then to gentiles, or Jews, we will not (...) at this time.
Howsoever it be, Luther says not (as you conclude) that by this means they
should no more appertain to us, then to gentiles, in whose nature also they
were written: But rather the contrary may be concluded by good Logic, out of
Luthers reason: If they did appertaiue to the gentiles, because they were
written in their nature: much more to Christians, in whose heart they are
written also by the spirit of god. What shall I say more? the Lord shall
destroy all deceitful lips, and the tongue that speaks proudiie. Psalm. 12.


Thirdly, you report that Luther said: It is a false opinion, and to be
abolished, that there are. 4. Gospels. For the Gospel of John is the only
fair, true, and principal Gospel. For this you cited his preface in nouum
Testamentum. which Master Charke cannot find, nor any man else that I hear
of, in latin. You say, it is not your fault. At the least it is your fault,
that in so strange a report you have not set down his words in latin, if
ever you saw the preface your self. As for the corrupt edition, or often
chaungeing of Luthers works by himself we have not to do with it: for why
might not Luther reform his own works, if ought in them were erronius or
offensive? But it is a cavil that you adioyne, of the confession of Auspurg,
whereunto the Germans perhaps ascribe too much, as Alasco writes: For though
there be diverse editions thereof, differing in words, yet are they not
contrary in sense, as appears by the harmony of confessions, lately set
forth at Gencua. Now sir, so much as we find sounding toward your report, I
will set down, that the reader may judge, how vprightlie you do charge
Luther with denying three of the four Gospells. Enarrat. in epist. Petri
argumentum: Primum omnium notandum, etc. First of all it is to be noted, that
all the Apostles do handle the same doctrine, for which cause it is not well
done, that men do number but only four Evangelists, and four Gospells,
whereas whatsoever the Apostles have left written, is one Gospel. For the
Gospel signifies nothing else but the preaching, and publishing of the grace
and mercy of God, by our Lord Christ deserved, and purchased to us by his
death: and that thou may take it properly, it is not that which is
contained in books, and is comprehended in letters; but rather a vocal
preaching, and a living word, and voice, which sounds into the wholl world,
and is so openly blown out like a trumpet, that it may be heard every where,
neither is it a book, which contains a law, in which are many good
doctrines, as it has been commonly taken heretofore: for it does not
command us to work any thing, where by we may become just, but it shows
unto us the grace of God freely, and given without our meritte, namely that
Christ has been our mediator, and having made satisfaction for our sins,
has abolished them, and made us just, and saved by his works. Now whoesoeuer
does either preach, or write these things, he teaches the true Gospel, that
which all the Apostles, and peculiarly Saint Paull, and Saint Peter in their
Epistles have performed. Therefore whatsoever is preached of Christ, is one
Gospel, although one handle it after one manner, an other man after another,
and in diverse manner of words, do reason of it. For the matter may be
handled, either in long, or in short speech, and be described either
streightlie, or largely. But seeing all pertains to this end, to teach
Christ, to be our savior, and that we are made just, and saved by faith in
him, without our works, it is one word, it is one Gospel, as there is but one
faith only, and one baptism in all the Church of Christ. Therefore
thoureadest nothing written by any of the Aposties, which is not contained in
the monuments of the other Apostles. But they which have handled this point
especially, and with greater diligence, that faith alone in Christ does
justify, they are the best Evangelists of all. And in this respect you may
more rightly call the Epistles of Paul the Gospel, then those which Matthew,
Mark, and Luke have written. For these men describe not much beside the story
of the Acts, and miracles of Christ. But the grace which is wrought unto us by
Christ, none does set forth more fully, or more rightly, then Saint Paul,
especially in the Epistle to the Romans. Now seeing there is much more moment
in the word, then in the factes, and miracles of Christ, and if we should want
the one, it were much better to lack the Acts, and history, then the word and
doctrine; it follows that shose books are to be had in highest price, which
handle the doctrine cheeflie, and the words of our Lord Jesus Christ. Seeing
that if there were no miracles of Christ extant, and we were altogether
ignorant of them, the words were sufficient for us, without the which we could
not so much as live. Therefore hereof it follows, that this Epistle of Saint
Peter is to be accounted among the most excellent books of the new testament,
and is the true, and pure Gospel, as in which he does nothing else, but that
which Paul, and the other Evangelists do, teaching sincere faith, that Christ
is given unto us, which having taken away our offenses, does save us, etc. This
that he speaks, naming Matthew, Mark, and Luke (say you) signifies some
tooth against these three Gospells. And what tooth I pray you? because these
three Gospells speak too much of good works. As though S. Paul in his
Epistles, and namely in that to the Romans, does not speak as much of good
works, as all those three Gospells: and Saint Peter, though breeflie, do not
speak as much in effect. But in the preface in question, you affirm that
Luther has these words: The Epistles of Paul, and Peter, do far pass the
Gospells of Matthew, Mark, and Luke, which yet more proves Luthers evil
opinion of those three Gospells. I doubtnot (albeit I never saw the preface my
self) but Luther does plainly express, in what respect the Epistles of Paul
and Peter do excel the histories of the Gospel, written by Matthew, Mark,
and Luke, even as he does in this preface unto his exposition of Saint Peter:
Because these Epistles are more occupied, in setting forth the Grace of Christ,
and the fruit, and benefit of his passion; which no more proves his evil
opinion of those three Gospells, then when Christ prefers John the Baptist
before all the Prophets, it proves his evil opinion of all the Prophets: or
when he prefers him, that is least in the kingdom of heaven, before John
Baptist, it proves his evil opinion of John Baptist. These brutish Papists
think all men void of common sense, when they make such impudent conclusions.

As for your first charge, that it is a false opinion, and to be abolished,
that there are four ghospels: For the gospel of S. John is the only fair,
true, and principal gospel: when you can allege the words of Luther in
latin, to justify your report, and, because we know not how to come to the
sight of that preface, will set down two sentences, that go before them, and
as many that follow them, you shall receive a reasonable answer. But until
you have thus much performed, I am persuaded, you will be as far to seek, as
Campian was for his reporre of Luther, that he should call the Epistle of Saint
James Stramineam, strawie, or like straw. And yet you take upon you to show
the intolerable impudency of Master Chark, and his fellows in the Tower,
against Master Campian, for that he could not presently show out of their
books, where these words are written by Luther; especially of Master
Whitaker (who to the admiration, and laughter of all other nations) has set
forth in latin, that Luther never called the Epistle of Saint James
Stramineam. And I pray you good sir, where does Luther so call it? For
admitting your report of his words ( Iacobi autem epistola pre illis
straminea est: the epistle of James in comparison of those of Peter, and Paul
is like straw, or but strawie) we find not yet that he does so call it
absolutely, but in comparison; which may be done without contempt, or reproach:
As when the Apostle says, the law has but a Heb. 10.
shadow of good things to come; he means not, that the law to alintents, and
purposes, is nothing but a shadow, for then it should be a vain thing, but in
comparison of the truth exhibited in the Gospel. The intolerable impudency
therefore is yours, and your fellows, and the laughter, and admiration of all
nations (if all nations may hear of your shameless folly) may be against you,
rather then Master Whitaker, that blush not to say absolutely, Luther called
the epistle strawy, when he spoke only in respect, and comparison of greater
plenty, of more weighty matter, in the Epistles of Peter, and Paul, then in
that of James.

But the matter presses Master Whittaker very heavily, for that he being a
reader in divinity, could not choose but have read those words alleged by
learned men, above a hunddred times, against Luther. As though he is bound to
believe, whatsoever he reads by papists alleged against him. In deed this
siaunder of Luthers rejecting that Epistle, and calling it strawie, is often
thrust in, by Popish writers, yet without alledgeing the place where, or the
words in which it is written. Prateolus out of Lindane of late has set it
forth in Lib. 10.
these words: eam non modo reiecit epistolam ceu canone indignam, sed
contumeliosissime quoque appellauit. Praealiis vere stramineam, quod
nihilipsius iudicio haberet Euangelicae indolis. He did not only reject that
episile, as unworthy to be in the Canon, but also most contumeliouslie, has
called it in comparison of other, verily of straw, because in his judgment
it had nothing of Gospellike nature in it. In the preface in Dutch whereof you
speak, we neither find this word verily, or truly, nor any reiection of
this epistle, or any such judgment of Luther expressed, that should contain
in it nothing that sauoreth of the Gospel. You see therefore what credit is to
be given to Popish writers in their reports against Luther. Now whether Saint
John did speak less of good works in his Gospel, then the other three
Evangelists, you handle a vain question, when you confess, that John writing
by the same spirit, could not but have many things to the same effect.
Neither are you hable to set down those words of Luther. our of which it
may be proved, either that Luther affirmed, that the Gospel of John was the
only true Gospel: or that the other three were to be rejected, or mishked,
because they spoke too much of good works: so that you remain still, forany
defense you have brought, a famous liet, and animpudent slaunderer.

The fourth doctrine of Luther you reported to be this: If any woman can not,
or will not prove by order of the law the insufficiency of her husband, let
her request at his hands a divorce, or else (by his consent) let her priuelie
lie with his brother, or some other man. Master Charke answered, that this was
Luthers counsel, while he was a Papist, which he revoked after his conversion.
For this you charge him with such wilful and shameful dishonestie, as can not
be excused: and ask how he will look his own friends in the face hereafter?
with such fond insultation against him, as was used in the preface, whereunto
has sufficiently been answered, to discover your impudency. For Luther
would not revoke his former counsel, say you, but do far worsse, namely
take the man by she locks, and touze him, except he did it. Whereas in plain
truth, Luther means nothing else, but to compel such a man, to an open
divorce, as I showed in answer to the preface, and as the woll discourse of
Luthers words shall make plain, even to a partial reader. Sermon. de matr,
speaking of the causes of divorce, Priores autem quos Christus ex matris vtero,
etc. The former sort, whom Christ says to be borne eunuchs from their
mothers womb, are those, which are called impotent, which by nature are unable
for procreation, and multiplying, In whom coldness, and infirmities do exceed;
or else are so affected in body, that they are not meet for the life, that is
in matrimony: such as a man may find both men and women. These as exempted
by God, and so created, as they are not partakers of the blessing of generation
and multiplying, are to be put away. For in them there is left no place for
that word of God, increase, and multiply: even as if God had made some lame,
or blind, which are free from walking, or seeing. Concerning such, a great
while a go, I committed to writing a counsel for confessors, which they
should use, if the husband or wife came to them, to ask counsel what they
should do, for as much as their yoke fellow is not able to render the due
benevolence; and yet the other party can not be without it, when he feels
sufficiently, that the creature of God in himself to be of ability. Then
they slaundered me that I taught thus: that if the husband can not satisfy his
wives wantonness, she ought to fly from him to another. But I suffered those
froward triflers to lie. The sayings of Christ and his Apostles were
perverted, and made worse: what marvel if the same thing happen to me? But
who shall be hurt thereby, they themselves shall see at the length. Therefore
after this manner I gave counsel. If to a woman meet for the matter, there do
happen a husband that is impotent, and she can not openly be married to
another man, and she unwillingly went against the common usage, and would not
have her credit and fame to be obscured, whereas in this case the Pope
requires without cause many witnesses, that she should speak to her husband
after this manner; Behold my husband, you cannot render unto me the due
benevolence, and you have deceived me, and my youthful body, beside this you
have brought me into peril of my good name, and health, or salvation, neither
is there before God any matrimony between us. Favor me I pray you, that I
may contract a secret matrimony with your brother, or your next of kin, so
that you may have the name, that your goods may not pass to strange heirs,
and suffer your self willingly to be deceived by me, as you have deceived me,
against my will. I proceeded also further, that the husband in this case ought
to assent unto his wife, and by that means, to yield unto her the due
benevolence, and hope of issue. And if that he refused, that she by secret
flight should provide for her own safegarde, and goeing into an other
country, be married to an other man. Such counsel I gave even them, when as
yet the fear of Antichrist did hold me. But now my mind were to give far
other counsel, and to such a husband which should with such craft beguile a
woman, I would lay hand on his locks, and pull him vehemently, as the
proverb is. And the same I judge of the woman, although it be more rare, then
in men. For it avails not any thing to defraud the neighbor, in such
weighty causes, as touch the body, substance, credit, and happiness: it were
needful, that he should be commanded no tably to pay for such deceitfulnes.
Thus far Luthers words truly translated. How say you now? is not this
sufficient to declare Luthers mind, that he would revoke his former counsel
of privy contract, or flying away, and compel the party to an open divorce?

But if any man think this is not sufficient, you shall hear what he writes
further, concerning this matter, while he rehearses how many causes in Popery
are allowed for divorces? Decima quarta est, quam supra recensui, simaritus and
vxor impotentes, and euirati: atque haec estynica inter octodecim illas causas,
que admatrimonium dissipandum sufficit, quanquam and ipsa (...) obstringatur
legibus, priusquam tyranni earn permittant. The fourteenth cause is that which
I rehearsed before, if the husband, and wife be impotent and unapt for
generation: and this is the only cause among these eighteen cause, which is
sufficient to dissolve the matrimony, although the same also be bound with
many conditions, before the tyrants will permit it. And yet again speaking of
those causes, which he himself allowed for diuorcement, he says: Quae nune
personae segregari queant intersese, videbimus. Tres ergo causas noui, ob quas
diuortium fieri potest, prima, quae iam and in superioribus recitataest, cum
marious and vxor impotentes ad rem fuerint, membrorum, aut naturae causa, etc.
Now what persons may be separated one from an other, we will see. Three causes
I know for which there may be divorce. The first, when the husband and the
wife are impotent, and unable for the matter, through cause of their members,
or nature, howsoever that may be, of which sufficient has been spoken. Is not
all this as plain as can be, that Lutherspeaketh of a divorce necessary to be
had in that case? As also in the same sermon afterward he teaches, that all
divorces are to be made by public authority, and with the knowledge, and
consent both of the common wealth, and of the Church, or of one of them at the
least. Therefore that I may rightly use your own words against you, which
you do unjustly abuse against M. Charke; Can this be excused from extreme
impudency, and most wilful falsehoode against your own conscience? Defend
this if you can, with all the helps, and devises of your fellows: er else let
the reader, by this one point of open dishonestie discovered, judge of the rest
of your dealings, and slaunderings of us without all conscience, both in your
sermons, and in your books, etc.

Now whether he were a Papist or not, when he gave this first counsel to such
as heard shrift, you move the question, and conclude against his plain words
(as it seems) that he was none. Well, let us hear your reasons. First, you
say, that many years after his conversion, he sloode in fear of the Pope,
and said nothing against con^ession. How many years, I beseech you? For as
soon as the Pope excommunicated him, and condemned his writings, to be burned
at Rome, he did open lie burn the Popes Canon law at Wittemberge, which was,
Anno Dom. 1520. before that time he acknowledged the Popes authority, and
humbly submitted himself to his Censure, if either the gross abuse of
pardons might have been reformed, or he him self convinced by the scriptures
to have erred. But from that time, he never stood in awe of the Pope, as that
open fact declared, and there had passed but four years before, since he
first began to inueigh against the abuse of pardons.

Your second reason is, that it appears evidentlie, by his wholl discourse in
the place alleged, where he says plainly (beside other things) that the
Papists did seek advantage against him for this opinion of his, and to that
end did misreporte his words. The wholl discouse I have set down, that you
may see how evidently it appears. For that the Papists did slander him, it
is granted, but therebie it does not evidently appear, that Luther at that
time was no Papist. For does not one Papist slander another sometime? was
there not spite and malice between friars of other orders, against them of
that order that Luther was of, and especially the Dominicans, which might cause
them to pervert his words and meaning. As for other things beside, and seeking
advantage against him for this opinion, you sucked out of your fingers ends:
for in the wholl discourse there is no such matter.

Your third reason is, that Papists teach no such doctrine, but clean
contrary: as though some Papists have not their private opinions, which are
not generally received. Neither is there any thing in substance, but in
circumstance, contrary to the Papists doctrine, in that counsel of Luthers.
For the Papists in the case of impotencie, or frigiditie, do grant a divorce,
which Luther thought, without trial of law, might be made by private consent,
or in case of the impotent persons dislent, by voluntary departing of the
other: so that this reason disproueth him not to have been a Papist at that
time, any more then the rest.

The fourth reason is, that putting such a thing in writing, he should have
been resisted presently, if he had been of your Church. But that follows
not, especially if the writing were not public, but private to a few gostlie
fathers, perhaps of his own order, and house, and his advise, or opinion
only, not a matter obstinately defended. And yet it appears, that is was
notwel brooked, when his enemies had an inkeling of it.

Your last reason is, that it appears by his own words, and the computation
of time, when he wrote this book, that he had left Papistrie a good while
before. In deed if you can convince us by his own words, that he had left
Papistrie, when he gave this counsel, you have some advantage against Master
Charke; but that is yet to come. As for the computation of time, in which he
wrote this sermon of Matrimony, will not help you to prove, that he was no
Papist, when he wrote the shrifte advise. For he speaks of it as of matter
that was very old, olim, he says, long ago. For the book was written much
about the time of his marriage, which was five year after his open renouncing
of the Pope; before which time, he was a Papist, though in some points he began
to epsy the gross errors of Papistrie.

But as though you had not done him injury enough already, you add, that in
an other place he says, that if a man have ten wives, or more fled from him
upon like causes, he may take more: and so may wives do the like in
husbands. Whereupon Alberus, one of your own religion notes, that Johannes
Leidensis, took many wives, and one Knipperdolling took thirteen for his
part, so that this doctrine was not only taught, but also practiced upon
Luthers authority. I will here like wiseset down the whole discourse of Luther,
in the place by you quoted, Exegesi ad c. 7. ep. 1. ad Cor. that the world may
see, whether there be a spark of honesty, or shamefastnes in Papists, that
make such impudent reports, which may so easily be disprooued. For that which
Luther speaks of ten wives fled from him, is in a far other cause, then the
cause of impotencie, and nothing in the world favors the plurality of
wives, practiced by the Anapabtistes, whatsoever Alberus, or any other has
written, of whom there is just cause to dout what he bath written, because you
are so false, almost in all your reports of writers of our side. As for the
Anapabtistes, it is certain they practiced not their polygamie upon Luthers
authority, whom they did utterly abhoore, and in open printed books
accounted him for a notable false teacher. Again, it is not like, that Alberus
being a Lutherane, would father so gross a lie upon Luthers authority.

But let the reader mark what Luther writes upon these words of the text,
but if the unfaithful depart, let him depart: a brother or sister, is not in
bondage subject to such. Hoc loci Paulus (says he) fidelem coniugatum
sententiam pro illo ferendo liberat, vbi infidelis compar discesserit, aut
concedere non vult vt Christum sequatur, eique copiare facit iterum cum alio
matrimonium contrahendi. Quod vero hic diuus Paulus de Ethnico compare dicit,
idem and de falso Christiano intelligendum est, us si alter coniugum alterum ad
impietatem adigeret, necilli permitteret Christum vita imitari, tum liber hic
sit and solutus, vt quicum libuerit se despondeat. Quod si hoc Christiano iure
non liceret, cogeretur fidelis infidelem suam comparem sequi, vel inuitus
repugnante natura and viribus suis caelebs permanere, magno cum animae suae
periculo. Id ipsum D. Paulus his denegat, inquiens: Quod si eiusmodi frater,
aut soror, seruituti non sit obnoxious, neque captus, neque venundatus sit: ac
si dicat, in aliis causis, vbiconiuges vna commorantur, vt in debita coniugij
beneuolentia, and id genus similibus, alter alteri obligatus est, nec sui (...)
est. In (...) vbi alter alterum ad impiam vitam cogit, vel ab altero discedit,
ibivero non est captiuus, neque (...) isti adhaerere porro. Quod si captiuus
non tenetur, liberatus and manumissus (...), despondere se alters potest,
velutisi matrimonio coniuncius sibimortem oppetiissit. Quid, si and (...)
coniugium non opportune cederes, vt alter alterum, maritus vxorem, vel e
contra, gentium in morem, adeoque impie viuere cogeret, vel si alter ab altero
fugeret, donec tertium, (...) quartum coniugium attingeretur, dareturne viro
toties (...) ducere, quoties alia eiusmodi (vt iam dictum est) esset, vt december,
velplures (...) viuentes transfugas haberet? Et rursum, licebitne vxori dectm,
aut plures, qui iam omnes (...), esse maritos? Responsio: D. Paulo non possumus
obstruere os, neque cumillo (...) eius doctrina: quoties necessum fuerit, vti
volunt, verba eius aperta sunt, Fratrem aut sororem liberos esse a coniugij
lege, si alter discesserit, vel cum hoc habitare non consenserit. Neque vt
semeltantum stat hoc, dicit, sed liberum relinquit, vt quottes res postularit,
vel pergat, vel consistat. Neminem enim incontinentiae discrimine couictum
vult, vt eo captus teneatur alienae temeritatis and malitiae causa.

In this place Paul sets at liberty the faithful married person, giving
sentence one his side: where the unfaithful match shall depart, or will not
grant, that the other may follow Christ, and gives him leave to contracte
matrimony with another. And that Saint Paul here says of a heathen
yokefellow, the same is to be understood of a false Christian, that if any of
the married persons, would compel this other to impiety, and not permit to
follow Christ in life, then is the party free to match in marriage with whom he
lists. Which thing if it were not lawful by Christian right, the faithfll
man should be compelled to follow his vnfaithfullmate, or else against his will,
his nature and strength repugning, to remain unmarried with great danger of
his soul. But that Saint Paull here denies, saying, in such, a brother or a
sister is not subject to bondage, nor captive, nor sold as a slave: as if he
said: in other causes, where man and wife dwell together, as in the due
benevolence of marriage, and such like cases, the one is bound to the other, and
is not at liberty. But in such, where the one compels the other to
impiety, or departs away, there the other is not captive, nor compelled to
cleave to this person any longer. And if he be not holden as a captive, he is
set at liberty, and made free, he may betroth himself to an other, as if the
other party, that was joined in matrimony to him, were dead. But what if the
second marriage fall not outrightly, that the one would compel the other, the
husband the wife, or contrariwise, to live after the manner of the Gentiles,
and that impiouslie, or if the one fled from the other, until the third or
forth marriage were come unto, should the husband have license so often to mary
a new wife, as the other is such a one, as we have said already, so that he
should have ten, or more wives (...) away from him, and yet living? And
again, shall it be lawful for the wife to have ten or more husbands which
are all come away from hit? The answer. We cannot stop Saint Paul's mouth,
nor wrestle against him they that will use his doctrine, his words are plain,
that a brother, or a sister are free from the law of wedlock, if the one
depart, or do not consent to dwell with the other. Neither does he say, that
this may be done once only, but leaves it free, that as often as the case
shall require he may (...) proceed, or stay. For he will have none to be cast
into the danger of incontinencie; that he should be holden in (...) thereby,
through cause of the rashness, or malice of another.

By this long discourse of Luthers own words, let the reasonable reader judge,
what occasion the Anabaptists might justly take, to defend their beastly
keeping of many women together, under the cloak of marriage, by his authority,
or what carnal liberty of marriage Luther graunteh, otherwise then the Apostle
allows, in the case of the infidels departure. Albert he put the case of the
second, third, fourth, tenth, or more, beinginfidelis, or false Christians,
which is altogether unlikely, and almost impossible to come to pass. For he
that is once rid of an unfaithful match, being himself a good Christian,
will not (...) take a wife, but of Christian Religion, and if he be deceuid
twice, it were monstrous that he should be deceived in his third choice. But if
he should wilfully and wittinglie match with so many known heathen women, it
would breed another case then Luther speaks of, and he were worthy to be cut
of from the congregation of Christians, as one that shows himself to be a
dissembling hypocrite, rather then a faithful Christian.

The fifth doctrine that you reported of Luther is, that if the wife will not
come, les the maid come. Which M. Chark has answered sufficiently to be
spoken of a third cause of divorce, when the woman shall obstinatelle refuse
her husbands company, But this you say cannot be excused, either by M.
Hanmers shameless denial, or by M. Charks impertinent interpretation. For you
say, that this was practiced in Germany, to all kind of lasciuiousnes, yea
among the Ministers them selves, as Sebastian Flaske, sometime a Lutheran
Preacher does testify. Here is upon the testimony of a lewd baudie knaves
confession of his own filthiness, for which it is like that he was banished
from the Church, and so becam a papist, a slander raised upon the wholl
ministry, yea upon the wholl nation of Germans, that profess Luthers
Doctrine, that by authority of Luthers writting, they use to call their maids
to bed, when their wives will not come, etc. But to justify Master Charkes
interpretation, and to let the reader see the intolerable impudency of this
wretched defender, I will set down, as I have done in the rest, Luthers words
concerning the matter in question more at large; by which it may appear, that
Master Hanmer might justly deny the words to be Luthers, where they were
drawn so far from his meaning. After he has showed three causes of divorce,
in his judgment, the first being impotencie, the second adultery, and the
third desertion, or forsaking, he speaks ofit in these words: Tertia ratio
est, vbi alter alteri sese subduxerit, vt debitam beneuolentiam persoluere
nolit, au: habitare Sermon. (...) trimon.
cum (...). Reperiuntur enim interdum adeo pertinaces vxores, quae
etiamsidecies in libidinem prolaberetur maritus, pro sua duritia non curarent.
Hic (...) est, vt maritus dicat, Si tunolueris, alia voler: si domina nolit,
adueniat ancilla: it a tamen, vt antea, iterum, and tertio vxorem admoneat
maritus, and coram aliis eius esiam pertinaciam detegat, vt public, and ante
conspectum Ecclesiae, duritia eius, and agnoscatur, and reprehendasur. Situm
renuat, repudiae eam, and in vicem Vasthi, Esther surroga, Assueriregis
exemplo. Porro hic tu Diui Pauli. 1. Cor. 7. imitaris verbis, maritus proprij
corporis potestatem non habet, sed vxor. Et vxer sui corporis ius non habet,
sed maritus. Ne fraudetis vos mutuo, niss vterque consenserit. Ecce (...) hic
fraudem (...) Apostolus. Nam in desponsione, alter alteri corpus (...) tradit,
ad matrimonij obsequium: vbi ergo alter debitum obsequium negat, tum alteri
corpus (...) deditum spoliat, and vi aufert, quod proprie coniugij repugnat
iuri, immo and coniugium dissipat. Igitur hanc vxorem cohihere magistratus est,
atque interimere. Hoc si (...) magistratus, imaginandum est marito suam (...)
vxorem a Latronibus raptam, and interfectam esse, confiderandumque vt aliam
ducat. Ferendum est aliquando, vt (...) (...) tollatur, spolieturque corpus,
and tollerandum non est, si vxor sese marito ipsademat, and praedetur, aut ab
aliis adimatur. The third way is, when the one withdraws himself from the
other, so that he will not pay the due benevolence, or refuses to dwell with
the other. For there are found women sometimes so obstinat, that although their
husbands should ten times fall into filthy lust, such is their hardness that
they would not care. Here now it is good time for the husband to say, if thou
(...) not, another will: if the mistres will not, let the maid come: but yet
so, that the husband before do admonish his wife, the second, and third time,
and discover her (...) also before other men, that openly, and before the
sight of the Church, her hardness may be known, and reprehended. If then she
refuse, be thou deuorced from her, and in steed of Vasthi, take Ester, by the
example of King Asuerus, and in this case thou may lean unto the words of
Saim Paul 1. Cor. 7. the husband has not the power of his own body, but his
wife, and the wife has none authority of her own body, but her husband. Do
not defraud one another, except it be by consent of both. Behold the Apostle
here forbids fraud one both parts. For in their betrothing they deliver
their bodies one to the other, to the service of matrimony. Therefore where
the one denies the due service, then he robs, and takes away by force his
body, which he has given to another, which is properly repugnant to the right
of marriage, yea and dissolueth the marriage. Therefore it is the Magistrates
duty to bridle his wife. yea and to put her to death. This if the magistrate
omit, the husband must imagine that his wife is stolen away and slain by
thieves, and consider how to marie another. Is it to be borne at any time, that
a man should be spoiled, and robbed of his own body? and is it to be
tolerated, if the wife do take away, and steal her self from her husband,
or be taken away by other?

Now (reader) it is thy part to judge, whether Master Charke have made an im
pertinent interpretation of Luthers words, and whether any practice of such
lascuiuiousnes as was touched, can be defended by this doctrine of Luther. Last
of all, whether there be any honesty in the defender, that faseth out the
matter still, as though Luther spoke not of a cause of divorce, but of
licentious lechery, to be committed with the maid, so often as her mistres
should chance to refuse her husbands company, upon any occasion: yea he
rubbeth his forehead hardly, and says to Master Charke, when you are not
ashamed to defend the doctrine, ye are more bold then the Lutheranes
themselves, who for very shame do suppress the German book, wherein it
was written, as Cromerus a Germane testifies.

If the Lutheranes had been so ashamed of the doctrine, as you say they were,
why suffer they the latin book to be so often printed? As for suppressing of
the Germane book, for very shame, you are not able to prove it: for how
could they suppress it, if it were once printed, and distracted? if they have
kept it in, being never set forth, why did they not as well in translation
resorme so gross an oversight? But it suffices you, that any Papist has
belied Luther: for such a testimony is sufficient evidence with you to con
demne him. And yet this opinion of Luther, that such obstinacy of the wife is
a sufficient cause of divorce, is not defended by Master Charke, more then by
Smideline. and whether Luther did ever retract it or no, I know not. And albeit
he did not, yet is it not so gross, as that of the Papists, which you defend,
as true and allowed by all laws of nature, civil, and Canon, that he which
marries a bond woman unwittingly, may be divorced from her. When our savior
Christ acknowledges no cause of divorce, detweene persons apt for marriage,
butonelie adultery.

The inconveniences, that you allege, of her body in bondage, her issue
bond, whereof the father can not have the education, etc. are better avoided
by buying the bondwoman of her Lord, then by breaking of Christ's law so
expresselie, and peremptorily set down in the Gospel. Unto which sail the
Lord may be compelled, by the Christian magistrate. But in case he be not
under a Christian governor, or the husband not able to pay the price, he were
better be in bondage himself, yea leese his life, then so wilfully to commit
adultery, by marrying another. The other cause of diuorcement, for covetousness
or other grievous sin, which is spiritual fornication, you answer, that it
was but the saying of one man: as though Luther were many men, or the master
of the sentences were not as great a man among you, as Luther is with us.

Where you conclude out of Thomas Aquine, that the knotte of marriage is not
dissolved, because Lumbardes words are, demittere eam, that is, dismiss her
from his company, you make a sound arguments for the very same word he uses
in the case of a bondwoman, which you confess to dissolve the knotte: his
words are these, Si nescitur esse seruilis conditionis, libere^ potest dimitti.
If it be not known that she was of servile condition, (...). 4. did. 36.
she may be freely put away. And in the 39. distinction, he expresses his
mind plainly, in what case the knotte is dissolved, and in what case it is
not.

The last four doctrines you huddle up together, upon a false pretense, that
Master Charke does grant The sixth point.
them as they lie, and think them sound enough to stand with the Gospel. For
touching the first, that matrimony is much more excellens then virginity,
Master Charke in deed notes certain things, in respect whereof marriage
excels virginity; which you can not confute: yet refuses to stand upon the
comparison, saying, they are both good: yet neither good for all, but marriage
for him that can not contain; and virginity in some respects, as the Apostle
notes, which Luther also does acknowledge. Wherefore, seeing the Apostle in
some respects prefers virginity, he were amadde man, that would affirm the
contrary. But seeing the Apostle in all respects does not prefer
virginity, he is a foolish wrangler, that quarelleth against him, that denies
marriage in all respects, to be inferior to virginity. For we have nothing to
do with Iouinian, Heluidius, Basilides, or whomesoeuer you can name, that was
condemned by antiquity, for affirming matrimony, paris esse merits cum
virginitate, to be of equal dignity with virginity in all respectes-neither
did Luther ever so affirm, but the contrary, as his own words shall
testify for him. At quisque (inquit) suum donum habet, alius sic, alius vero
sic. Hic profitetur (...) votum impleri non posse, neque velle deum cuique
eximium Exegis. ad cap. 7. Epist. 1. ad Cor.
illud impartiri donum. Atque hunc textum tu in intimis pectoris tui
penetralibus recondas, pleraque enim in se complectitur, neque minus
continentia matrimonium praedicat. Nam sicubi coniugium quis cum caelibatu
conferat, praestantius certe donum est (...). Attamen matrimonium itidem Dei
donum est (inquit hoc loci Paulus) vt continentia. Mas etiam faeminae praestat,
attamen aeque vtille, opus dei haec est. Coram deo enim omnia sunt aequalia,
quae inter sese alias distant. Quicquid is condidit, suum eum (...), and
creasorem appellat, and dominum, neque quicquam alio sublimius eum nominat,
sieve magnum, sieve paruum fuerit. Sic idem valet coram illo matrimonium and
virginitas. Nam vtrunque est donum and creatura dei, tametsi alterum alteri
antecellas, si quis inter se conferat. But every one (says he) has his
proper gift, one man after this manner, another man after that. Here he
professes that his desire can not be fulfilled, and that God will not bestow
upon every man that excellent gift. And this text lay thou up in the
innermoste closet of thy breast, For it comprehends many things in it, and
sets forth marriage, no lose then continency. For if a man shall compare
marriage with virginity, certainly virginity is the more excellent gift.
Nevertheless, marriage (says Paul in this place) is the gift of God, as well as
continency. A man also is more excellent then a woman, yet is she the work
of God, as well as he: for all those things are aequall before God, which
otherwise do differ among themselves. Whatsoever he has made, it calls him
the maker, the creator, and Lord thereof, neither does any thing name him
more highly, then another thing, whether it be great or small. So before him
matrimony and virginity be of equal value: for both is the gift and creature
of God, albeit the one more excellent then the other, if they be compared one
with the other. These words of Luther are plain enough, to show his opinion
of the excellency of virginity above matrimony, in some respects; allthough
in regard that they are both the gifts of God, he affirm them to be equal.
For the gifts of God may be the one more excellent then the other, (as he
confesses of virginity) yet is not the one more the gift of God, then the
other.

But all this is little worth (you may say) if that, which you bring in next
against him, be true. For seeing the ancient writers did write whole books in
the commendation, and preferment of virginirie, above all other states of life,
What would they have said (say you) If they had heard the base, scurrile, and
impious words of M. Luther, de natura statuum inter se, as his own
explication is: that is, of the very nature of these two states in them
selves, without respect of abuse, or good use, to affirm matrimonium esse
velut aurum, the state of matrimony to be as gold: and the other state of
virginity and continency to be, vti stercus ad impietatem promouens, like
stinking doung promoting to impiety. Can any thing be spoken more abject, or
more contradictorie to the scriptures and Fathers, then this? Can hell be more
opposite to heaven, then the carnalitie of this Apostata to the spiris of all
saints? See you not how this fellow insulteth? how he chafeth? how he raileth?
but will you see also how he lies, how he falsifieth, how he slaundereth? For
Luther says not: that marriage in comparison of virginity, is as gold, he
says not that the state of virginity and continency is as stinking dong, etc.
But the comparison he makes is between the state of matrimony, and the
popish Exeg. ad cap. (...). ep. 1. adcor.
spiritual or Ecclesiastical state: of which he says, de vsu, vel abusu,
etc. of the use or abuse of the states at this present, we say nothing, but of
the condition and nature of the states in themselves, and do conclude that
matrimony is as gold, but the spiritual state (meaning of the popish Church)
is as doung, because that sets forward to faith, this unto impiety. And
lest you doubt, what spiritual state he speaks of, he calls it expresselie
in the same discourse, spiritualis status in papatu, the spiritual state in
popery. And for a more manifed discovery of this impudent slaunderer, I will
set down his words in the same place, more at large yealding reasons, why he
does so highly prefer marriage, before that popish state, speaking nothing of
virginity, or continency, or true chastity; as this shameless cauiller does
cry out. Nemo igitur (obiicies) tua sententia coelelis permanebit, sed quisque
matrimonium contrahet, quaeres huic Paulino textui aduersaretur? Respondeo. De
spiriiuali nunc statu loquor ad matimonium comparato, non de coelibatu. Status
spiritualis nulli prorsum rei accommodus est, sed perditissimus, praestaretque
neminem spiritualem, and quemque coniungtam esse. Porro coelibatus and vera
continentia aliud est ac spiritualis status: de hoc nihil omnino hic Paulus
agit: de vera. n. castitate loquitur. Nullus enim statuum impudentior, and ad
libinem promptior est, Ecclesiastieo and spirituali statu, vt hodiernus dies
contestatur. Quod siex illis coelibes quidam essent, non tamen vtuntur
calibatu, ad Pauli institutum and normam, vt nequaquam castitas esse queat,
cuius hic (...) mentione^ facit. Isti enim ex castitate meritum, iactantiam and
magnificentiam coram Deo and hominib, faciunt, and in eafidunt, idquod cu^fide
pugnat. D. Paulus vero exeafacilitatem quandam and seruitutem ad verbum Dei and
fidem effecit. Spiritualis vero status, non ex labor suo viuit, Arcadico
iumento segnior, etc. Thou will object by thy sentence, therefore, shall no man
remain continent, but every one shall marie, which thing is contrary to the
text of Saint Paul? I answer, I speak now of the spiritual state, being
compared to matrimony, not of continency or virginity. The spiritual state,
or the spirituality, is good for nothing in the world, but is most wicked, and
it were better that there were never Such a spiruall man.
a spiritual man, and that all were married. But as for virginity and
truecontinency, it is an other thing then the state of the spirituality of
which Saint Paul in this place speaks nothing at all, for he speaks of true
chastity. For no state in the world is more shameless, and more prone to
filthy lust, then the ecclesiastical and spiritual state, as this days
experience does testify? And if any of them were continent, yet they use not
their continency to the purpose and rule of Saint Paull: so that it can not be
that chastity, whereof Saint Paull makes mention in this place. For these men
of their chastity do make a desert, a boasting, and magnificense before God
and men, and put their trust therein, which is contrary to faith. Whereas
Saint Paul thereof has made a certain easines, and service unto the word of
God: but the spiritual state lives no of their labor, being more slow then
an Ass, etc. Thus have thou (reader) Luthers judgment out of his own
sayings; by which thou may and must needs acknowledge, what injury this
falsarie has done unto him in saying, that Luther affirms the state of
virginity or continency to be as stinking dung promoting to impiety, when
Luther speaks of the Popish spirituality, whose doctrine and manners are
blasphemous and wicked, like the old heretics called Apostolici and
Origeniani turpes, Epi. hae. 61. and 63. August. in Catal. her. 40.
which boasted of continency, and performed nothing less, as Epiphanius and
other do testify.

The second of these last 4. that Christ and Saint Paull did not counsel, but
dissuade virginity unto Christians: You The seventh point.
ask if any thing can be more contrary to Christ's and Saint Paul's sayings?
Master Charke answers you sufficiently: the counsel pertains not to all,
but unto those, that have the gift; the rest are dissuaded from the attempt.
And for them that have the gift, Master Charke says, it is more profitable for
them many ways to abstain. Luther says: Nec ideo coelibatum and
virginitatem reprobare mihi animus est, nec inde quenquam ad iugale vinculam
inuitare. Quisque pro dono suo diuinitut impertito, vt potest, feratur. Neither
is it my mind to reiest continency, and virginity, nor to provoke any man
from thence unto wedlock. Let every man bear himself according to the gift,
that he has received of God, as he can. What would you say more? that all men
are here exhorted unto virginity, even those that have not the gift of
continency? it seems you would, by alledgeing the saying of Saint Jerome.
Quasi hortantis, etc. it is the voice of our Lord, as it were exhorting, and
stirring In Mat. c. 19
up his soldiers to the reward of chastity: he that can take it, let him
take it, he that can fight, let him fight, conquerre and triumph. And whom
does Jerome mean by his soldiers? all men in differently? or those only,
whom God has armed with the grace, and gift of continency? If you (...) say
all, S. Jerome in the words going immediately before in the same place, will
tell you another tale. Qui potest capere, capiat, vt vnusquisque consideret
vires suas, vtrum poffit virginalia and pudicitiae implere praecepta. Per se
enim castitas blanda est, and quemlibet ad se alliciens. Sed considerandae
suntvires, vt qui potest capere, capiat. He (says he) that can take it, let
him take it, that every man may consider his strength, whether he be hable to
fulfill the precepts of virginity, and chastity. For chastity in deed of it
self is pleasant, and alluring every man unto it. But men must consider their
strength, that he which is hable to take it, may take it. You see here, that
Christ exhorts none but them that are hable, by his grace, and that all have
not strength to contain: those that have the strength Luther also exhorts to
use it: they that have it not, are commanded by the Apostle to marry.

The third doctrine, touching the necessity of a wife to euerieman, to be as
great as the necessity of eating, drinking, The eight point.
or sleepeing, which imports that he may not welmisse her 24. hours
together, you marvel Master Charke was not ashamed to maintain. But neither
Luther, nor Charke, do maintain it necessary for every man to have a wife,
but only for them that have not the gift of continency, which cannot avoid
sin without marriage, as the text of the Apostle is manifest. Where you
infer, 1. Cor. (...)
that then he may not well miss her 24. hours together, it is a fond
conclusion. For the like necessity of things, binds not to the like often
use of the same things. As if I should say, meat and drink is as necessary
for the life of man, as breathing, it follows not, that a man must eat and
drink every moment, because he must breath every moment. Correction, we say
commonly, is as necessary for children, as meat and drink, and yet I trow it
follows not, that children must of necessity be beaten once in 24. hours.
Letting of blood, or sweating, for some bodies, is as necessary, as sleep:
therefore must they be let blood, and sweat allwaies once in 24. hours? But
you marvel especially, if that sentence of Luthers be added to the former
sermon. De matrim. Verum est profecto, it is true verily that he must needs be
a baud that flies matrimony, seeing God has created man and woman for
copulation and (...) sake. This you say is a wise reason of a (...) Apostata,
for every man must either couple and marie, by this, or be a baude. But in
truth we may say, this is a slanderous conclusion of an impudent lier. For
Luther in the place quoted speaks against them that differ, and fly marriage,
that they might live more licentiously in whoredom: as his words going
before are plain: Plerique ideo matrimonium and differunt and fugiunt, quod
primum satis ad tempus aliquod vsque scortari velint suamque explere
voluptatem, and (...) vbi saturi fuerint, honestatise item dedere. sed bonae
verba quaeso, etc. Many do therefore differ and fly marriage, because they
will first for a certain time commit whordome enough, and take their
pleasure to the full: afterward when they are glutted, they will give
themselves to honesty also: but suft I pray you, etc. and so proceeds to
inueigh against such purposes, and at length comes to these words cited by
our defender, and other that follow. Verum profecto est, eum lenonem esse
oportere, quimatrimonium fugiat, and qui aliter eueniret? posteaquam marem and
foeminam commixtionis and multiplicationis causa condidit. At quare scortatio
matrimonij statu non anteuertitur? Nam vbi praecipua gratia non excipiat,
necessum est naturam feruere and multiplicaeri. Si ^d in matrimonio non
contingat, vbi alias quam in fornicatione, aut peioribus peccatis accideret? It
is true in deed, that he must needs be a baude, which flies matrimony. And
how can it be otherwise? seeing he has created man and woman for copulation,
and multiplications sake. But why is not whordome prevented by the state of
marriage? For where special grace does not except a man, nature must needs
boil, and be multiplied, if that happen not in marriage, where should it happen
else, but in fornication, or worse sins? Yea the saying which I cited in
answer to the next point before, does follow, necideo coelibatum, etc. neither
do I reject continency, or virgininitie: let every man use his gift, as he
has received it of God. All which I suppose is manifest to declare, that
Luther compted not all men baudes, that lived unmarried: but those only, that
had not the gift of continency, and which by flying holy marriage, fall into
grievous sins of fornication, and uncleanness.

The last Doctrine, that al Chrstians are as holy, and as just as the mother
of god, and as the Apostles were, if it be understood as Luther means,
contains no absurdity; neither is it any badge of intolerable pride. For
Luther means of the holiness and justice of Christ, communicated unto us, by
which we are made holy and just, as Christ is made equally to al Christians,
justice and holienes, not of the effects of this grace, which 1. Cor. 1. 30.
works inequallity of holiness and righteousness, as the image of God is more
or less restored in every one. And this his words declare. Quia vero renati
sumus, filij atque haeredes Dei, pari sumus in dignitate and honor D. Paulo,
Petro. S. deiparae virgini, ac diuis omnibus. Habemus enim eundem In epst. 1.
Pet. 1.
the saurum a Deo, bonaque omnia tam largiter quam ipsi. Siquidem and ipsosnon
secus atque nos renasci oportuit: quare non plus habent, quam quilibet reliqui
Christiani. Because we are borne again the sons and heirs of God, we are
equal in dignity and honor to Saint Paul, Saint Peter, to the virgin mother
of God, and to all the Saints. For we have the same treasure of God, and all
good things, as largely as they. For that was necessary for them also, no
less then us, to be borne again. Therefore they have no more then all other
Christians. By these words it is evident, that Luther makes this equallitie
in the grace of regeneration, and the common effects thereof, not in the
special gifts that follow, according to the several measure of grace, that God
gives to every one, and therefore it is out of season to dispute here, of the
degrees of rewards, or the excellency of Gods gifts, in some more then
other: no nor of the merit of good works, except you will say, that the grace
of regeneration is given according to merit. Although the term of merit, used
often times in the Fathers, which you do gladly usurp, signifies not the
desert of good works, as the Papists take it, but the praise, commendation, or
honor of virtue, and sometimes virtue, and good deeds themselves. Finally, to
compare with the Apostles, and the virgin Marie, in holiness and righteousness
of life, it is neither the meaning of Luther, nor of the Ministers of England,
but to acknowledge that we have received the like precious faith, in the
righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ, by which we are made holy and
righteous in him, Saint Peter will warrant us. 2. Pet. 1. For the ligittimation
of Dyonise, falselie surnamed the Areopagite, you would feign bring the
authority of general Councelles, but your note book deceived you. For you
quote Council. Constable. Act. 4. can. 2. both (...) your page, and in your
correction: but in deed (...) which is said of him, is in Council.
Constantinopol. 6. (...) vndecima. Which was holden almost 700. years after
Christ, where oue Sophronius, Patriarch of (...), writing to the Council,
makes mention Dionysius the Areopagite, and his writtings, as he supposed, not
counterfeit. But where lay the books of Dionyse for 600. years, that none of
the writers, that gathered the monumentes of such ancient Fathers, could once
hear of them? I mean Eusebius Hierome, Gennadius. The other testimony out of
the second of Nice, which you quote as fondly, I will not stand upon, seeing
it is of later time, and lesle credit, among such a number of bastardes made
legitimat, to set up Idolatry. How well you have justified your nine
slanders, and proved Luthers Doctrine to be licentious, and carnal. I will
not spend time in repeting: let the reader judge of that which has been
brought on both sides.

The fifth section, entitled, Other doctrines of Luther, and of Calvin, and
Beza.
What other absurdities you are able to bring out of Luther, you have given us
a sufficient taste, in the former section, in which you handle the matter of
licentious liberty: by which the indifferent reader may esteem of the rest.
For ribaudrie, scurrilitie, and thameles falsehood, of which you say you have
examples more, infinite, and without number, when we hear of them, you shall
receive answer, either of confession, defense, or excuse. But in the mean time
you will note us one or two things of impiety, as they lie together in one
treatise, that we have in England, which he desendeth obstinately, after they
were condemned by the Church, being such positions, as cut the very sinews of
all virtue, and so open the high way unto all dissolution. The first example
is, when he holds that the very just man, in every good work, does sin
mortallie: by which (say you) how does he discourage all men from doing good?
I answer, whatsoever Luther has written to that effect, as not to discourage
men from doing good, but to dissuade them from trusting in their own doing,
when it is at the best. And seeing there is so great imperfection in the best
deeds of men, he encourrageth men to labor more toward perfection. He
teaches men therefore, to a scribe to the grace of God, that which is
properly his and to acknowledge their own infirmity, which without his grace
can do nothing but evil: which grace secing it is sufficient for us, in that
his power is made perfect in our weakness, there is no discouragement, either
unto faith, or good works: for the sufficiency of his grace shall comfort us
in faith, and the strength of his mercy, shall be glorious in our infirmity.
Wherefore this Doctrine of Luther, does no more discourage men from doing good,
then he that says, whosoever hitteth not the prick, does miss the mark,
does discourage men from shooting as nighe as they can. The second example of
impiety is, when he says, A man has not in his power to do evil. Whereby
(say you) how does he encourage all lewd people to wickedness, delivering them
from the fault thereof? But Luther does neither of both. For albeit he say,
that it is not in the power of man, to make his ways evil, because noe man
has any power to do any thing, but from God, Act. 17. 28.
in whom we live, move, and have our being: yet does he not deliver the
wicked man from the fault of his wickedness, because he sins willingly,
though he can do nothing else but sin, being destitute of the grace of God,
and therefore sins necessarily: for proof whereof Luther alleges
Augustine de spiritu and litera. cap. 4. saying, Liberum arbitrium sine gratia
non valet, nisi ad peccandum, etc. freewill without grace avails not, but to
commit sin, etc. And further he says, Ieremias quoque cap. 10. sic dicit:
Scio Domine quoniam non est hominis via eius, nec viri est vt dirigat gressus
suos. Quid potuit Assert. art. 36.
apertius dici? si via sua and gressus sui non sint in potestate hominis,
quomodo via Dei and gressus dei erunt in potestate eius? Via enim hominis est
ea, quam ipsi vocant naturalem virtutem faciendi quod est in se. Ecce haec non
est in arbitrio hominis, seu liberi arbitrij. Quid ergo liberum arbitrium est,
nisires de solo titulo? Quomodo potest sese ad bonum praeparare, cum nec in
potestate sit suas vias malas facere? Nam and malaopera in impiis Deus regit,
vt proverb. 16. dicit. Omnia propter semet ipsum operatus est Dominus, etiam
impium addiem malum. and Romans 1. Tradidit illos deus in reprobum sensum, vt
faciant quae non conueniunt, etc. Jeremy cap. 10. says thus: I know O Lord,
that a man's ways is not in his own hands, neither is it in man to direct his
own steps. what could be said more plainly? if a man's own way, and his
own steps be not in his own power, how shall the way and steps of God be
in his power? for the way of man is that, which they call the natural power of
doing that which is in him. Behold this is not in the will of man, or of
freewill. What is free will then, but a thing of title and name only? How can
a man prepare him self to good, when there is not in his power so much as to
make his wates evil: for God governs even the evil works in the ungodly,
as he says in the 16. of the Proverbs. God has made all things for
himself, even the wicked man against the evil day, and Romans 1. God has
delivered them into a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient. All power of doing is of God, whether it be good or evil that is
done. For the murderer could not live, nor lift up his hand, but by the power
which he has of God; who also orders even the wickedness of the murderer to
good, either for the punishment of him that is slain, or for his reward, if he
be slain for the defense of his truth, and in a good cause, and evermore
turns it to his glory. Yet is not the malice of the murderer from God, nor
the murderer delivered from the fault of his wickedness; because he does not
intend therein to serve God, but his own cruelty. And this is that which
Luther does both say and mean, far from the slanderous report of this
malicious cauiller, as his own words do bear witness.

The third example of impiety is, that Luther teaches, that to fight against
the Turk, is to resist God himself: whereby (say you) what a path makes he
to the empire of infidelity? But in truth, Luther teaches not that it is
unlawful simply and absolutely, to fight against the Turk, but to fight
against the Turk under the Popes banner. The article is better gathered by the
Collectors, then by you sir defender. Praeliari aduersus Turcas, (...). 34.
etc. to make war against the Turks, is to resist God, visiting our
iniquities by them. And this article I do approve (says Luther) by a double
experience of our infelicity. The two experiences are these. First, that all
prayers and Counsels of prevailing against the Turks, have been hither to
frustrate, and the strength of the Turk is increased by our wars. The second
is, that under pretext of making war against the Turk, the Popehath used to
rake money to gether for their pardons: And he concludes, that without
repentance and the overthrow of the Popes tyranny, there is no hope to
prevail in war against the Turks, because God is not on our side,
butiustlie incensed against us. Quantorectius (says he) faceremus etc. How
much better should we do, if first with our prayers, yea rather by changeing
the wholl course of our life, we reconcile God unto us? And then that the
Emperors and the princes would restrain that Idol of Room, from tyranny,
deceit, and destroying of souies. For that I also may once prophecy, although
I know I shall not be heard. Except the Pope of Rome be brought under, all
Christendom is undone. Let him fly, as Christ has taught, into the
mountains, he that can; or with confidence let him offer his life to death,
unto the Romish murderers. The Popedom can work nothing, but sin and
destruction, what will you more? But who shall subdue the Pope? Christ by the
brightness of his coming, and none other. Lord who has believed our preaching?
he that has ears to hear let him hear, and let him abstain from the
Turgish war, while the name of the Pope prevails under heaven. I have said.
By this you may see, that Luther favored not the empire of infidelity; but
shows by what means it may be resisted. Again, he forbids not defense
against the Turk, but invasion of the Turk, when we may be at peace with
him. For that it is lawful to fight against the Turk in our own defense, he
shows his opinion, in consut. Rat. Latomianae, where he derideth the folly
of Latomus, and the divines of Louane, which racked the decree of Pope Leo to
this sense, that it was needles to answer the aduersaties of religion: which is
as great wisdom of the school of Louane in proceeding against Luther, as if
when the Turk does set upon us, which is no ways lawful for him, and yet he
will not be staid, we should send the divines of Louane ambassadors unto him,
which should say unto him, It is not lawful for thee to fight, and if thou
do, we will condemn thee, and so suffer him to raunge at his pleasure, and yet
boast that we have gotten the victory. Nay (says he) let us lay aside
prayers and all spiritual armor, and cease to resist the devil, denouncing
unto him, and saying: It is not lauful for thee to trouble the Church of God.
So that Luther by these words declares his judgment, that it is as lawful
for us, and as necessary, with bodelie armor to defend our selves against the
Turk assailing us, as it is to fight against the devil, with spiritual
armor, and to confute enemies of the truth by the word of God.

For a fourth example of impiety, you add, when he reprehended the Pope, for
defining beside scripture, that the soul is immortal, and calls it a
monster of the dunghill of Rome, what ground of impiety does he not lay? In
deed if Luther should deny the immortality of the soul, as Pope John the,
23. did, and was therefore convicted, and condemned in the Counsel of
Constance, we would accurse Luthers memory, as much as the Popes. Sess. 11.
But if Luther reprehended the Pope, for delivering that upon the creditte of
his own definition, and authority, which is manifestly grounded upon the
authority of holy scriptures, what a slanderous pen have you? He was
charged by the Collectors, art. 37. to have said thus. Certum est, in manu
Ecclesiae, etc. It is certain, that it is not in the hand of the Church, or of
the Pope at all, to decree articles of the faith, nay nor yet laws of manners,
and good works: To this article Luther answers thus. Probo hunc sic, etc.
This article I prove thus. 1. Cor. 3. No man can lay any other foundation,
beside that which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ. Here thou have the
foundation laid by the Apostles: but every article of faith is part of this
foundation: therefore none other article can be laid, then is already laid?
There may be builded upon, as the same Apostle says. And therefore the Pope
ought to be laid, and builded upon the same foundation, but not to lay any
foundation: for all things to be believed are fully set forth in the
scriptures. Yet I permit that the Pope may make articles of faith to them that
believe in him: such as these are; That the bread and wine are
transsubstantiated in the sacrament: That the essence of god does neither
beget, nor is begotton: That the soul is the substantial form of the body:
That he him seife is the Emperor of the world, and King of heaven, and an
earthly God: That the soull is immortal. And all those infinite monsters in
the Romish dunghill of decrees, that such as his faith is, such may be his
Gospel, such his beeleeuers, and such his Church, and that like lips may
have like lettice, and the cup a cover meet for it. But we which are
Christians, and not Papanes, do know that there is nothing pertaining either
to faith or good manners, which is not abundantly set forth in the holy
scriptures: that there is neither authority nor place for men to decree any
other thing. These words declare, that what doctrine is true, and needful to
be known, must be received from God by the holy scriptures; not from the
Popes decrees, or from any mortal man's authority. It is marvel you do not
charge Luther, with holding the plurality of Gods, because here prehendeth the
Pope, for defining, that the essence of god can neither beget, nor be begotton,
as well, as with denying the immortality of the soul. both which articles are to
be taken out of the holy scriptures, not from the authority of the Popes
definition. For though the Pope define any thing which is true, yet it must not
be received upon his creditte, but upon the authority of Gods word. And
seeing the Popes decrees do contain such a number of untruths, the articles
of faith from the Popes decrees may receive discredit, rather then authority.
But all things must be examined according to the word of God written, which is
the truth, yea even the scripture coming from the mouth of the devil. Again,
I wish the reader to consider, how truly you say, that Luther calls that
opinion of the immortality of the soul, a monster of the dunghill of Rome,
when he speaks of the infinite monsters of falsehoode, that are found in the
dunghill of the Popes decrees, where of he makes no express mention in
answer to this article.

The last example of impiety is, when Luther affirms, and mantaineth, that
neither man, nor Angel on earth, can lay any one law upon any one Christian,
further then he will himself. What foundation (say you) does not he overthrow
of all Christian commmon wealths. Luthers short answer to this, is. Hoc non
de ciuilibus legibus, sed de Ecclesiasticis dixi, and est sententi a Pauli.
Coll. 2. This I speak not of civil laws, but of Ecclesiastical laws, and
it is the sentence of Saint Paul, Coll. 2. What foundation now does he
overthrow, or teach, of any Christian common wealth, when he speaks of the
freedom of conscience, from all constitutions of men? These be the great
monsters of impiety, which cut the sinews of al virtue, and do open the high
way to all dissolution. Will you never be ashamed, to slander their doctrine,
which you are not hable to confute?

But now for the bodelie and sensible conference of Luther with the devil, you
wonder with what face Master Charke can deny it: and we wonder with what mouth
you can affirm it. That the Tygurines give testimony of it, is a lie, as I
have showed before. And the wholl discourse of Luthers words shall make
manifest, that his confession is only of a spiritual fight in mind, and no
bodelie conference, as Master Charke answered at the first. His words in his
book, de missa priuata, and unction sacerdotum, are these. Sed forsitan
agnoscatis quam firmis nitatur columnis vestra causa, si in horam incidatis
tentationum. Eg o coram vobis reuerendis and sanctis patribus, confessionem
faciam: date mihi absolutionem bonam, quae vobis opto quam minimum noceat.
Contigit me semel sub mediam noctem subito expergefieri. Ibi Satan mecum caepit
eiusmodi disputationem. Audi, inquit, Luthere doctor per docte, nostietiam te
quindecim annis celebrasse missas priuatas quotidie: Quia si tales missae
horrenda essent idololatria, etc? But peradventure you may acknowledge upon how
sure pillars your cause leans, if you fall into the hour of tentation. I
will make my confession before you reverend and holy fathers: give me good
absolutition, which I wish may hurt you least. It happened that once I waked
suddenly about midnight. There Satan began this disputation with me. Hearken,
says he, thou very well learned Doctor Luther, etc. thou know also, that
thou have said the private Mass by the space of, 15. years, almost every
day: what if such private Masses were horrible idolatry, etc? These words are
manifest that Luther speaks of a spiritual temptation, such as even good men
are subject unto, in which Satan obiecteth unto the conscience of men, such
things wherein they have offended God most greeuouslie.

The atguments that the devil lays against him, are not so much against the
Mass, as against Luthers sin, to bring him in despair for saying mass,
being a sinful man, as appears by these words which he attributes to the
devil. Prome vbi scriptum est, quod homo impius, incredulus, possit assistere
altari Christi, and (...) ac conficere infide Ecclesiae: vbi iussit ac
praecepit hoc deus? Bring forth where it is written, that an ungodly man, an
vnbeeleeuer may stand at the altar of Christ, and consecrate, and make the
sacrament in the faith of the Church: where has God bidden or commanded this?
For Luther had defended himself, and sought to quiet his conscience, because
he was an anointed priest, because he celebrated in the faith of the Church,
although he was unworthy in respect of the weakness of his own faith, and the
multitude of his sins. But this you clippe, as your note book served you,
which was not of your own gleaning, Age, prome vbi scriptum est, vbiiussit aut
praecepit hoc Deus. Go to now, show me where the mass is written in
scripture, where has God commanded it; and scoff at the Protestants fashion
of disputation, and conclude, that Luther not being able to answer, finally
yielded to banish the mass, upon the devils appointment, which is a tale of a
tubbe: for there is no such conclusion, but that Luther by faith in the merits
of Christ, overcame this temptation. For after his conflict described thus, he
proceeds: Hic respondebunt mihi sanctissimi patres, hic ride bunt and dicent,
tune es doctor ille celebris, and non nosti respondere Diabolo? An ignoras
Diabolis esse mendacem? pape! vestro merito vobis gratias ingentes ago, pro tam
suaui consolatione in re tanta. Has tres voculas (Diabolus est mendax)
ignorassem ego (...), nisi monuissetis vos eximij theologotati. Si papista
essem omnium tentationum ruais, quem securum and (...) Satan negligeres, vt
ipsos negligit indulgentes suis cupiditatibus, etc. etiam talis gigas essem,
contra absentem hostem alacer and fortis. Sed si vobis sustinendi essentictus
Diaboli, and audiendae disputationes, non diu essetis cantilenam de Ecclesia,
and veteri recepto more cantaturi: equidem satis video in David, and reliquis
Prophetis, qu am grauiter luctentur and ingemiscunt in his certaminibus and
similibus, contra diabolum, and horribilem impetum eius. Et Christus ipse
quamuis sine peccato, propter nos in quantis lachrimis, in quibus angustiis
agonizauit, in his agonibus contra satanam? Vrget enim in immensum corda, nec
(...) niss repulsus verbo dei. Et ego plane persuasus sum, Emser um, and
Oecolampadium, and similes, his ictibus horribilib. and quassatio nib. subito
extinctos esse. Nec. n. humanum cor horrer dum hunc and ineffabilem impetum,
nisi deus illi adsit, perferre potest. Satan enim in (...) oculi repent totam
mentem terr oribus ac te. nebris adobruit, and si nihil quam hominem inermem,
and verbo no instructum inuenit, quasi digitulo totum (...). Verum qui them hoc
est, quod mendax sit, sed eius mendacia non sunt simplicis artificis, sed long
callidiora and instructiora ad fallendum, quam humanus captus assequi possit.
Ipse sic adoritur, vt apprehendat aliquam and solidam veritatem, quae negarinon
possit, atque eam adeo callide and versute vrget and acuit, and adeo speciose
fucat suum mendacium, vt fallat velcautissimos, etc. vti cogitatio illa, quae
Iudae cor percussit, vera, Tradidi sanguinem iustum: hoc Iudasnegare non
poteratised hoc erat mendacium, ergo est desperandum de gratia Dei. Et tamen
diabolus hoc mendacium, hanc cogitationem tam violenter vrsit, vt Judas eam
vincere non possit, sed desperaret. Proinde bone frater, domine papista, non
mentitur Satan, quando accusat aut vrget magnitudinem peccati; ibi enim habet
duos inconuincibiles graves testes, legem dei, and nostram propriam
conscientiam. Non possum negare, quodreus summortis and damnationis, etc. Sed
ibi mentitur Satan, quando vltra vrget, vt desperem de gratia: Sicut Cain
dicebat, maius est peccatum meum, etc. Et ibi tum opus est in tali agone diuino
and caelesti auxilio, vt vel srater adsit, qui te consoletur promissionibus
gratiae foris, velintus in cord, spiritus sanctus verbum fratris erigat, ac
animet, ac sustentet cor tuum, vt possis sic apud (...) statuere, Confessus
quidem sum (Lege dei conuictus) coram diabolo, me peccasse, me damnatum esse,
vt Iudam. Sed verto me ad Christum cum Petro, and respicio eius immensum
beneficium and meritum, etc. ille omnem horrendam damnationem damnauit. Here
those most holy fathers will answer me, here they will laugh and say, art
thou a famous doctor, and know not how to answer the devil? Do thou not
know that the devil is a liar? how say you by that? I give you great thanks,
as you are worthy, for so sweet comforse, in so weighty a matter. These
three words (the devil is a liar) I should not have known, until now, except
you most notable divines had taught me. If I were a Papist, inexpert of all
temptations, whom Satan would not neglect, being carles, and snorting, as he
neglects them that follow their lusts, etc. I should be such a Giant also,
stout and valiant against the enemy, that is absent. If you should bear the
stripes of the devil, and hear his disputations, you should not longsing the
song of the Church, and after the accustomed manner. I verily do see
sufficiently in David, and the rest of the Prophets, how greeuouslie they
wrestle and groone in those combats, and such like, against the devil, and
his horrible violence. And Christ himself (although without sin) in what
abundance of tears, and anguish, did he siriue for us, in those conflictes
against Satan For he urges man's heart exceedingly, and cease not, except he
be driven back with the word of God. And I am plainly persuaded, that Emser
and Oecolampadius, and such like, were sodendlie slain wieh these horrible
stripes, and shakings. For Rash judge meant.
the heart of man cannot abide this horrible and unspeakable violence, except
God be with him. For Satan in the twinkling of an eye, sodendlie ouerwhelmeth
the wholl mind with terrors and darkness, and if he find nothing but a man
unarmed, and not instructed in the word, as it were with a little finger, he
ouerwhelmeth him all at once. It is true in deed, that he is a liar, but his
lies are not of a simple crafts man, but much more crafty, and prepared to
deceive, then man's capacitis can comprehend. He does in such sort set upon a
man, and take hold of him, and that sound truth which can not be denied, and
that he urges, and sharpeneth so craftelie and subtillie, and covers it so
cunningly, that he may deceive them, that take the best heed of him, etc. As,
that cogitation, which struck the heart of Judas, was true: I have betrayed
innocent blood, this could not Judas deny. But this was a lie, therefore I
must despair of the grace of God. And yet the devil urged this lie, this
cogitation so violently, that Judas was not able to overcome it, but
despaired. Therefore good brother, Sir Papist, the devil does not lie, when he
accuses or urges the greatenes of sin. For thereby he has two grave
witnesses, that are vnreproouable, the law of God, and our own conscience. I
can not deny but I have sinned, I cannot deny my sin to be great, I cannot
deny that I am guilty of death and damnation, etc. but there Satan lies,
when he urges further, that I should despair of grace: As Cain said, my sin
is greater, etc. And in this conflicte thou have need of the help of God from
heaven, that either some brother be present, which may comfort thee outwardly
with the promises of God, or that the holy ghost inwardly in thy heart,
through thy brothers word, do lift up, and encourage the, and comfort thy
heart, that thou may determine thus with thy self, I have in deed confessed
before the devil, being convicted by the law of God, that I sinned, that I am
condemned as Judas: but I turn my self unto Christ with Peter, and look
back to his infinite benefit, and merit, etc. he has condemned all horrible
condemnation, etc. Now I report me to every indifferent reader, whether
Luther do not speak here of a spiritual conflicte, or tentation unto
desperation, for his saying of private mass, after he knew that it was
idolatry, not of any bodelie conference, about the abolishing of the mass.
Secondly, that Luther does not yeald to the persuasions of the devil,
wherewith the defender confesses, that both good and evil men are assaulted,
but according to the difference by him observed, resists the assault, and
obtains victory thorough Christ.

But now let us hear what arguments our defender brings, to prove this
bodelie conference. First, the confession of the Tigurine Caluenists. but that
is false. The Tigurines did only reprove Luther for his intemperat
inuectiues, and naming of deuilles so often; our wise defender concludes, ergo
Luther had deuilles. Secondly, he says, it is evident that this conference was
more then spiritual, by the deuilles preface, wherein he calls the friar,
right learned Doctor, according to the vain of pride, wherewith he saw him
puffed up, etc. But what reasonable man sees not, that this presace of his
title, was but a bitter scorn of the devil? no flattering speech, to make him
ready to receive his impressions, as the defender says. As for the sound of
Satan's voice, described in the place alleged in the Censure, there is none
such. For the book demissa angulari, so often alleged by the papists, is none
other, but this, de missa priuata, and unction sacerdotum, as appears by the
very words, noted by the Papists, in lib. de missa angulari, which are found
here in this book, de missa priuata, etc. Therefore the sound of Satan's voice,
is but some papists dream upon the matter, which our defender would now hide,
under the title of de missa angulari. The third reason is, for that Luther
confesses some of his fellows to have been slain by this conference. What
he says in his rash judgment of Emser, and Oecolampadius, where of the one
was a Papist, the other a Protestant, you heave hard in his own words, which
proves no bodily conference. For those terrible blows and shakinges, where
of he speaks, are no more bodelie, then the busfeting of Satan, where of
Saint Paul speaks. And who doubts 2. Cor. 12. 7.
but that by such spiritual buffeting of Satan, a man that is overcome with
exceeding sorrow, may suddenly die? except he be assisted and comforted by the
grace of Christ, as Saint Paul was. Finally, the bushel of de missa angulari.
sault (says our defender) which Luther confesses himself to have eaten
together with the devil, proves that he had bodelie conference with him.
First, the book is not extant, and if any such were, yet it proves no
bodelie conference. For no man is so mad to think, that the devil and
Luther did corporally eat salt together. But the eating of busshelles of
salt with one, is a proverb, signifying long experience of him, as Tullie in
his book de amicitia uses that saying, that a man must eat many bussheles
of salt with one, before he join in friendshipe with him, that is, know him,
and try him thoroughly. And this (if Luther speak of eating of salt, with
the devil) his meaning is, that he had long experience of the assaults and
temtations of the devil: as Saint Paul says, we are not ignorant of the
devises of Satan, nor of any bodelie conference, such as Prateolus out of
Lindanus 2. Cor. 2. 11.
does report on these words. Nec defuere virifide dignissimi, qui sibi visum
demonem corporaliter cum Luthero conuersari adfirmarent. Neither have there
wanted men most worthy of credit, which did affirm, that they have seen the
devil corporally conversant with Luther. O pleasant invention. At lest they
should have told us their names, the place, the time, the manner, the shape in
which they saw the devil conversant with Luther: and if he were not in any
strange shape, how they know that it was the devil. But there is no lie so
incredible, that needs any further proof to slander Luther, then that
Censure. Defense.
some papists have affirmed it.

Concerning Luthers death, which the papists affirm to have died. dronken, and
slain by the devil, our defender says, ( as it is thought) and (as it is
coniecturrd) but the words of Hosius, as they are cited by Lindanus and
Prateolus, are absolute. Tandem sub vitae finem, Prateol. in Luther.
(inquit Hosius) reipsaeuenit. Probe. n. potus and hilaris, postridie mane in
lecto repertus est mortuvs. At length toward the end of his life, says
Hosius, it came to pass in deed (namely that he was in a moment slain by his
familiar devil) for being well tipled and merry, the next day in the morning
he was found dead in his bed. The defender be-like being ashamed of the matter,
does qualify it with thought, and a conjecture, raueth against Master Charke,
for opposing Sleidan only against three popish witnesses, whom he quoteh: as
though one writer, receiving information of the manner of Luthers death, from
them that were present, is not more to be credited, then an hundred Papists,
which feign of malice, or receive of malicious rumors, without any one witness
of credit, whatsoever may sound to the slander, and the defacing of Luther.
For the credit of Sleidans story, I refer men to his own Apology, in which
he declares, that the chief substance thereof, is taken out of public
writings and records; which is sufficient to justify him against all Papists
in the world, from any purpose of lying or faining, especially seeing he does
not interpose his judgment of matters in controucrsie, as Historians commonly
use to do; but only reports them as he found them in public monuments.
And therefore deserves more credit with all indifferent men, whatsoever
Latomus bableth of eleven thousand lies, or Lindane reports of Charles the
Emperor, which Surius ascribes to Julius Pflugius Bishop of Numburge,
although he affirm the like of Charles the Emperor.

But now you will bear us down with a sound testimo ny of Iustus Jonas, that
was present at Luthers death, and was his dear friend, and his cook, to
prove that he was drunk. But why do you call Iustus Jonas Luthers cook. It is
well known, that Iustus Jonas was a reuer end learned man, and a Doctor in
Divinity, he had as little skill in cookerie as you. Your answer will be, that
Pontacus the Popish Chronicler so calls him. And surely I should marvel
what monster were meant thereby, but that I read in Surius, that his name was
Iustus Cocus, and that he called himself (as he says) Iustus Jonas. For
Papists can tell every man's right name better then himself. So they trifle
with the names of Calvin and Luther. But to the purpose. What says Iustus
Jonas, or Jonas Cook, if you will have his name so? Forsooth that Luther, a
little before his death, said to him, and Coelius, and certain other, that were
present, Orate Deum pro Domino Deonostro, and eius Euangelio. Pray to God for
our Lord God, and his Gospel. Surius adds further; vt ei been succedat, etc.
that it may have good success, because the Council of Trent, and he
abominable Pope do set themselves against it. Here (say you) Luther prayed
for Christ at his death, which either you must ascribe to drunkenness, or to
some worse affection, he being in his perfect wits, as the author affirms.
And is it with you a sign of drunkenness, to pray that the Kingdom of Christ
upon earth, and his Gospel may have good sucesse? You would have been as
angry, as the high priests and scribes were, if you had been in their time,
with the children, that cried in the temple, Osanna to the son of David, that
is, Lord send health or prosperity to the son of David, blessed be the
Kingdom of our father David, that comes in the name of the Lord. You might
cavil as well, that Christ has taught us to pray for God the father, when he
taught us to pray, that his name might be sanctified, his kingdom come, his
will be done. If Luther had said simply, pray to God for our Lord and God
Christ, It had been an hard construction, to infer upon those only words,
that he was drunk: but now when he expresses, that he would have them pray
for the success of Christ's Gospel, which was oppugned by Antichrist, and his
blaspemous Chapter of Trent, no man, except he were mad with malice, would
conclude, that this speech proceeded of drunkenness. The Apostles Act. 4. do
pray unto God to stretch forth his hand unto healing, that signs and wonders
may be done in the name of his holy son Jesus: does this prayer argue any
evil affection in the Apostles, against the divinity of Christ, which had
given them power to work miracles in his name. None but an Arrian would so
gather. Noe more of this prayer of Luther, that God will defend the Gospel of
Christ, against the enemies thereof, any reasonable man would conclude, that
Luther was drunk. Prateolus out of Lindane against the testimony of Iustus
Jonas, Michaell, Caelius, and Ioannes Aurifaber, which were present, with
manyother learned and noble persons at Luthers death, has nothing to oppose,
but tamen haud temere, R. P. Hosium literis prodidisse credas, Lutherum been
potum and hilarem, etc. Yet belecue thou not, that the reuer end father Hosius
has rashly committed to writing, that Luther being well tippled and merry,
was the next day found dead in his bed. So these impudent Papists, will have
one enemy of Luther, being absent many hundred miles from the place of his
death, bringing noe witness, argument, or probability of truth, but his bare
word, to be credited before so many learned and noble persons, as were
present, and eye witnesses, concerning the rumor of Martine Luthers departure
out of this life. But Hosius was a Bishop and a Cardinal forsooth: as though
a malicious Papist, when he has a white rochet put on his back, or a red
hat clapped on his head, were sopriuileged by his titles, that he must needs be
credited though he lie never so impudentlie.

Touching the dissension of Luther with others, that professed the Gospel,
Master Charke does grant that in some points he disagreed from them, and yet
he says, there was a singular care among them of the unity in the Gospel.
But this our defender takes in so evil part, that he calls it in tolerable
impudency, specially that for proof thereof, Master Charke cites the act of
concord agreed upon at Marpuge, Anno. 1529. upon the report of Brentius
(which since has showed him self an obistinate heretic, and author of the
opinion of the vbiquitie of Christ's body) who reports that the Zuinglians
were vanquished, and yet he gives them this testimony, that they desired with
tears to be called brethren, which Luther refused. But what the agreement
was, the book of Acts printed both in Latin and Dutch does testify unto the
world. The 15. Chapter of which conuention, con cerning the matter in
controversy was this: Credimus and profitemur omnes, de caena domini nostri
Jesus Christi, Vsum illius sub vtraque specie (iuxea Christi institutionem)
obseruandans dum esse. Quodque missanon sit vllum eiusmodi opus, quo alto
alteri qutsquam (sieve mortuo, sieve viuo) gratia^ consequi possit. Quod item
sacramentum altaris, sit sacramentum very corporis and sanguinis Jesus Christi:
Et quod esus spiritualis eius (...) corporis and sanguinis, sit vnicuique
Christiano homini inprimis necessarius. Adhaec quod vsus huius sacramensi
(perinde atque verbum ipsum) a Deo opt. max. sit institutus, atque ordinatus ad
excitandas ad fidem infirmas hominum conscientias per spiritum sanctum.
Quanquam autem inter nos hactenus, non plane potuit conuenire, number verum corpus
and (...) sanguis Christi pani ac vino corporaliter insit, debebit nihilominus
tamen vtraque pars altera erga alteram declarare Christi anam charitatem,
quatenus idomnino cuiusque conscientia far potest. Et vtraque pars deum. opt.
max. diligenter precabiturrot is nobis per spiritum suum verum eius rei
intellectum constabilire dignetur. Amen. Martinus Lutherus. Ioann. Brentius.
Iustus Jonas. Joan: Oecolampadius. Philippus Mclancthon. Huldricus Zuinglius.
And. Ostander. Martinus Bucerus. Stephan. Agricola. Gaspar Hedio.


We all beeleeue and profes concerning the supper of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that the use thereof in both kinds according to the institution of Christ, is
to be observed. And that the mass is not any such work, whereby any one man
may obtain grace for another, whether he be dead or a live. Also that the
sacrament of the altar is the sacrament of the true body and blood ofIesus
Christ. And that the spiritual eating of the same his body and blood, is very
necessary for every Christian man. Moreover that the use of this sacrament,
eue^ as the word it self, is instituted and ordained of almighty God, to stir
up unto faith the weak consciences of men by his holy spirit. And although
it could not hitherto be altogether agreed amongst us, whether the true body,
and true blood of Christ, be in the bread and wine corporally: yet never (...)
both parties ought to declare Christian charity one toward the other, so
far as every man's conscience can bear. And both parts shall diligently
pray unto almighty God, that he by his spirit may vouchsafe to establish unto
us the true understanding of that matter. Amen.

Martine Luther, etc.

The subscriptionof their names appears before.

You hear how far forth they agreed, and to a full (...) indeed, the
Lutherans could never be brought, nor Luther himself, who in this point was
out of measure hard and intractable. which seeing it is not denied by Master
Charke or any of us, it is altogether needles, that our defender spends two
leaves, and more in citing testimonies of his dissent from the rest that
profess the Gospel, which he calls Zuinglians, and Caluinists. And to make
the matter more large, he (...) the writings of Brentius, Stankatus, Ochinus,
men fallen from the truth into open errors, condemned of all pattes, against
the professors of the truth. But what care the godly had to maintain the
unity of the Gospel, may appear by the harmonic of confessions of so many
diverse Churches, in the sum of Christian Religion, and doctrine, of the most
necessary points of faith unto eternal salvation, thoroughlie agreeing within
them selves, and against the heresies of the Papists, and all other sectaries,
both old and new. That the Lutherans, notwitstanding continue still their
uncharitable judgment against the other, it is in deed to be lamented, but
yet noe cause for Papists to rejoice, who whether it be by us or them, in all
other points of their heresies, are beaten down and brought to confusion. And
still that remains true that Master Charke said of Oecolampadius, Bucer and
others, although in some points they disagreed from Luther, and other of his
side, yet was there among them a singular care of unity in the Gospel. The
intercourse of loving letters, that you so earnestly require, may be seen
among Caluins epistles, where there are loving letters between Calvin,
Melancthon, Vitus, Theodorus, and other.

And now we are come to the odious inuectiues against the lives of Calvin, and
Beza, taken out of a vile libell, written by Jerome Bolsec, an unlearned,
ungodly, and unshamefast knave; who once was a Carmelite friar, and flying
from his cloister, came first and deceived the Dachesse of Ferrara for a time,
but his knauerie being known, and he espied, he was banished from her; and
then within three days study, he professed him self to be a Physician, and
came to Geneua; where being contemned of the learned in that science, he would
take upon him to be a divine, and openly inueighed against the doctrine of prae
destination, not as a Papist, out as a mere Pelagian, for which he was
condemned and banished the City, and after for like troubles, he was twyse
banished the territory of Berna. After that, when he thought the Churches of
France should have continued in peace, he fained repentance, and sought
reconciliation of the Church of Geneua, laboring ambitiouslie to be admitted
into the ministry: but when war and persecution befell unto the Church,
contrary to his expectation, he returned to his leech craft, and revolted
again to Poperte: and in satisfaction of his Apostasy has forged, and
refined these lies against Calvin and Beza. Anp this is that reverend man
whom our defender commends, for wisdom, learning, and honesty. Whose
impudent slanders with noc indifferent man can find any credit, seeing all
law and common equity, allows exception against such a vile person to be a
witness, much more to be an accuser, witness, and judge himself alone. The
law of God will have no man condemned, but under two or three witnesses: and
the discipline of the Gospel will not have any accusation to be admitted
against an elder of the Church, under two or three witnesses: much less ought
the slander of such an impudent adversary, being a most vile and absurd
person, to be received to the condemnation of so excellent learned teachers,
whose life in public view and fame, where they have lived, has always been
blameles, and unreprovable. Wherefore, the accuser being thus notoriously
known, by open factes and judgments against him, there needs none other
detence of the persons slaundered, but their simple denial of the crimes
objected; whose nay by all reason must be better, then his yea: seeing no man is
by law presumed to be evil, before he be lawfully convicted. Beside this the
particular slanders have bin so diligently confuted by him that first
answered this lewd defense, for that purpose principally, that I shall not
need to spend any longer time, in declaring the vanity and fasehood of them.

But because our defender will needs make a brief recapitulation of the
matter, and tell us that there were six reformers of all our English Religion,
it shall not be amiss to consider what weighty matter he can bring. The first
(says he) was Luther himself, who confesses expressly himself without
gloss, that the first motion thereof came from the diuill himself in proper
person, lib. de missa priuata and unction sacerd. How false and slanderous
this report is, the reader may see, by Luthers own words, before set
down. The second, Carolostadius (says the defender) was by Luthers
procurement, as unworthy to live among Christians, banished out of all the
dominions of the Duke of Saxony and so ended his life miserably in laboring
the ground, as your own Historiographer Sleidan writes, lib. 5. Sleidan in
deed does write, that he was banished, as one that seemed to favor the
Anabaptists: but he writes also, that by Luthers procurement, he was admitted
to purge himself of that crime. But that he ended his Life miserabliein
laboring the ground, Sleidan our own historiographer does not write, and it
is an impudent lie, as it is manifest by your own Historiographer Surius, who
in Anno 1530. writes, that Carolostadius of an Archdeacon of Witemberge,
became a deacon of Zurich, and after the death of Zuinglius, he removed to
Basile, and there in the ministry of a Zuinglian Church (as he says) ended
his miserable life miserably. Certain it is that Carolostadius was a vain
man, and had great imperfections, yet it is a shame to lie upon the devil.

The third, you say, Oecolampadius, was so lewd a man, as by Luthers
affirmation, he was slain by the devil himself: lib. de missapriuata and
vnct. sacerd. or as some other think, killed him self with his own hands.
Lind. dial. 3. dubit. It is true that Luther utters his rash and fall
sentence of Oecolampadius upon occasion ofsome fly ingtale, that he had heard
of the soden death of Oecolampadius. She like he affirms in the same place of
Emser the Papist: if his authority be good for the one, why is it not for the
other? But the truth is, that Oecolampadius as he lived holilie and up
rightly, so he made a Godly and quiet end, and was sick in his bed 15.
days before he departed, as is testified in the story of his death, set forth
by that reverend learned man Simon Grinaeus, who was present, and saw, and
heard all that he writes, with many more witnesses of sufficient credit. In
his sickness he was visited by all his friends, both of the Senators of the
university, and of the people. So that it is a most shameless fiction, either
that he died suddenly, or that he killed himself, as that malicious Papist
Lindan writes.

The fourth reformer, says our defender, was Zuinglius, who having received
the proofs of his new doctrine of the sacra meant, from a spirit in the night
(as himself writes, and confesses that he knew not whether he were black or
white) lived in such sort, as he was detested by Luther, and finally stirring
up the Suitsers his countrymen to fight, was slain himself in the field, and
his body burned. That Zuinglius was flaine in the field, and his body burned
by the Papists, it is confessed: but that he stirred up his countriemen to
battle (which were provoked by intolerable injuries) it is false. He went
with his countriemen as a Preacher, according to their custom, and it pleased
God, that he was martyred by the enemies of the truth. As for the proofs that
he received from a spirit in the night, you shall hear the wholl matter in his
own words. lib. de subsid. Euchar. But first you must understand, that he
rehearses the whole story concerning the abolishing of the mass at Zurich,
and shows that a certain scribe opposed himself against it, the 12. of
April, and objected that those phrases (unto which Zuinglius compared the
words of the institution, This is my body) the seed is the word of god, the
field is the world, the envious man is the devil. etc. were spoken
parabolically. Zuinglius maintained that nevertheless, there was in those
sayings the same trope or figure, that is in the words of the supper: so the
decree was made concerning the abolishing of the mass. After this he writes
after this manner.

Restabat adhuc haud minimus conatus, quo scilices exempla proderemus, quae
nulla cum parabola coniuncta forent. Caepimus ergo cogitare omnia, omnia
reuoluere, attamen aliud nihil exemplorum occurrebat, quam quod in commentario
proditum est, aut quod occurrebat erat illorum simile. Cum vero decima tertia
Dies adpeteret, vera narro, adeoque vera, vt caelare volentem, conscientia
cogat effundere, quod Dominus impertiit, non ignorans, quantis me contumeliis
risibusque exponam. Cum inquam decimatertia Aprilis lux adpeteret, visus sum
mihi in somno, multo cum taedio denuo contendere cum aduersario scriba, sicque
obmutuisse, vt quod verum scirem, negante lingua beneficium suum, proloqui non
possem: qui me angor, us solent nonnunquam somnia fallaci ludere nocte
(nihilenim altius quam somnium narramus, quod ad nos attinet, tametsi leave non
sit, quod per somnium didicimus, gratia Deo in cuius solius gloriam ista
prodimus) vehementer turbare videbatur. Ibi (...) visus est monitor adesse
(ater fuerit, an albus, nihil memini, somnium enim narro) qui diceret: Quin
ignaue respondes ei quod Exodus 12. Est enim Phase hoc est transitus Domini.
Protinus vt hoc Phasma visum est, simul expergefio, and electo exilio. Locum
apud 70. primum vndique circumspicin, ac de eo coram (...) concione pro virili
dissero: qui sermo vbi acceptus est, quemadmodum paulo post dicemus, omnibus
sacrarum literarum candidatis, qui adhue nonnihil propter parabolae obstacula
haerebant, omnem nebulam discussit, etc. There remained yet not the lest
endeavor; namely that we should bring forth examples which wereioined with no
parable. Therefore we began to think of all that we could, to unfold all that
we could, but yet none other example, came to mind, but that is set forth in
our commentary, or else whatsoever came to mind, was like unto those examples.
But when the 13. day drew near, I tell the truth, and that so true, that
though I would conceal it, my conscience compels me to utter that which the
Lord bestowed upon me, being not ignorant to how great reproaches, and scorns I
lay forth my self; when (I say, the 13. day of April drew near, me thought
as I was a sleep, that with great tediousnes I was again disputing with the
scribe my adversary, that my mouth was so stopped, that my tongue denying her
office, I was not able to speak out that which I knew to be true: which
trouble, as dreams are wont sometimes to mock men in the deceitful night
(for here I declare no higher matter then a dream, as concerning my self,
although it is no light matter that I learned by this dream, thanks be to God
to whose only glory I utter these things) which vexation (I say) seemed to
trouble me vehemently. Then suddenly there seemed an admonisher to be present
with me (whether he were black, or white, I do not at all remember, for I tell
a dream) which said, why do thou not thou coward answer him, that which is
written Exodus 12. For it is the paschall which is the passover of the Lord.
Immediately as this sight appeered, I awoke withal, and leapt out of my bed.
And first I considered the place in the Seauentie Interpreters on every side:
and thereof before the wholl congregation I preached as well as I could, Which
sermon when it was heard, as soon after we shall declare, drove away all
mist, or want of understanding from all those that were students in the holy
Scriptures, which unto that time did somewhat doubt, because of the objection
of the parable.

Thus far Zuinglius, by whose words you may easelie perceive, what proofs
he received of his Doctrine, of the Sacrament, of a spirit by night; as our
defender says, when he shows only that he was admonished by Gods
providence in a dream, ofthat example Exodus 12. in which the trope or figure
is manifest, being also in the doctrine and institution of a sacrament,
whereunto the Lords supper does most properly answer, which is used in the
words of the Lords supper: this is my body, without any such parable, as was
objected unto him in the other examples. Where he says, that he remembers not
whether the aduertiser were white or black, he means no more, as all men
that know the proverb must confess, but that he remembers not what he was,
whether known to him, or unknown, of whom he dreamed that he received that
example. The same proverb he uses not long before, in the same discourse, of
him that disputed against him, who, whether he was white or black, that is,
what manner of man he was, he would not describe. Surius quarelleth against An.
23.
him, that he would attribute so much to a dream when otherwise he will admit
nothing but holy scriptures, whereas every reasonable man may see, that he
admits no Doctrine upon the bare credit of a dream or of the admonisher,
were he whit or black, but is only put in mind by a dream of a place of
holy Scripture, that served to stop his adversaries mouth, and to remove
all doubt from them, that were nouices in the study of the scripture. And this
is a thing that many times comes to pass, that a man which earnestly
studieth of any matter, shall in his dream be admonished of some better way,
then he could think of waking. Which when he has considered to be the best,
for any good purpose, he need not to doubt, but that it came unto him by the
providence of God, without being afraid to follow it, because he thought of it
first in a dream. What Luther thought of Zuinglius, it skilleth not, seeing as
he was stiff in his error of the carnal manner of presence, so he was apt
both to think and speak worse, then the truth was, of all them that held the
contrary.

The last two were Calvin and Beza, of whom it is needles to say any more
then has already been setforth in their defense in print these two years,
with out reply of any papist. Although God be praised the Church of England
depends neither upon these, not upon other men, further then they were
faithful interpreters of the word of God, according to which our faith is
framed, and not after the decrees of men.

Concerning the death of Martine Bucer, welknown in England, whom the papists
abroad (as they do of the rest) imagine to have died a foul death, our
defender quarrelleth with Master Charke, for belying of Lindan, and charging
him to say, that Lindan avouches it, where he only reports as he heard
of certain worshipful Merchants of Colene. But in truth Master Charke says
not, that Lindan does avouch it, but only, that by uttering his false reports,
he makes Bucers death as horrible and monstrous as may be suspected. Pontacus
the popish historian, utters a like report, as the defender confesses, that
he died a Jew, denying the Messiah. Surius adds another tale, that he
circumcised his son. begotten of I know not what woman. Thus these lying
papists, heap lies upon lies, and when they have neither sufficient author,
nor probability of truth to bear them out, then certain worshipful
Merchants, then a certain grave, and most excellent Lindan Surius Pontacus
learned man, then some of Bucers own disciples are the reports, under which
cloak it is an easy matter to forge any slander and turn over the envy of
it to the man in the moon, in the mean time to burden men with suspicion of
infamy among credulous persons, where no proof of their false accusations can
be demanded and obtained. Touching Bucers inconstancy, The defender out of
Surius, and other of that stamp, gathers many things, perverting to
unsteadfastness of judgment, what soever Bucer did say, laboring to make unity
between Luther and Zuinglius. Charging him also to recant the article of the
baptism of infants to be unnecessary, as he had written before upon the third
Chapter of Saint Mathewes Gospel, and upon the 26. of Matthew to ask pardon of
God, and of the Church, for that he deceived so many with the heresy of
Zuinglius, as he calls it. Both which matters are mere forgeries, for in
those commentaries upon that Gospel which we have seen, there is no such
matter.

Finally, where he affirms, that Calvin differed from Zuinglius (which
Master Fulke in all his writings most impudentlie denies) he (...) 15.
articles of heresies which Andreas Zebedeus Preacher of Nion, and Ioannes
Angelus preacher of Burtin, both Zuinglians, did take upon them to prove
against Calvin at Berna (Calvin being present) upon pain of burning,
whereupon proceeded the decree of those magistrates, in the year 1555. April.
3. that none of their dominions should communicate with Calvin at Geneua.
Pontac. in anno 1555. The truth is, thatby instigation of that heretical
varlet Bolsec, diverse Preachers near unto Geneua, quarreled against Caluins
doctrine of gods eternal predestination, charging him to affirm, that god is
the author of evil, with such like impudent slaun ders, whereupon Calvin by
license of the Senate Beza in vita Caluini.
of Geneua, so purged himself before the Bernates, that one Sabastian and
Bolsec were banished their dominion And Andrew Zebedey not many years after,
albeit he were then the most earnest accuser of Calvin in his death bed at
Nouidune, four miles from Geneua before the chief men of that town, revoked
his errors, detested all those his acts against Calvin, and commanded all
his papers to be burned in his fight. So that whatsoever was offered to be
proved, nothing was proved in deed, to show such dissent between Calvin
and Zuinglius, as Master Fulke might not justly deny any dissent
betweeneCaluine and Zuinglius in the substance ofChristian religion, which was
truly taught by them both: notwithstanding any cauills, that quarrel-pickers,
or fault-finders have devised against Calvin.

The sixth section, entitled, Of the Jesuits doctrine.
MAster Charke being charged to have falsified the Jesuits words, defends
his report by testimony of Donatus Gotuisus, out of whose treatise con cerning
that matter, he professed at the first to rehearse their words. And that it is
lawful for him to charge them upon an other man's report, he brings example
of the Censurer, who reports intolerable slanders of Luther upon the credit
of Lindan, Cocleus, Hosius. This reply the defender thinks not sufficient,
because he brings three witnesses, and Master Charke but one. As though three
false witnesses were of more credit, then one that speaks the truth, after
it is tried and known. For what Luther affirms, his own writings do
declare, so that if a thousand Papists would swear against him, that he has
written otherwise, then he did, his writings being open to al men's view, the
world might condemn them al of falsehood. And if Gotuisus have reported
untruely, the blame is his, and not Master Charkes, who cites his report.
But in the end it shall appear, that Gotuisus has done the Jesuits no wrong,
but either in their own words, or in their meaning, truly delivered the
substance of their doctrine, howsoever they may cavil to cloak the matter,
as the defender here compares Master Charke to a bird taken by the leg for
lying, and seeking every hole to escape.

The first is, that he charge the Censurer with four lies in one sentence:
this the defender calls most ridiculous accusations, and asks if men do not
pity the poor minister, that stoopeth to so miserable helps for his relief:
so he laugheth at his lies, when he can not justify them, and turns the woll
matter to a scoff, when he has not one word to answer for himself. he think
eth not the matter worthty he defense, because the lies are madein no weighty
causes. And yet a man may justly note how looselie he writes, that has no
more regard of truth, the nto rappe out four lies in so short a compass of time
and place. What will he do in matters of greater importance? I need not ask:
for you may see how often he has been taken in most impudent and shameless
assertions, such as makes me often to think that he is no professor of
divinity, which has any grounded knowledge himself, but some cosening
Copesmate chosen out for his impudency and verbositie, to broch such stuff
for unlearned readers, as the note gatherers were ashamed to put forth under
their own names.

But to return to our starting holes, the second says sit defender, is, that
Master Charke and his fellows, draw all matters against the state, as Pasie
the mad man dealt with his Master to defend himself, when he was near a
shrewd turn, for some prankes played with his companions: and here by name
doctor Fulk is charged with this practice, and with parasiticall and palpable
flattery, who answers ^
for himself in the treatise often named, page 44. etc. But in truth Mastet
Charke needed not any coards to draw matters against the state out of your
writings: for you offer frankelie more, then it would be your ease to answer,
if you durst show your face. And truly he said that you charge the
Magistrates and Bishops, as if they were careless, what doctrine is delivered
to the people, when you ask what he and his fellows dare avouch in their
sermons, speeches, and discourses, which they are sure shall never come to
examination.

The third hole is, by laying all his lies upon one Gotuisus: where his
falsehood appears, in that he did not in all his whole discourse so much as
once name, or quote his auther Gotuisus, either in text or margent.
MasterCharke answered before, that the authors name is quoted in the most
books, and so it is to be seen, in the margent over against those words of
the text, out of a treatise concerning this matter I have enterlaced their own
words, as they are to be found in the same book. Where the quotation is
Donati Gotuisi, lib. de fide Jesus and Iesuitarum. This being to be read
ofeuetie child in many hundred copies, of what metrall is his face made of,
that does so confidentlie deny it, because (as he says, believe him ifyou
list) he could never happen upon any copies, that had him quoted. And if
somehad it, he asks why al had not? as though he were ignorant, that a fault,
or an omission escaped in a few copies, may be reformed or added in the rest,
when it is espied. The other surmises that follow, why Master Charke should
not quote his author Gotuisus, are vain, seeing he has quoted him, as also
the other charges of treachery, and malicious meaning, for so much as there is
no proof of them, but his bare word, are as easily denied by us, as they are
by him affirmed. If in the particulars that follow, he be hable to bring any
substantial matter, to confirm any one of them, it may be considered, as
the cause shall require, and occasion be offered.

The 7. section entitled, Of the nature and difinition of sin.
THe first article of the Jesuits doctrine, you say, is this: It is not sin
whatsoever is against the word of God. Here you charge Master Charke with
guilefull dealing, and that you take upon you to show, by an example of a
lawyer that should say, it is not treason whatsoever is against the Prince and
common wealth, which sounds odiouslie, as though nothing committed against
the Prince and common wealth, were treason. But in what asses ears should it
so sound? when every reasonable man must needs understand, that there be
offenses against the Prince and common wealth, as fellonie, misprision of
treason, Mayhem, and such like, which yet are not offenses in so a high a
degree, as treason is. The thing in question you confess, that there is
something that does repugne the law of God, and yet is no sin at all, if it
be without will or consent, as the first motions of concupiscence are. Another
cavil you have, that his authors have not only these words, but somewhat
more, as when they say, Sin is not, whatsoever repugneth the law of God,
but, etc. If Master Chark had denied the rest, it were somewhat that you say:
but seeing you grant they have all that he rehearses, he is without blame,
and whether it be part of a definition, it skilleth not, seeing it is part of
their affirmation. A third cavil is, that he changes the place of the
negative, which in framing propositions alters often the sense: as for
peccatum est non quicquid, he says, non est peccatum quicquid. If Master
Charkes changing in this place did alter the sense, you would have told us of
it: but seeing the sense is all one, the change is no fault. Lastly, for
repugneth the law of God (you say) he puts, it is against the word of God.
But here by your leave you make a piece of a lie, for in his first answer he
says, it repugneth the law of God, which when he repeateth in his reply, it
is against the word of God, it can have none other sense, then before. That
you will admit as much, as the Jesuits in word or sense have uttered, it is as
much as Master Charke requires.

Now to the objection against the Jesuits definition, made by Master Charke:
you say that to prove that sin is no act, he obiecteth that injustice is a
sin, and yet no act. He were a poor sophister that could not epsy your
paultrie in this place. Master Charke does not prove that sin generally
taken is no act: but he affirms that there is some sin which is not an act.
And therefore the Jesuits in their definition have not given the right Genus
or material cause of sin. Now for injustice (to pass over your knauish
example of the execution of Campian and his fellows, so innocent and learned
men, by great injustice) You take upon you to teach Master Charke an high point
of learning, Of the difference between a vice that is an habit, and a sin
that is a singular fact, which perhapps (you ween) he learned not before, and
yet every young sophister in Cambridge knows it well enough. But Master
Charke speaks of general injustice (as his words are plain) which is a
sin in not doing the thing commanded, because it is a manifest transgression
of the law of God, who commands the wholl and every part to be
fullfilled, and is the sin of omission, which you make the second objection.
But every omission, you say, includes an act, which is a gross absurdity,
meaning such an act as is sin. For I may do a good act, while I omit a
better: the omission of a better act is sin, the doing of a good act is no
sin. To tith mint and anise, is a good act of it self, for it was commanded
by God, and must not be omitted, yet was it sin to omit mer cie and justice,
as the words of Christ are plain; this you Mat. 23. 23.
ought to do, and not to omit the other. The examples you bring of one
resolving not to go to Church, Helie determining not to punish his children,
and the watchmen not to sound the trumpet, where the determination and
resolution as the cause, is the principal part of the sin, are foolish. For
there may be omission which is sin, where there is no resolution, and
determination to the contrary, of that which should be done, but negligence,
or forgetfullnes: yea there is omission which is sin, where there is no power
in us to perform that should be done, as in all the reprobate and
unregenerate, and in the regenerate also in part, which neither do, nor can in
this life, love God and their neighbor in such perfection as the law of God
requires. There is omission also through ignorance of Gods law, which is
sin, and deserves stripes, and yet ignorance the cause thereof, is no act,
but the lack of knowledge.

But being overcome by scripture and reason, you fly to the authority of the
ancient fathers, and first you quote Chrysostom. Homil. 16. in Epist. ad Ephesians.
most impudentlie, where by scriptures, reason, and examples, he Luc. 12. 48.
teaches the clean contrary, that omission of duty, is sin though there
be no act to the contrary, as when Christ shall say, I was an hungered, etc.
and concludes: Nihilenim boni facere, hoc ipsum est malum facere: to do no
good, even that is to do evil, or to sin. The like he says. Hom. de
virtut. and vitiis, Satis est igitur mali hoc ipsum, nihil fecisse boni. Even
this is evil enough, to have done noe good. Ambrose hom. 18, has nothing to
the purpose, or if you mean 81. which is translated out of Basils hom. which
you quote next, he has nothing to your purpose, but rather against it. For
upon the words of Christ Math. 25. I was an hungered, and you gave me not to
eat, he writes thus; Neque enim in his verbis, qui aliena inuasit arguitur,
sed is qui non communiter vsus est iis que habuit, condemnatur. For in these
words he is not reproved which has laid bold upon other men's goods, but he
which has not communicated those things which he had, is condem ned. Basills
words in Greek are (...). For the extorcioner is not Hom. in illud. Luce.
destruem horrea.
there accused, but he that does not communicate is condemned.

Last of all you charge us with that definition of Saint Augustine contra
Faust. lib. 22. cap. 27. Peccatum est factum, vel, etc. Sin is something
done, or said, or coueted against the eternal law. But if this were a perfect
definition, what needed the Jesuits to frame another, according to whose
definition, this of Saint Augustine is larger then the word defined, and in
respect of the sin of omission, it is streighter then the term of sin: yet
it served Saint Augustine for his purpose in hand, concerning the facts of the
Patriarchs, mentioned in the scripture, which were to be praised, and which to
be dispraised. As for Ambrose in the place by you quoted, lib. de paradiso,
cap. 8. has another definition, then Augustine, and a more perfect, taken out
of Saint John. Quidest enim peccatum (says he) nisi praeuaricatio legis
diuinae, and coelestium inobedientia praeceptorum. For what is sin, but the
transgression of the law of God, and a disobedience of the heavenly
commandments? This definition of Ambrose is perfect, and makes flatly
against you: for he that does not that which god commands, sins, although
in the mean time, he do some other thing that is good, or not evil, yea
although he sleep and do nothing.

Where Master Charke does distinguish the creatures and ordinances of God,
which are good, from the: corruption, and preuarication that is in them, which
is evil, you pick a fond quarrel to him and make him to say, that devils
and evil men do not repugne against the law of God, and that they do not
sin properly: Which is false, for he says no such thing: but that evil
men, as they are the creatures of God, are not against the law, but the evil
in men, and so of the rest: yet evil men do sin properly, and repugne
against the law of God, by the evil that is in them: as in your own example,
the Physician cures his patient, not as he is a man, but as he is a Physician,
and by knowledge of Physic, which is in him. And as for the repugnance of
contrariety, whereof the question is in the definition of sin, it is not in
the creature of god, but the corruption of that good crearure. A black horse
is not contrary to the color of white, but the color of black; so not an
evil man, but sin of an evil man is contrary to the justice of Gods law: So a
Phitisian drives away an ague, yet aPhisitian is not contrary to an ague, but
thevertue of the medicine, which he ministers. When every child may
understand your cauilling, it is no marvel, though you charge M. Chark with
such absurdity, and ignorance, yea with heresy: and that out of Augustine,
Tom. 8. fol. 665. not telling us of what edition you speak, so that it were
hard to find (if it were worth the search) that which you talk of: but you
are to be pardoned, for your note was imperfect, and did not express in what
homely, upon what Psalm.

The second fault of the Jesuits definition, is, that they call it an humane
or reasonable action, Master Charke would rather say, a beastly or
unreasonable action, of a man endued with reason. Here you take on, and ask
whether Master Charke be so unlearned in all foundation of Philosophy? And
Aristotle, and Saint Augustine are called to witness, that sin proceeds from
the mind endued with reason: and what other thing I beseech you, does Master
Charke say? his words are plain, as I have set them down, and the same that
you cite Tom. 6. defide. cont. Man. c. (...). 9. and 10.
out of Augustine. Now if you will defend, that sin is an action agreeable to
right reason, because it proceeds from a reasonable man, he gives you a
weapon to play with all against your next encounter, otherwise he has better
reformed the words of your definition, the you have either wit, or grace to
understand. It has. a better color that you object, of the moral works of
justice, temperance, and other virtues in the gentiles, which M. Chark will
acknowledge to be sin, and yet they seem to be agreeable to right reason; and
so they are in part, so far forth as they be directed by that light, which is
left in men, proceeding fro the eternal word of god: but in so much as that
light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, no acceptable
work to God can be brought forth therebie. Yea for so much as all the moral
works of the gentiles, respected not the right end of obedience, and glory
of God, whom they knew not, their wholl actions were Psa. 109. 7. Pro. 15. 8.
therebie vitiated, and corrupted, so that they may justly be called sin.
Even as prayer is turned into sin, and the sacrifice of the ungodly is
abomination to the Lord. And M. Charke faith truly, whatsoever is not of
faith is sin, be it reasonable as you speak, or against reason. And in deed
against right reason it is, that the gentiles in their moral works, sought
not to obey God according to his law, and therefore even their best works of
justice and temperance were sin. But this is so iumpe (you say) that an
horse might be a sinner, for that his actions proceed not of faith. In deed if
Saint Paul had spoken of the actions of brute beasts, as your Saint Francis
(witness your Legend) did preach to brute beasts, you had iumped near the
matter: but when none but an ass would understand Saint Paul to speak of any
other actions, then such as proceed from men, you iumpe as near as Germans
lips, that were nine mile a sunder. But you will answer to Saint Paul with
S. Ambrose, that he means whoesoeuer does a thing against that, which faith
prescribes, that is against a man's own conscience, and judgment, he sins.
The words of S. Ambrose are these. Recte peccatum appellat quod aliter in ep.
ad Rom cap. 14.
fit quam probatum est. He does rightly call that sin which is done
otherwise then is allowed. Now this allowance or approbation, is not referred
to every man's corrupt conscience, or ignorant judgment as you expound it, but
is measured by faith, which is a certain knowledge and persuasion, grounded
upon the word of God, as Saint Paul shows in the 14. verse of the 14. Chap.
I know and am persuaded by our Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean of it
self: which faith when the Gentiles had not in their works, their works were
sin. And therefore you abuse S. Ambrose by your gloss, to restreine the
prescription of faith only to that which a man does against his conscience
and judgment.

But Saint Augustine (you say) proves at large against Master Charke, that
the moral good works of infidels were not sin. lib. de spiritu and litera,
cap. 26. 27. 28. In truth S. Augustine though he call such works justice,
liberality, wrought by infidels, as we do commonly, good works, yet his
judgment is none other, then I have before expressed, and that he declares in
the latter end of the 27. Chapter, for in the 26. he has nothing sounding
that wase. Speaking of infidels. Quaedam tamen fact a vel legimus, vel nouimus,
vel audimus, quae secundum iusticiae regulam non solum vituper are non
possumus, verumetiam merito recteque laudamus: quanquam si discutiatur quo fine
fiant, vix iuueniuntur quae insticiae debitam laudem defensionemue mereantur.
Yet some deeds we either read, or know, or hear of, which according to the
rule of righteousness, we cannot, not only dispraise, but also we do worthily
and rightly praise them, although if it be discussed with what end they are
done, they are scarslie found, which deserve the praise or defense dew to
righteousness. But most cleerelie his judgment is for Master Charke against you
(sir defender) as well for the allegation of the text, Romans 14. where you
scornfullie iumped in your sinful horse, as for the matter in question, that
the moral works of Gentiles are sin before God. Contra Iulianum Pelagianum
lib. 4. cap. 3. toward the end in these words. Si Gentilis inquis, nudum
operuerit, numquid quia non est ex fide peccatum est? prorsus: in quantum non
ex fide, peccatum est: non quia per se ipsum factu^, quod est nudum operire,
peccatum est: sed de tali opere non in domino gloriari, solus impius negat esse
peccatum. If an heathen man (say thou) do cloth the naked, is it sin,
because it is not of faith? yea, out of doubt, in as much as it is not of
faith, it is sin. Not because the deed it self, which is to cloth the
naked, is sin, but not to rejoice in the Lord of such a work, none but an
ungodly man will deny to be sin. This and much more to this effect, has
Saint Augustine in that place against the Pelagians, which with the papists
denied that such works of the infidels were sin. But albeit Saint Augustine
be directly against you, yet Saint Jerome (you think) may help you in
Ezechiell: cap. 29. who says thus. Caeterum ex eo quod Nabuchodonoser
mercedem accepit boni operis, intelligimus etiam ethnicos, si quid boni
fecerint, non absque mercede Dei iudicio praeteriri. But of this that
Nabuchodonvser receuied arewarde of good works, we understand that even the
gentiles, if they have done any goood thing, are not passed over without
reward by the judgment of God. To this I answer, that God rewards virtue
in the gentiles, it proves not their moral works are not sin, in as much
as they are not done of faith, as S. Augustine at large teaches in both the
books and places last cited. For those good facts are of the relics of Gods
image, not altogether blotted out, which God does reward as his own work in
them: but in as much as they do not those good deeds well, they are sin in
the doers, as Saint Augustine says: and therefore neither Saint Augustine,
nor Saint Jerome, are against Master Charke in this cause.

The third fault of your definition Master Chark says is, that you restrain
sin only to voluntary action. Against which you oppose Saint Augustine in
many quotations, where he repeateth these words so often, Sin is an evil so
voluntary, as it can be by no means sin, except it be voluntary. But what
his judgment was of those words, appears best in his retractations which
you quote lib. 1. cap. 13. and 15. In the former he says, patest videri falsa
haec definitio, sed si diligenter discutiaiur, inuenieiur esse verissima.
Peccatum quippe illud intelligendum est, quod tantummodo peccatum est, non quod
est etiam paena peccati, etc. This difinition may seem to be false, but if it
be diligently discussed, it shall be found to be most true. For that sin is
to be understood therein, which is only sin, and not also the punishment of
sin, as I have showed before, when I rehearsed certain things out of my
third book of free will. Although even those sins, which not unworthily are
called sins not voluntary, because they are committed either by them which
know not, or which are compelled, can not be committed altogether without the
will, because even he which sins of ignorance, sins willingly, when he
thinks that to be done, which ought not to be done. And he which does not
those things which he will, the flesh lusting against the spirit, Gal. 5.
lusts truly unwillingly, and there in does not what he will: but if he be
overcome, he consents to concupiscence willingly, and therein does not what
he will, being free from Justice, and a servant of sin. And that which in
children is called original sin, when as yet they use not the free choice of
will, is not absurdlie called also voluntary, because being drawn from the
evil will of the first man, it is made as it were coming by inheritance. The
same in effect he says C. 15. answering that he had set down, de duabus
animabus c. 14. Propterea vera est, etc. That definition is true for this
cause, for that, that sin is defined which is only sin, and not that
sin which is a punishment of sin. Again he says. sine voluntate nullum
esse petcatum, sieve in opere, sieve in origin: that there is no sin without
will, either in the work, or in the beginning. By which sayings Saint
Augustines judgment is plain, that in the particular work, there are sins,
that are not voluntary; as those that come of ignorance, or compulsion, or as
concupiscence and original infection, yet al these may be called voluntary in
respect of the first man's offense, in whom was freedom of will, which Master
Chark grants, and therefore that childish insultation needed not, but to
show your pride in contempt of others, as though al learning had been bred
with you, and were like to die, if you did not plant it in us. Saint Augustine
therefore is clear, that that sin which is a punishment of sin, is not
voluntary, and that his definition (as he calls it) was only of sin,
which has none other consideration, but as sin: his disputation being
against the Manichees, which derived sin from an evil God, and not from the
free will of man, or devil, first created good, by the only good God. But
you have scripture to prove every act or omission which is sin to be
voluntary: because Christ him self says, that those things which do defile a
man, do come from the heart, as though nothing might come from that
corruptroote, the heart of man, which is not voluntary. You your self affirm,
that evil thoughts are not voluntary, which he says come from the heart. Mat.
15. 19.

Now concerning the objection of original sin, there has been enough said
out of Saint Augustine concer ning the other objection of manslaughter, done
without consent of will, which you affirm to be innocence, God defend every
good Christian from such innocence. At least wise you might have made such a
fact committed by error, a voluntary sin, by the first man's sin, that was
of free will, which if it had not been, no man should have erred in that case,
or any other. But the text (you tell us) calls him an innocent man,
liberabitur innocens, etc, the innocent shall be delivered from the hand of the
revenger So great a Rabbin as you would seem to be, by your quotations out of
Rabbi Isaac, Rabbi Mose, and Rabbi Leui, should not be ignorant, that in the
hebrew text the word is harotzeach, that is the killer, and not the innocent,
which yet is adjudged to escape punishment Number. 35. 25.
of death, by the politic law, because in respect of man's judgment, he has
not offended: for which cause also Deuteronomy. 19. his blood is called innocent. Yet
his flying to the city of refuge, and imprisonment there, until the death of
the high priest, argues as Master Charke says, that there is something in his
fact or the error, by which he committed the fact that has need of forgiveness
by Christ, where of the high Priest was a figure. Neither was the city of
refuge appointed only for the trial of the slaughter, whether it were
willingly or unwillingly committed (as you say) but also for a kind of
punishment, and detestation of manslaughter; so that if the sleaer were found
out of the City, before the death of the high Priest, the auenger of blood
might kill him, and not be charged with his blood, Where you refuse the
mystery of Christ's death in the death Number. 35. 27
of the high Priest, and fly to the fantasies of the Jews, you declare that
you care not what you bring, so you may obtain your purpose. But Chri stian
divines as Cyrillus, Maximus, and others, of the death of the high priest in
that place, gather deliverance by the death of Christ. Saint Ambrose also is
Cvrill. and aliorum collect. ex deuteronomy. cap. 15. de fuga Jeculi. cap. 2.
clear, that the high Priest in this place, signifies Jesus Christ, and
confuteth the politic reasons, by you rehearsed, out of R. Mose, and R. Leui,
for that in causis paribus there was impar euentus, In equal causes unequal
end. For the high Priest might die (says he) the next day after the manslaier
has taken his refuge. Again he adds, that Christ is exors omnium
voluntariorum and accidentium delictorum: void of all offenses voluntary and
chaunceable, by which he acknowledges unwilling manslaughter to be an offense.
Saint Jerome also, Dialog. aduers. Pel. lib. 1. is plain in that wholl case
and sin of ignorance, and that he which is fled to the city, must tarry
until the high Priest die, that is until he be redeemed by the blood of our
Savior. Beda also upon this place by his allegory, shows how in deuteronomy. c. 15
he thought of that kind of sin. Also Theodoretus in lib. Number. quaest. 51.
declares both the mystery of the high Priests death, and shows, that such
unwilling manslaughter is sin. Cur ad obitum Pontificis praescribet
eireditum, qui nolens interfecit? Qnia (...) Pontificis secundum ordinem
Melchisedech, erat humani peccati solutio. Whte until the death of the high
Priest, does he prescribereturne unto him, which has slain a man
unwillingly? Because the death of the high Priest after the order of
Melchisedech, was the loosing of the sin of man: and so forth to the same
effect. And if all the politic reasons be granted, of the man's tarying until
the high Priest die, yet the mystery of Christ's death, is not thereby taken
away, whoose blood cleanses us from all sin voluntary, or vnuoluntarie.

The last fault of the definition is, that the Jesuits acknowledge not the
sin of ignorance: you answer, they do, of that ignorance, whereof a man
himself is the cause, but not of that ignorance, which the schoolmen call
invincible, which is not in the doers power to avoid, nor he fell into it, by
his own defaulte as in the example of the Queens subject, being in his
Princes affairs in India, and commanded by proclamation in Westminster to
appear there, at a certain day: in which cause his absence is excused by
invincible ignorance. This case granted between the Prince and his subject,
proves not that ignorance excuses before God, because there is not the like
reason: seeing no such ignorance, whereby a man should transgress the law of
God, is in man, but by voluntary and witting transgression of the first man,
and his own negligence which makes his fact sinful, because he is cause of
his ignorance by negligence, or in the sin of Adam, in whom you confess
that all men sinned. At least wise if original sin be voluntary, by the
sin of Adam, so also is the transgression of gods law, in these cases of
invincible ignorance, wittinglie committed by the same sin of Adam.
Augustine, whom you quote for De libet. arb. lib. 3. cap. 22.
your purpose, speaks of naturallignorance, and infirmity, which is in
insants, not of that whereby men fall into error, and so transgress Gods law.
For that he calls penal ignorance and difficulty, which is justly laid
upon them that neglected to seek knowledge, and is sinful, therefore cannot
excuse sin. Chrysostom, whom you quote likewise, is manifestly against you.
his words are these. Quodsi ea ignoraueris quae scriri non possunt, praeter
culpam eris: sivero quae scitu and In epist. ad Romans hom. 26
possibilia sunt, and facilia, extremas poenas merito dabis. If thou be
ignorant of those things which are not possible to beknowne, thoushalt be
blamles: but if they be possible, and easy to be known, thou shall worthelie
suffer extreme punishment. As in the cases of Abimelech with Abraham's wife,
and Jacob with Lea, who if they had made diligent Genesis 20. Genesis 29.
inquiry, needed not to have been deceived through ignorance. Neither does
God excuse Abimelech from sin altogether, as you say, albeit he pardoned his
ignorance, and kept him from the fact of adultery, and acknowledged his mind
to have been free from the purpose of Adultery. For the punishmeut laid upon
him, argues what he deserved by his over hasty purpose of marriage with Sara,
and Abimelech confesses that Abraham had brought upon him and his Kingdom a
great sin. Also when God says to him, I have kept thee thatthou should
not sin against me, he declares plainly, that if Abimelech had lien with
Sara, upon that ignorance, he had sinned against God. But of Iacobslying with
Lea, in stead of Rachell, you move a greater contention, and allege Saint
Augustine in Cont. Faust. lib. 2. cap. 47. 49. 50. 51. 52
his defense. But whosoever gave you your notes, through your negligence in not
reading the places your self, made you err through ignorance. For S.
Augustine does notin all those Chapters once touch the question, whether Jacob
sinned, in that he did not regard what woman was laid in his bed, by which
negligence, as Master Charke says, he might have committed most horribleincest
with his mother, aunt or daughter. Only he defends his Polygamie, by the
custom of that time, and the contention of his wives for their lodgeing with
him, and last of all, allegorizeth upon the wholl story, drawing the error of
Jacob and all the rest to a mystery. Nor yet de ciuit: dei lib. 16. c. 38.
does he defend his negligence, rehearsing only, how he came to have four
wives, when he went into Mesopotamia for one only, adding that because he had
lain with Lea unwittingly, he did not put her away, lest he might be thought
to have mocked her. Neither has Justinius Martyr lib. de verit. Christ. rel.
any defense of Jacobs innocence, or excuse of his negligence in this fact,
but shows only what Dyal. cum Tiyobon. in Genesis quest. 84.
mystery may be gathered of his marriages, as Saint Augustine does. Finally
Theodores your last ancient witness, agreeing with the rest, says that Jacob
betrothed only Rachell, and beside the purpose of his will, had to do with
Lea. But immediately as soon as he perceived the deceit, he took it heavily
and complained to his father in law. what word of defense, or excuse of his
fact committed through ignorance and negligence, have you in this saying? yet
you conclude after your vaunting mannner. And what one word can Master Chark
now peep against all this?

O you papists, that with sincerity of Religion, have not cast of all humane
honesty, do you not, blush at the impudent ignorance, of this your defender?
And yet he is not ashamed to gather Master Charks absurd positions, not one
according to his meaning, and but one only agreeable to his words. First
that sin is no action, where he holds that all sin, as the sin of
omission, is no action. Secondly, that no evil men do sin, but the evil
in men: which he says not, but that man, as he is the creature of God, is not
against the law, but the evil in man. Thirdly, that sin is not voluntary,
which he says not generally, but of some sin, speakeing properly. Forthlie,
that sin, is no humane or reasonable action. which he says, rather to be a
beastly and unreasonable action of a man endued with reason. Fiftlie, that it
requires neither will nor knowledge in the doer. where he says, that the
transgression of Gods law is sin, in some case and sort, which is without the
will and knowledge of the doer. Last of all, that fools, and mad men may as
properly commit sin as others: but this he says not at al, but that the
infirmites of folly and madness shall not excuse sin, and that if a mad man,
or a fool kill a man (in the Censurcrs judgment) it is properly no sin.
Whereof you may infer, that it is sin properly, but not that it is as
properly sin, as in others. But if mad men and fools could not commit
sin properly, why are they punished for sin? To conclude where you say,
that Master Charke rejects Saint Augustine about the definition of sin, it
is false. For these are his words. Howsoever you allege Austen to approve
your definition, it is no way so large, as sin, and iherefore a most
unlearned definition. These words of his declare, that he rejects not
Augustine in this matter, but your false and fraudulent allegation of him,
which is manifestly showed before, by Augustines sound judgment, in his
retractions.

The eight section, Of sin.
MAster Chark having said out of the definition of Saint John, which also Saint
Ambrose does use, as I have showed before, that all transgression of the law
is sin, was charged by the Censurer with transposition, because the Apostles
words lie thus in the text, Sin is transgression 1. Ioh. 3. 4.
of the law. Master Charke defends himself, alleging that these words
sin, and the transgression of the law, are as the definition, and the thing
defined, which are mutuallie verified the one of the other. The defender
brings nothing to prove, that this is no definition, but that which he has
said in the section before, which is overthrown. Only he quarrelleth, that
Master Charke said, the Gospel is as general, as the power of God to
salvation, whereas Christ also is called the power 1. Cor. 1. 24.
of God to salvation. As though the Gospel did not include Christ. For when it
is said, the Gospel is the power of God to salvation, you must understand, the
general matter, namely the doctrine or the preaching. That transposition of
words is sometimes lawful, M. Charke shows by an example, God is a spirit,
where the words lie in the text, a spirit is God. The defender wrangleth,
that it is not always lawful, which shall be granted unto him, without
controversy. That in this question it is not lawful, he has nothing to prove
but a beggarly demand of that in question, that transgression of Gods law is
larger then sin. Where Master Chark alleges out of 1. John. 5. 17. that
every iniquity is sin, he makes no small ado, because the greek word in
that text is (...), in the other (...),, which if they be not all one in sense,
let him enter an action against the vulgar interpreter, which in both places
translateth iniquitas. Yea, let him quarrel with Saint Augustine, 1. Ioh 3. 4.
Tr. 4.
which upon the place in question, writes thus. Nemo enim dicat, aliud est
peccatum, atque aliud iniquitas: nemo dicat ego peccator homo sum, sed iniquus
non sum: omnis qui facit peccatum, and iniquitatem facit, Peccatum iniquitas
est. quid ergo faciemus de peccatis nostris and iniquitatibus? Let no man say,
sin is one thing, iniquity is an other thing: let no man say, I am a sinful
man, but I am not unjust: every one that commits sin, does commit iniquity:
for sin is iniquity: what then shall we do with our sins, and iniquities,
etc? You see here that S. Augustine accounts sin and iniquity or injustice
to be all one. So does he in 1. John. Tr. 5. And where the Apostle uses the
word (...), which is vnrighteuosnes, what say you? means he general
injustice, or special? If he mean general, as you must needs say for shame,
then it is as large as sin, and it is manifest, that the Apostle uses the
word Justice, as contrary to sin, therefore justice must needs be the same
that sin. If you can make a diversity between general iniquity, and general
injustice, you are wiser then the vulgar interpreter, specially if he speak
in this latter place of great sins only, as you say, whereas iniquity in
the former place, may signify such small transgression, as is no sin at all.
Verelie Oecumenius is against you, and says, Simpliciter tanquam a genere
peccati facit (...), and (...), omnis iniquitas peccatum est, hoc est, sieve sit
ad mortem, sieve non. He makes a plain division of sin, as it were from the
general, and says, all inquitie is sin, that is, whether it be unto death,
or not. And upon 1. (...) 3. he says. Sciendum autem quod (...), etc. We must
know that sin is a falling from that which is good, (...) or (...) is an
offense against the law: and both of them has, this beginning, namely sin,
the (...) from that which is good, iniquity, to do against the law that
(...). And they agree the one with the other, and are about the same thing. For
he which sins, erreth from the mark which is according to nature, and in
nature is self. For the scope or mark (...) nature, is to live according to
reason, far from unreasonableness. Likewise he that does (...), offends
about the law given in nature, being affected intemperatelie. Recte ergo
discipulus domini (...), inidem (...). Therefore the disciple of our Lord,
has rightly used the one for the other. Here iniquity is as large as sin.
Against this what have you to say? Aristotell in praedicam. qual. For which I
send you to Aristotell. Eth. lib. 5. c. 1. But (...) every iniquity is not
sin, you have Saint Augustine lib. 2. cont. Julian cap. 5. When you can set
down his words, you shall receive an answer; in the mean time as you say,
Master Charke reserved a sure card for the end. I may think you have
prepared this as a bumme card to wine the game. That S. Auustine says,
concupiscence in the regenerate is not sin, I grant, so you will confess
that he says also, that it is sin. When he says, it is not sin he means
either because the guilt is forgiven (...) because it is not actual sin, as
Saint James does distinguish sin from concupiscence. But that it is of it
self sin, and damnable, if it be not remitted, he affirms cont. Iul. Pel.
lib. 5. c. 3. and lib. 6. cap. 5. he says it is evil always, and cap. 3. he
condemns it as the Pelagians heresy that (...), it is not to be blamed.

Where Master Charke charge you with alteration of the text, when you
translate, omnis qui facit peccatum, every one that sins, where you should
say, every one that does sin, you make sport afteryour manner, and ask
what difference, whether a man say, your wife spinneth, or your wife does
spin? where you show your self to be a very good Grammarian, that can make no
difference in our tongue, between the sign of the active mode, does, and the
Greek word (...), and think that (...) differs nothing in vehemence from
(...), which M. Chark told you, you should have translated, to express the
force of the phrase in our tongue, every one that commits sin. But this
you count small game, and I would it were the greatest that you have committed
in your censure. You cannot afford M. Chark to say, that he knows he serves
the Lord, because he has not that knowledge by Aristotle's demonstrations (you
are sure) which yet are the only means of certain science properly. So
that the doctrine of the scriptures, and the testimonies of the holy ghost,
are no means of certain science properly. Yet without them and Aristotle's
demonstrations also, you are sure, that Master Charke has no certain
knowledge, that he serves the Lord. Or if you suppose you can gather your
surenes (...) Aristotelicall demonstrations, it may please you to think, that
Master Charke may by the same kind of demonstrations gather the certainty of
his knowledge, having the mayor in the holy scriptures, and the testimony of
his conscience, and of the holy spirit, for the minor and conclusion. The
examples you object, of Luther and Bucer altering their opinions, are not like
the matter in question. For as men may (...), so may they be deceived in their
opinion of (...) God: yet it follows not, that no man may be certain that
he serves God truly. Where you say that Luther had been a protestant many
years, when he said he did know there was a purgatory, it is false; sor at
the same time he acknowledged the Popes authority, (...) humano, by the law
of men, as in the time of the Canstans Council, it was the opinion of many
Papists.

The ninth section, entitled, Of Concupiscence. Art. 2.
THe doctrine of the Jesuits as Gotuisus reports is, that Concupiscence
remaining in the regenerate, although it be against the law of God, yet is it
not (...) properly in it self, or of his own nature. Here you will not
accept the excuse which lays the addition of these words, although it be
against the law of God, upon (...), because Master Charke might have seen them
wanting in Canisius. As though he was bound to examine the report of Gotuisus,
which he promises to rehearse by Canisius. But Master Charke tells you, the
excuse is needeles, because those words must of aecessity be understood. For
the question isof none other concupiscence, but that which is against the law.
Secondly you slander him, when you say he does assure his Reader, that you
do under hand grant concupiscence to be some kind of sin, when you deny
it to be mortal sins for his sentence is disjunctive: namely, either you
grant, etc. or else you load, and disguise your sentence. with waste words,
which is true: for to what purpose should you deny that to be deadly sin,
which you do not acknowledge to be any sin: as if one should say, an Ass
is not a wise man, he should speak fondly, seeing an Ass is no man. That
concupiscence by Saint Paul is called sin improperly, as S. Augustine says,
because it is the cause of sin, Master Charke denies, yet without any
malepertnes (as you charge him) or contumely never so little unto Saint
Augustine, but with that liberty which he himself grants to all men, that
shall read or examine his writings: Neither is Saint Augustines judgment
always the exposition of the primitive Church, when both he diffenteth from
others, and from himself also, now and then.

But now let us see, how you cavil at Master Charkes exposition of Saint Paul
to the Romans, where he (...). 7.
calls concupiscence sin. First he says, though the Law stirrcth us to
sin, yet is it no sin: and that makes for you, for so you may conclude of
concupiscence. But then your conclusion shall be false, and your reasoning
weaker, then that you reprehend in Master Charke, as weak reasoning, where he
says: If the law that is holy do come in question of sin, for that it
provoke our corrupt nature to sin, how much more concupiscence, which is
unclean of it self? This proves nothing (say you) but from the place, a
disparatis, where children and distracted men take their arguments. I will
enter no logical disputation with you, of what force the argument a disparatis
is, if it be rightly used: but I marvel you could not see, the argument a
comparatis, from the less to the more. If the holy law may come in question
of sin, much more the unclean lust. But you would have men think, that
Master Charke meant by this comparison to conclude, that lust is properly
sin, whereas he only prepares a way to that conclusion, by this
comparison. But the antecedent (you say) is false, that the law stirs us to
sin, or the law provoke our corrupt nature to sin. Which Master Charke
says not absolutely, but that through our rebellion, the law giving no
occasion, but the occasion being altogether taken by our corruption rebelling
against the commandment. You reply, that the law does no way stir to
sin, but by discovering, as a glass does spots, and that Saint Paul has
no such meaning, as Master Charke says. But the text is too plain to be
denied, That sin taking occasion through the commandment, has wrought in
me all concupiscence, the commandment coming, sin revived. Sin Romans 7.
8. 9. 10. 13.
taking occasion thorough the commandment has deceived me, etc. that sin
might be made exceedingly sinful. Now to prove that Saint Paul means
voluntary concupiscence, whereunto consent or delectation is yielded, where he
says, he had not known concupiscence, if the law had not said, thou shall
not lust: you cite S. Augustine lib. 1. de nupt. and concup. cap. 29. where he
has the clean contrary judgment. Multum boni facit, qui facit quod scriptum
est, post concupiscentias tuas non eas, sed non perficit, quia non implet quod
scriptum est, Non concupisces. He does much good, which does that which is
written, go not after thy lusts, but he makes not his good perfect, because
he fulfilleth not that which is written, Thou shall not lust. These words and
the wholl Chapter proves that Saint Augustine understands the tenth
commandment of concupiscence, whereunto no consent is added. Again, lib. de
spir. and lit. cap. vltimo, he says, that this commandment, Thou shall not
lust, pertains to the life to come, because no man can fulfill it in this
life: but the other, Go not after thy lusts, pertains to this life, because
men may restreine, by Gods grace, consent and delectation in lust. Your third
quotation is, lib. 19. Cont. Faustum, cap. 7, where Saint Augustine says no
more for you, then in the rest, saving that he says. That for as much as it is
hard for us to fulfill in every respect, that which is written in the law,
thou shall not lust, Christ being made a priest, by the sacrifice of his
flesh obteineth pardon for us, even so fulfilling the law, that by his
perfection might be recovered that, which by our infirmity we could not. In
which saying, except you will cavil upon the term of difficulty, which in
other places he makes a flat impossibility, there is no shadow for your
assertion. In your fourth quotation, Cont. 2. ep. Petil. lib. 3. cap. 7. or in
steed of Petil. as I guess, you would say Pelagianorum, is nothing sounding
to the matter, but rather the contrary; that perfection cannot be in this
life, because there cannot be perfect justice or fulfilling of the law. Where
fore I can but wonder at your impudency in these quotations. And yet as though
you had found a great (...), you say it is most worthy of laughter which
Master Charke for filling up of a page, discourses of S. Paul's estate, when he
says, Paul compares his estate before his knowledge of the tenth
commandment with his state afterward, etc. Verelie the Greek proverb has
place in you (...), etc. A fool lauheth when there is nothing worthy of
laughter. You ask how he could be ignorant of that commandment, considering
his education, and yet be able to (...) other sins by the light of natural
reason. But Master Charke says he knew other sins by the law, and light of
nature. He knew also by his bringing up that it was written in the law, thou
shall not lust, but he understood it not otherwise, then the Pharisees did,
which thought they were able to keep the law. But after he learned what
original sin, and the lust thereof proceeding was, he sound himself
condened by the tenth commandment, which he could not do by the other nine,
from which it is perfectly distinct, nor by the light of reason: for the
philosophers could never atteine to understand that sin. But concupiscence
with consent, and delectation, they could perceive to be vicious, and sinful.
So that your sardonicall laughter may be staide and turned to weeping, if (...)
had grace to know that commandment, as Saint Paul had, whereof it appears
you are as ignorant, as euerhe was.

Concerning the similitude of the latin tongue, whereof the tongue is only
an isntrumental cause, as it answers not the effect of original sin, so
being a contention of terms, I will not stand upon it. Again, I confess it
is not necessary, that every effect of original sin should be sin in the
regenerate, as hunger, sickness, etc. but original sin is not so the
efficient of these, as of actual sins: for the justice of God, is the good,
proper, and principal next efficient of those punishments, sin is the cause
moving the justice of God to punish: but original sin is the immediate, evil,
and material cause of actual sin. That the guilt of original sin is takenaway
from theregenerate, in and by baptism, we do not deny: yet remains the sin
after baptism, though it be not impured as sin unto condemnation in the
children of God. That Christ is called sin, because i. e is a sacrifice to
take away sin, may prove, as you say, that something is figuratiuelie
called sin, which properly is no sin. But that concupiscence should as
improperly be called sin, you can not prove, because it is a matter and
increaser of sin. Your false quotation Romans 8. where Christ is called sin,
you would justify by the 3. verse, where there is no such matter, but that God
sent Christ in the similitude of sinful flesh, and of sin condemned sin in
the flesh. But if the text will not serve, you send us to the commentaries,
which can not alter the text, howsoever some do compare this place with that of
2. Cor. 5. 21. and other some do take it otherwise.

Touching the ancient Fathers (...) in the Censure to testify, that
concupiscence is not sin in the regenerat, if consent be not yealed, etc. you
say, he has passed over Cyprian, and Pacacius, without any word unto him.
The cause is, for that they say nothing to him, in the matter controuersed
beteweene him and you. For Cyprian, in both the places shows, that baptism
by the spirit of God, lib. 2. ep. (...) de latio (...)
purges a man and washes him clean from all spots of sin. Which Master
Charke confesses, as concerning the guilt, because concupiscence, though it
remain, is not imputed for sin in the regenerated. But the question is, what
concupiscence of it self deserves, (...) in the regenerated, if it were
imputed by Gods justice, as it is forgiven by his grace. Albeit he be not bound
to take all that Cyprian writes for Gospel, especially in that Sermon de
ablutione pedum, if it be Cypriant. As for Pacianus, he says not all so much.
If you have any words in the Fathers, that may enforce your meaning, set
them down plainly, and mock us no longer with dumme questiones. Ambrose, and
Clemens Alexandrinus (as Master Charke tells you) have not your words, nor
sense: for whatsoever they say of the pureness of them, that are regenerated,
we acknowledge with them, in respect of the remission of their sins, not
that the regenerated are void of al sin, or natural corruption, more then
they be void of infirmity and mortality.

Where Clemens says, that concupiseence alone is adultrie, you labor in vain
to add, consent, for the word (...) alone does exclude what soever you can
add unto it. Where you cavil that he exhorts the Gentiles to resist these
motions of concupiscence, and would prove thereby, that they are not the first
motions, which are unavoidable, it is a tale: for he exhorts the Gentiles to
Christianity, where they should find remission of all sins, and all
honnstie oflife. Gregory Nazianzen, has an oration, or homily entitled of
holy baptism, but not de S. Iana, as your Censure had in the first edition:
and in that oration he proves not your purpose, teaching only, that we are
consecrated, or made perfect by baptism, which is true in respect of
sanctification, and remission of sins, but proves not that concupiscence,
which you confess to be an evil thing, remaining in the regenerate, is
changed in nature to be no sin, although it be forgiven and shall not be
imputed, to the elect. For the wrong quoting of Augustine do (...). and
concupiscent. You were best quarrel with your printer: for Master Charke has
instlie charged your book with error, in the first edition, whereunto he
answered, which you will not understand, but charge him with ignorance,
quarreling, and impudency, whereas your quotation was twice, lib. de nupt. and
concupiscent. And not, as you say now, lib. 1. de nupt. and concupiscent. You
with that you were with Master Charke, to see if he would blush at his
ignorance by you discovered, and call back your wish, for fear of purseuants.
But I look not at all, that your brazen face should blush, either at so small
a fault, or at so false a defense thereof, which are not ashamed of a great
number of more wrong, and impudent quotationes, then that is, for which though
no purseuantes shall attach you, yet the reproach of them shall pursue you, to
the utter confusion of your proud and arrogant Censure, and more impudent, and
unlearned defense. Finally, Ambrose lib. 1. de voc. gent. c. 5. has not one
word to prove that concupiscence in the regenerate is no sin of it self.

But where Master Charke rehearses not the very words, but the meaning of
Saint Augustine, expounding himself, in what sense he says, that
concupiscence is not sin, you set abroad all the sails of your railing, and
venomous tongue and pen against him. Saint Augustines words are, dimitti
concupiscentiam carnis Lib. 1. de nupt. and conc. cap. 25.
in baptismo, non vt non sit, sed vt in peccatum non imputetur. Quamuis autem
reatu suo iam soluto, manet tamen, donec sanetur omnis infirmitas nostra,
proficiente renouatione interioris hominis, de die in diem, cum exterior
induerit incorruptionem: non enim substantialiter manet, sicut aliquod corpus,
aut spiritus, sed affectio est quaedam malae qualitatis sicut languor.
Concupiscence of the flesh is remitted in baptism, not so that it is not, but
so that it is not imputed to sin. And albeit the guilt thereof be loosed, yet
it remains, until al our infirmity behealed, the renewing of the inward man
profiting from day to day, when the outward man shall have put on
incorruption, for it remains not substantiallie, as a body or a spirit, but
it is a certain affection of evil qualitic, as a sickness. These words
declare, that concupiscence being an affection of evil quality (which is as
much to say, as sin) remaning in the regenerate, although it be not imputed
to them as sin, for that if they (...) against it, it shall not preuaill
against them to condemn them. A sin not imputed, is a sin of his own
nature. The sins of Gods elect are not imputed to them, they are forgiven,
the guilt is taken away, they are washed away in the blood of Christ, they
are as white as wool, and as snow: yet of their own nature they are foul,
abominable, and detestable transgressions of Gods law: so is concupiscence
against the law, thou shall not lust, as Augustine often confesses, therefore
of it self sin, even in the regenerate, to whom it is remitted. The
similutude of a sickness also, whereunto Augustine does often compare it,
shows the same. For a sickness if it be not healed, either by strength of
nature prevailing, or by medicine, does either cause death, or remains as
long as life: so concupiscence of itself, would kill, if the medicines of
Christ's redemption did not overcome the malice of it, and in the end take
away the disease from the roots.

But for a cleerer proof, Master Charke alleges, that Saint Augustine in an
other place says plainly, it Cont. Iul. lib. 5. cap. 3.
is sin. You answer, that he says only of concupiscence in general, that
it is sin, and not of concupiscence in the regenerate, But that Saint
Augustine speaks of concupiscence in the regenerate, it is manifest by this
reason, for that he says, concupiscence of the flesh, against which the good
spirit lustesh, which is only in the regenerate. Cont. Iul. lib. 6. cap. 11.
As he him self says in an other place, by you quoted. Non enim recte
cuiusquam spiritus concupisceret aduersue carnem suam, nisi habitaret in illo
spiritus Christi. For no man's spirit should rightly lust against his fiesh,
except the spirit of Christ did dwell in him. But that concupiscence without
consent is properly no sin, you say, Saint Augustine prooneth by the words
of Paul himself, who calls it sin in the chapter last remembered: but
that is false: he only retains Gal. 5.
his usual acception of the word sin, for actualsin, as Saint James does,
whose terms of conception, and bringing forth also he uses: yet he concludes
that concupiscence without consent is evil, is to be chastised, to be
brideled, to be fought against, to be overcome, which proves sufficiently,
that it is sin, though not actual sin, yet properly sin, from which we
can not be delivered, but by the grace of Christ: sin of another kind, sin
in another degree, called sinnne in the scripture, and therefore without
controversy (except we will trifle in vain contention of terms, and childish
sophismes, where the matter is plain) sin in deed, and properly, which of
his own nature deserves death, but that it is purged by the blood of Christ,
as all other sins, of what sort or degree soever they be, in those that are
saved. That Saint Augustine uses other whiles the terms of veniallie, and
mortallie, when he speaks of sinning, it can not defend your distinction,
wherebie you hold, that there be some sins so small, as of their own nasure
they deserve not damnation: contrary to the scripture, that says generally,
the reward of sin is death. Whereas Saint Augustine means only degrees of
sins, whereof some are less, some are heinous, yet all deserve death. For
Saint Augustine must be understood according to the scripture, but the
scripture must not be racked to agree with Saint Augustine.

Hitherto concerning the doctrine of the Jesuits, that concupiscence in the
regenerate without consent is not sin. Against this doctrine Gotuisus
opposes the words of our Savior Christ, Mat. 5. 28. whosoever shall see a
woman to lust after her, he has already committed adultery with her in his
heart: which text you confirm as you said before to be alleged ignorantly,
and against himself, because here is a manifest consent of the heart
expressed, to make concupiscence adultery. And for that purpose you cite Saint
Augustine: and to all this you ask, what sir William replyeth? and answer your
self, Surely nothing, but makes a long idle speak, of praedicatum and
subiectum, as pertinent to the matter, as Charing cross to Billings gate. If
William Charkes book, might be had no where, but in your report, you would
make miserable matter of it. But they that list to see how impudentlie you lie,
shall find in his book, first that he confesses, that the effect of
concupiscence, which is adultery by consent, is a breach of the 7.
commandment. For which he does not allege the place as you misconster him.
Secondly that Christ uses a word, which in greek is (...), which signifies
to behold, that is more then to see, or to use the sense of sight: which
beholding with concupiscence alone, he denies to be sin in the first degree,
that with consent of heart is made sin in so high a degree as adultery. And
Augustine him self in the place by you cited, makes three degrees to actual
sin: suggestion, delectation, and consent. The first he compares to the
devils temptation, which when it was without man, was not sin in man: but
now that every man is tempted of his own concupiscence, how can you say it is
not sin in man, as it was in the devil? Thirdly the long speak of
subeictum and praedicatum, that Master Charke makes, is comprehended in less
then three lines. And last of all, whereas you say, that to quit the Lord
most carefully from sin, he alledgeeth Saint James, you pervert, and that
wilfully, both his saying, and his meaning, and scoff at him in your dogs
eloquence, as you are accustomed. But he says expresselie, that Saint James
does carefully quitte the Lord, from being a sinful cause of sin, when he
turns upon man the whole work, and all the blame of sin, from the first
sin of tempting, to the ripe and full birth thereof: saying that a man is
tempted of his own lust, and therewith drawn away, and as it were with a bait
entised. Which things (says Master Charke) can not be in bare concupiscence,
except it were sin, and a sinful cause of sin. And in deed, if every
thing conceive, and bring forth a creature of the same kind, that the damme is
of, what should the mother of sin be but sin? Concupiscence conceiueth, and
brings forth sin, therefore it is sin it self

But Calvin is condemned of your Church, as you affirm, for this impiety,
that he makes God author of sin. But Calvin appealeth from your Church, to
the Catholic Church of Christ, before whom let us see what you can allege,
to justify this horrible crime. You ask if he does not hold that God is the
author of sin, in diverse places of his works: namely lib. 1. Inst. cap. 8.
17. 18? I answer no: but directly maintains the contradiction of that
blasphemous slander, namely that God is not the author of sin: answering
all objections, that are made to the contrary, both by authority of
scriptures, and by testimony of the fathers. You demand further, does he not
condemn Saint Augustine by name, for holding the contrary, lib. 2. Inst. c.
4? I answer as before, noe. Only he misliketh Saint Augustine in one place,
where he says, that induration, and excecation pertain not to the working of
God, but to his foreknowledge, where the scripture expresselie says, God does
harden, God does blind, not as an evil author, but as a just punisher, as
Augustine else where confesses, for which he is cited cont. Iul. lib. 5. where
he proves at large, that some sins are not only of Gods permission or
patience, but of his power, that former sins might so be punished. What is
this to make God the author of sin? Yet further you ask, whether Peter
Martyr his scholar, do not hold the same. in com. lib. 1. Reg. cap. 2? And I
answer as before, that he never held that opinion, but the contrary, that God
is not the author of sin, as it is sin, al though no fact can be committed
without his power, in whom we live, move and have our being. But this is a
common slander of unlearned Papists, when they that be learned, if they come
to entreat of Gods power, providence, predestination, reprobation, etc. can not
speak more reverently then Calvin, Martyr, and all other learned Protestants
do write of those high mysteries of God.

The tenth section, entitled, Of the first motions of concuptscence.
THe Jesuits hold, that the first motions of lust, are without hurt of sin.
Of this you think you have said enough before, because it depends wholly of
that which goes before. Yet two places of Saint Augustine you add, and both
fraudulently. The former cont. Iul. lib. 2. circa finem, you cite thus. We
might be alwaie without sin, if we never did yeald consent to our
concupiscence to sin. But Saint Augustines words are otherwise, Quantum enim
ad nos attinet, sine peccato semper essemus, donec saneretur hoc malum, si ei
nunquam consentiremus ad malum. For as much as concerns us, we should be
always without sin until this evil were healed, if we did never consent
unto it unto evil. He says not absolutely, we should be without sin, but
as much as concerns us, because that evil is in us, without our will or
consent, which makes actual sin. Otherwise not many lines before, he
calls it, vitium mortuum, a vice dead, but yet to be buried, that is
thoroughly healed.: and adds further, Quomodo igitur mortuum dicimus hoc
peccatum in baptismo, and How then do we say, that this sin is dead in
baptism (as this man also says) and how do we confess, that it dwells in
our members, and works many desires against our wills which we resist by not
consenting (as this man also confesses) but because it is dead in that guilt
in which it held us, and till it be healed by perfection of burial, it
rebelleth even being dead. Although now it is not called sin, after the same
manner, in which it makes guilty, but because it is made by the guilt of the
first man, and because, by rebelling, it labors to draw us to guiltines,
except the grace of God do help us. This place of Saint Augustine shewteh
that it is sin. and why it is so called, although it differ much from
actual sin. Again when he says, it is dead vice, in respect that it is
remitted to the renegerate in baptism, yet it is as a stinking carcass of the
enemy, which until it be buried will infect: by which it appears what a
pestilent thing it is, of it self, though by grace it be overcome, and must be
buried in us, till it be utterly abolished.

The other place, lib. 2. de gratia, cap. 40. you cut very short, and utter in
these words. Quibus sinon consentitur, nullius peccati reatus contraehitur.
Unto which nation if we give no consent of heart, no guilt of sin is
contracted by them. But you conceal craftelie that he calls these first
motions vicious desires, which is as much as we require, and shows how the
guilt is taken away, namely by remission of sins in baptism. His words are
these, Non solum peccata omnia, quorum nunc remissio fit in baptism, que reos
faciunt, dum desideriis vitiosis consentitur, (...) peccator, verumetiam, ipsa
desideria vitiosa, quibus si non consentitur, nullus peccati reatus
contraehitur, quae non in ista, sed in alia vita nulla erunt, eodem lauacro
baptismatis vniuersa pur gantur. Not only all sins whereof there is no we
remission in baptism, which make men guilty, while they consent to vicious
desires, and to sin: but even those vicious desires also, to which, if
consent be not yealded, no guilte of sin is contarcted, which not in this
life, but in the other life, shall be none at all, are altogether purged in the
same lauer of baptism. Now whether a Christian man need to say, forgive us
our debtes, for his vicious or wicked desires, although he consent not unto
them, you define out of Saint Austine, that he need not. And quote Ep. 200. ad
Asell. where he says that, if we did not at all follow our concupiscence, and
although the desires of sin be in us, while we are in this mortal body: yet
if we give consent to none of them, there were not for which we should say to
our Father, which is in heaven, forgive us our debtes. Yet should we not be
such, as we shall be after this mortal has put on immortallity: for then
there shall be in us no desires of sins. Secondly you quote. conc. 3. in Ps.
Where he answers this question, in these words: Quantum quidemegs sapere
possum, etc. As far as I can perceive, the whole guilt of the disease and
infirmity, from whence those unlawful desires are moved, which the Apostle
calls sin, is loosed by the Sacrament of baptism, with all those that
obeying it, we have done, said, or thought: neither should this disease
hereafter hurt us, though it be in us, if we yealded obedience to none of the
unlawful desires thereof at any time, either in work, speech, or
secretassens, until the sickness it self be healed, when that which we pray
for, is fullfilled, either when we say, thy kingdom come, or when we say,
deliver us from evil. Thirdly you quote de perfect iustisiae, c. vltimo.
Where against the Pelagians, which hold that a man might be just without
actual sin, although he could not be without concupiscence, which is called
sin, because it is sin to consent vntoit, and is moved against our will, he
has these words: Subtiliter quidemista discernit, etc. He that so says,
discerns these things subtillie, but let him be advised what is done in the
Lords prayer, where we say, for give us (...) debtes. Quod nist fallar, which
except I be deceived, it were no need to say, if we did neeur consent, never
solitle, to the desires of the same sin, either in slipping of tongue, or in
delight of thought, but only we should say, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil. Lastly you quote Cont. (...) Epist. Pel. lib. 1. cap.
13. Nec propter ipsum, (...) iam, etc. Neither for this concupiscence, whose
guilt is already confumed in the lauer of regeneration, the baptized say in
their prayer, forgive us our debtes, etc Out of all these places this I may
gather: First, that Saint Augustine does not so constantly affirm, as you
say, as a Doctrine most certain, but modestly delivers his opinion, saying,
as far as my wisdom serves, and, except I be deceived. Secondliehe speaks
not of those motions, that be in us, which consent to some, though not to al of
the^; but in case we never consented to any of them. Thirdly he rendereth his
reason, because they he already forgiven, to theregenerate in baptism. And
sorthlie, he calls them unlawful desires of sin, against which we pray to
be delivered. So that all things weighed, as you have Saint Augustine in some
sort favorable, to the words of your assertion in this piont, yet he is not so
rank, and full one your side, in the sense of the matter, as you would bear us
in hand.

Now follow a number of cauillations against M. Charkes words, which I will
briefly run over. First where he says. Are not all the first motions of
just merely natural, and ever more of some cause given by us, and dwelling
within us, namely the corruption of Adam? This fond (...) (say you)
includes two contraries: for of they be meerlie natural, then are they not of
any cause given by us. This fond argument (say I) has two faults. One is
ambiguitie, sought where it needs not, in the word meerelie natural, which
Master Charke shows to be by corruption of nature, and then the consequent
follows not: for to that corruption, cause is given by us, and in us, in the
sin of Adam. Secondly you say, that it is false that all first motions of
just are merely natural: for in lewd men they are often voluntary. Iump, as
you are wont to say. For if will go before them, then are they not first, we
speak of motions, which go before will, and therefore are called first
motions: wherefore your example of awaking a mad dog, and distinction of
natural in the root, and voluntary in the branch, do not excuse, but
increase your heap of waste words, as when you be awake you may perceive.

Another cauillation you have, that Master Charke deceitfully auoideth the
simulitude of first motions with the pulse, because they be not like in all
things, which is untrue, but because they are not like in quality, in the
which they are compared. For the first motions unto sin are evil, vicious,
unlawful, as Saint Augustine calls them, so is not the motion of the pulse:
therefore not like. But while he reasons against your example of the pulse,
he utters three foul absurdities, and most gross errors, if we believe you.
Which are they? say on, and take heed you lie not. The first is, that he
places concupiscence of the flesh (whereof we talk) in the reasonable part of
the mind, and (...) in the sensitive part. That is false: for his words are,
you cannot conclud from that part of our soul, whereby we have life and sense
only, to that part where in our reason and affections are placed. In these
words he denies not concupiscence unto the sensitive part, but extends it
to the reasonable part, where also the affections are, where virtues and vices
have their seat, in as much as the reasonable soul is distinguished into two
pars, the one that uses reason, the other that should obeie reason. And
therefore you speak very grossly, and falselie, when you say, The first
motions are nothing else, but the rebellions of our sensitive parts. And your
reason is as gross in divinity, as your position is in philosophy, because
it is called flesh, and the concupiscence of the flesh, etc. where flesh
signifies the whole corruption of man, as it is manifest by the works of the
flesh, rehearsed by Saint Paull in the text you quote, Gal. 5. where there is
not only whordome, glottonie, drunkenness, and such like, but Idolattie,
witchcraft, heresy, etc. which are sins against faith, and knowledge, and
doubtless have their first motions, as well as other sins, that are
principally committed with the body, as adultrie, drunkenness, etc. and may
have their first motions both in the body, and in the mind, but chiofly in the
mind. Therefore while you charge Master Chark with intolerable ignorance, you
bewraie intolerable want of knowledge, in one that would be taken both for a
philosopher, and a divine.

The second absurdity, you say, is greater, in affirming that the sensual
part of man is not so much corrupted by original sin, as the reasonable
part. But master Charke says, the former (that is, that part of our natural
soul where bie we have life and sense only) is not in the same sort
corrupted as the second: neither does sin so work in natural life, and
sense, as it does in the heart, by the corruptions and guiltines of the soul.
Now these words do declare a comparison in quality, not in quantity: for the
question (if you be remembered) was of a similitude, which is a comparison in
quality, not in quantity. But if he hadmade comparison in quantity, I think
there is no wise man, but feels temptations against the knowledge of God, and
faith, greater and more dangerous, then to commit sin in the abuse of any of
the senses. And seeing all that defiles man comes first from the heart, I
marvel how you place concupiscence in the sensitive part, except you place the
sensitive part in the heart. Although it is not without fraud, that you change
Master Charkes words, who speaks altogether of life and sense, and you
only of the sensitive part, in which you include the inward senses, as well
as the outward, where as Master Charke speaks of the outward only, as his
examples of smelling, seeing, hearing, and feeling declare.

The third absurdity is joined with flat Pelagianisme, where he says, that
the necessary actions of life and sense, remain now in man, as they were
before his fall. For which is alleged a saying of Saint Augustine de Eccles.
dogm. cap. 38. that if any man shall affirm, that man both in body and
soul, is not changed into worse, he is deceived with Pelagianisme. But Master
Charkes words are, that the nenecessarie actions of life, as eating, drinking,
etc. and of sense, as smelling, ate of them selves all free from sin,
remaining as they were in man before his fall, he does not deny that they are
changed into worsse, but that of them selves, they are not sin. It is not sin
to eat, but a man may easily sin in eating: it is not sin to see, but by
sight a man may easily fall into sin. Neither does your author say, that the
actions of life and sense, are sin, but he speaks against them that thought
by the fall of Adam, the body only was subject to corruption, the liberue of
the soul being unhurt. Now if you hold that the simple, and necessary
actions of life and sense, are sin, I wounder how you can deny the first
motions, and unlawful desires of sin, to be sin. But you (...) them from
sin, because they be not voluntary, which is serase true of the senses, for a
man need not to see except he will, seeing he may close his eyes. But against
this point of voluntary, you say, he obiecteth original sin, which is
answered before, and showed how it is voluntary. And I answer, that the first
motions are voluntary, by the same reason. Secondly he obiecteth, that god
says in Genesis, every cogitation of man's heart is evil evermore. To that
you answer, that it inclines to evil, by reason of concupiscence left in us.
Thus God and you agree not. He says, it is evil, you say, it inclines to
evil, Genesis 5.
but yet is not that inclination sin without consent. But God says, it is
only evil, and that always. Thirdly you say he obiecteth the
commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, etc.
Whereby the first motions, being against the great commandment, must needs
be sin. But that you say is false. For though we be stirred by this
commandment to all perfection, that we can in this life, yet no more is
enjoined us thereby, under pain of sin and damnation, but only that we do
not yealde consent to sin. If you say, that god imputes not unto us, that are
his children, all breach of this commandment to our condemnation, I would
agree with you. But that any man in this life can keep this commandment, or
that no transgression thereof, except it be with consent, is damnable sin, I
do utterly deny. Yet you make Saint Augustine author of your interpretation.
First, lib. de spirit. and lit. cap. vltimo. Who both affirms, that this
commandment is not fullfiled by any man in this life, and also that there is
no perfect justice in this life, but that man has profited most, which
knows how far he is from perfection of justice. Again, that there is no
justice in this life, but by faith, and therefore walking by faith, he may be
said not to sin against the justice of this commandment, seeing he is not
to be blamed, if he love not God so perfectly, as when he shall know him
perfectly. But all this is to be understood of the new man, so far forth as
he is reformed, according to the Image of God. And therefore he concludes in
the end, that of what quality soever, or of what quantity soever, we can
define justice in this life, there is no man void of sin, and it is
necessary for every man to pray for remission of sins, and to presume of no
justice of his own, but of the grace of God. Secondly you lib. 1. de doct.
Christ ca: 2.
quote lib. 1. de doct. Christ. cap. 2. where there is nothing to the purpose.
Thirdly, de natura and gratia, cap. 69. where he says, this commandment is
not heavy, where there is that love, whereby faith works, where this love is
not, it is heavy. But that the breach of this commandment is not sin,
where we yeald no consent, he says not one word. Lastly, you quote lib. 2.
de pecc. merit. cap. 6. where this commandment is not once mentioned. Thus
you think to carry away the matter with dumme quotationes, when in the places
quoted, there is nothing to uphold your assertion.

Next follows a question, whether Protestants or papists do repress the
raines of lusts, which he knows best, that searches the heart, and the
raines. But the doctrine of the protestants (say you) does take away both
raines and bridle out of our hands, while they teach the first motions to be
natural, and that we cannot let their effect, but that they work sins in
us, whether we consent or not. But that is false, for we say, that by the
grace of God, we may resist their effect, which is to work actual sin, if
default be not in our self: yet we say they are sin of them selves, for
which we ought to sigh and groan, with the Apostle. And where you say, we have
no hope of victory, because we sin, though we consent not, and thereof Romans
7. 24. (...). Co. 12. 7. 8.
make many words in vain of the excellency of popish doctrine, it is most
untrue: for we have a most cer taine hope by the grace of god in Jesus Christ,
to have deliverance from the one, and victory of the other, and that to the
obtening of the crown of everlasting glory.

Now are we come to the tenth commandment, which is contrary to the Jesuits
doctrine, which you say, the Censure, out of S. Augustine expounds to be
meant of consent. lib. 1. denupt. and conc. cap. 23. where S. Augustine does
not so expound this commandment, thou shall not lust, but shows as he does
in other places before noted, that it is not fullfilled in this life.

Next to this, you say, it pleases Master Charke to put down four manifest
lies, saying, As the Papists make of the tenth commandment two
commandments, so this fellow makes of two several breaches of two diverse
commandments, but one sin. And both these you say are slanders. But how
both these, if they were slanders, should make four lies, I do not yet see,
except it be by multiplication. Your answer is, first that the Catholics make
but one of the tenth commandment: but the question is which is properly and
distinctlie the tenth commandment. Very well, if it be a question, and such
a question as you conclude not to be defined in your Church, you do ill to
make it an argument to convince him of slander. For if that opinion be true,
that makes but one commandment against coveting, which few papists do
follow, and yet many ancient writers do hold, as you confess; then do the
rest make two commaundemetes of that one, against coveting. Yes Saint
Augustine, you say, contendeth in diverse places, that these two clauses, thou
shall not have strange Gods, and thou shall not make any graven Idol, are but
one commandment, and therefore, that the two other of coveting, make two
distinct commandments. That S. Austine likes that division, I deny not;
but that he contendeth for it, is untrue. And you your self note six ancient
writers, namely Origin, Procopius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Hesychius, S. Ambrose,
and S. Jerome, that follow our division, assigning four precepts to the first
table, and six to the second. To which may be added Greg. Nazianzen, decalog.
Mosis carmine, and Augustine or whoesoeuer was author of those books, called
quaestiones ex veteri and. N. T. quaestione 7. Beside the authority of those
old fathers, reason is against it. For whereas you say, this clause, Thou
shall not covet thy neighbors wife, is the ninth commandment, and the rest
the tenth, Moses is against you, Exodus 20. placing, thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house first, and then, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife,
which were a confusion, if that which is in the second place were the ninth,
and that which is in the first, were the tenth: beside the transposition, that
part of the tenth commandment should be joined with the ninth. Therefore,
seeing the same Moses places the coveting of the wife, Deu. 5. in the first
place, it is manifest, that both those clauses make but one commandment, else
should it be uncertain, which is the ninth, and which the tenth. Again, where
you say, it is most convenient that the twoe 1. Ioh. 2.
general internal consentes unto the two lusts, of carnalitie, and
covetousness, called by Saint John concupiscence of the flesh, and concupiscence
of the eye, should be expresselie and particularly forbidden by two distinct
commandments, I answer that it is more couuenient, that concupiscence of all
sins against the second table, should be forbidden in one general
commandment. And it is meruaill how in Saint John you forgotte the pride of
life, which he joins with the concupiscence of the eyes, and of the flesh:
which was as needful to be forbidden as the other two: though you say the
internal temptations against the other commandment are neither so frequent,
nor so dangerous as those two. Yes verily, the temptations to ambition,
rebellion, disobedience, malice, lying, and such like, are both as frequent,
and as dangerous, as unto bodelie lust, and covetousness.

To that you sat, they are sufficiently forbidden by the words set down in
the commandments themselves, it may be answered, so are the other two; and
therefore, all lust with consent, is forbidden in every one of them, as lust
unto adultery, in the commandment prohibiting adultery, desire of revenge
in the commandment prohibiting murder, by our savior Christ's own
interpretation and authority, by like reason, ambition, or lust of
disobedience, in the commandment that bids parents to be honored,
covetousness in that which forbids theft, the lust of lying, or slaundering,
in that which forbids false witness. Therefore the commandment of lust
being one and general, must needs be the tenth, and the commandment of
having no gods but one, and the true God, the first: the commandment of not
making, nor worshipping Images, the second: which are two perfectly distinct
precepts, the one commanding the true God to be honored alone: the other
commanding the worship of God to be spiritual, and forbidding all carnal
imaginations of Gods worship, as by Images, or any other thing of men's devise,
wherebie they change the glory of the immortal God, into the shape of a
mortal man, beasts, fouls, or any other thing. Therefore he that worshippeth
Baall as a God, breaks the first commandment, he that worshippeth Iehoua in
the calfe that Aaron made, or the calves that Jeroboam set up, or by offering
incense to the brazen serpent, offends against the second commandment. This
division therefore is both most convenient, as that which distinguishes all
good works, and all sins, by their proper precepts, and also necessary, as
that which makes ten commandments, every one perfectly distinct from the
other, and that shows all men all manner of sin, as well that which is in
act, as that which is in desire, not only that which is with consent, but
even that also which proceeds of the corruption of nature, and is resisted by
the spirit of God. Therefore that which you say untruly, of the first two
branches, is true of the last, that they contain but one thing, namely a
prohibition of concupiscence, against any of the other five precepts of the
second table.

But it is a weighty argument that the 70. interpreters do recite them
distinctlie, as two commandments in their Greek translation. How shall we
know that? You answer, Ex. 20. and Deuteronomy. 5.
by repeating the verb twice. But that is a slender proof, for the verb is
twice repeated in the Hebrew text, and in Deuteronomy. 5. once changed. In the twoe
first commandments, there are four verbes denied: there shalls not be, thou
shall not make, thou shall not bow down, thou shall not serve. Yet these two,
you will have to be one. But why do you fly from the authority of your
vulgar latin interpreter, which in both places, makes the prohibition of
concupiscence one commandment, in Exodus by adding the copulative which is not
in the Hebrew, but a pure negative, Non concupisces domum proximi tui, nec
desiderabis (...) eius, etc. Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, neither
shall thou desire his wife, etc. In Deuteronomy. by leaving out the verb, which is in
the Hebrew. Non concupisces (...) (...), non domum, non agrum, non seruum, non
accillam, non bouem, non asinum, and vniuersa (...) illius sunt. Thou shall not
covet thy neighbors wife, not his house, not his field, not his servant, not
his maid, not his ox, not his ass, and whatsoever things are his. By this
translation your interpreter shows plainly, that he acknowledged but one
commandment against concupiscence, although the sin were set forth in
diverse words. And it is as great reason to make a several commandment for
every word that follows, as to make the concupiscence of the house one, and
of the wife, another. But you do better to acknowledge the matter doubtful,
as being no matter of faith, and not defined by your Church, because of the
authority of so many aun cient fathers against you: yet you have no color, to
shift of your Idolatrous woshipping of Images, except you confound the two
first commandments in one: neither can you exclude the commandment against
concupiscence without consent, except you divide the tenth commandment into
two, reteining the distinction that ought to be of every precept from other,
and making the law perfect, which prohibiteth all sin, as I have showed
before.

But it is a greater slander, I ween, that the Protestants charge you to
leave out the second commandment against Images, where you do but include it
in the first. As though you have not in your English primers, and other books
where you set forth the ten commandments, altogether left out that precept,
as ten thousand books will testify against you. And as for your including, is
but a crafty hiding of it from the common people, lest they should learn to
detest your grosie Idolatry, and forsake your malignant Church, as the mother
of all abominations against God, and his true worship. Your distinction of
mental adultery, from actual adultery, and of mental theft from actual
theft, to make four commandments of two, is gross, and unlearned. For why
should not mental murder, mental disobedience or rebellion, mental slander
or lying, require enerie one a several commandment, distinct from actual
murder, actual rebellion, disobedience, or treason, actual slaundering or
lying? And so in the wholl we should have thirteen commandments at the
least. Or else Master Charke has truly charged you, to make the several
breaches of two diverse commandments but one sin, and the breach of one
commandment to make two several kinds of sin: as you do in the breaches
of the commandments against adultery and theft. Where our savior Christ
says expresselie, that the looking on a woman, with desire of lust, is
adultery, which he should rather have said, according to your where is
forbidden in the seventh commandment, distinction, it is sin against the
ninth commandment, which you say is against mental adultery. And so he
should have said no more in effect, but mental adultery, is mental
adultery. But our Savior Christ referring that sin to the commandment
against adultery, shows that concupiscence without consent, is an other
sin, and not only in an other degree of the same kind, as mental and
actual adultery are, and as anger, racha, thou fool, are against the sixth
commandment.

The last reason of the censure, to prove that the first motions to lust are
not forbidden, is, because they are not in our power. where the scripture
says, This commandment, Exodus 30.
which I give the this day, is not above thee. Master Chark replieth, that the
assumption of this argument (which is, to resist the first motions, is not in
our power) is false. You rehearse his words thus: Our first motions are not
altogether out of our power, for that the gift of continency does more and
more subdue them. Here you cavil, that albeit good men do cut of infinite
occasions and causes of motions and temptations, yet can they never subdue all
motions. But Master Charke said, It is neither true, that all these first
motions are altogether out of our power, etc. neither does it follow, that we
are not subject to the law for such offenses, as we can not resist, the fault
being ours through corruption, why we can not resist them. So that in the
first part of this saying, he confesses some motions to be out of our power to
resist, some not out of our power, which you also acknowledge: and therefore
your assumption, if it be general, is false: if it be particular, the
conclusion cannot be general, that to resist all the first motions of lusts
is not commanded: orthus, the law forbids no first motions.

To the second part of Master Charkes saying, you answer nothing, that is of
the consequence of your assumption: namely that the fault being ours through
corruption, and such as our first father did willingly bring upon him and us
all, our want of power to resist offenses, can not exempt us from the justice
of God. This was so strong, that you had not so much as a cauil against it. But
as though you saw it not, you run by, into your usual path of girding our
Ministers: who, you say, talk of continency and mortification, (each one
having his yoke mate ready for his turn) as good fellows do of fasting, that
sit at a full table. And yet I think it is more praise, to keep temperance at
a full table, then to abstain where there is hunger, and nothing to eat. But
I pray you sir, does continency and mortification belong only to unmarried
men? You are as good to say that no married man can be a true christian, seeing
mortification is necessary for all Christians, and continency also, not from
the undefiled bed, but chastity from all uncleanness is commanded generally
to all true members of Christ: How the wiueles votaries in popery perform
continency, and mortification, but even of that one earthly member of
uncleanness, the world is to full of examples, and the justice of god will one
day make manifest.

To the place of Moses Master Chark says the translation is false, and
corrupt, which says, the commandment is not above thee, where Moses says,
it is not hidden from thee. And that the place is so to be translated, and to
be applied to the revelation of the Gospel, it is evidently declared by the
plain text, and by the application thereofin the epistle to the Romans. cap.
10. 6. To this you answer, that he proves it neitherby the words of text, nor
by Saint Paul's application. O wretched shift. when he quoteth the Chapter and
verse, where the Apostle begins to speak of this place of Moses, in these
words: The righteousness which is of faith, says thus: Say not in thy heart
who shall go up into heaven? that is to bring down Christ: or who shall go
down into the deep? Deuteronomy. 30. 14.
that is to call Christ from the dead. But what says the scripture? The word is
near in thy mouth, and in thy heart: this is the word of faith which we
preach. Here is the application of the text to the Gospel, and not to the
law. But the text (you say) is not so evident: for Saint Jerome either the
author, or the corrector of this translation, knew what the hebrew words
importe, and how they are applied by Saint Paul, as well as William Charke.
Here is a vain and an odious comparison, without need or cause. For who will
grant unto you, that S. Jerome was either author, or corrector of the vulgar
translation, that we now have? None surely that favors the credit of Saint
Ierom, who though he have some in this age, as well Papists, as Protestants,
better learned in the hebrew, then he was, yet was he far better learned,
then that he would have suffered, either in translation, or in corre ction such
gross faults, as be in that vulgar translation which we now have. As for Saint
Paul's application of that part of the sentence, which he touches, (you say)
make eth wholly for you, as after shall be showed. Well, when you show it, we
shall shape you an answer. But now to the very words of the text itself.
Niphleth, which, as you confess, that it fignifieth to be hidden so you
affirm, that it signifies also, to be marvelous, to be hard and difficult, as
appears, Psalm. 13 9and 2. Sam. 1. which we do not deny, so you understand
to be difficult and hard for want of knowledge, and not for want of power. For
you are not hable to bring an example, where this verb Phala, which most
properly signifies to be hidden or unknown, is taken in that sense you would
have it here, namely to be hard or difficulte for lack of strength. That it
signifies to be marvelous, it is because merueling is upon causes, that are
hid or unknown. The Chaldee and Greek must either be answerable to the
Hebrew, or else they are to be rejected as untrue or improper translations.
Although the Chaldee word signifies the same that the hebrew: whereunto if you
ad the signification of separation, yet it must be separation from knowledge,
and not from strength, or else it answers not unto the original. As also the
greek word (...), which signifies (as you say) exceeding, immeasurable,
great, passing all mean, etc. must be understood for exceeding measure in
knowledge, or else it is not right: and so may your latin, suprate, be
understood also, as Saint Jerome translateth the same verb, Ps. 139. where it
is manifestly taken for marvelous, in respect of the want of knowledge. And
therefore none of these three words, used in the three ancient tongues, having
a negation before them, do express so much as you would gather by the vulgar
translation, the law is not above thy strength. Wherefore you may take bayard
whom to your own stable, that make such ignorant and impudent conclusions, as
an Arcadian beast, that had learned but a while under Apuleius, would not make
for shame.

But if Saint Jerome will not satisfy us, you bid us take Saint Austen, who
(say you) handles both the words alleged of Moses, and also the application
used by Saint Paul of part of the sentence: and proves out of both the very
same conclusion that we do, to wit, that the law is not above our ability to
keep it: and for confirmation thereof he adds maenie other textes of
scripture, as, my yoke is sweet, and my burden light: also, his
commandments are not heavy, and the like, concluding in these words, we
must believe most firmly, that God being just and good, could not command
impossible things unto man. That you may understand how many ways he
mocketh us, with his dumme quotations, and shameless collections, I will set
down the wholl Chapter which he quoteth. De natura and gratia. c. 69. Valde
autem bona sunt praecepta, etc. The commandments are very good, if we use
them lawfully. Far even by the same whereby it is most firmly believed,
that God being just and good could not command things impossible, hereof we
are admonished, both in easy things what to do, and in hard things what to
crave. For all things are made easy to love, to which alone the burden of
Christ is light, or that alone is the self same burden which is light.
According to this it is said: And his commandments are not heavy, that he to
whom they are heavy, may consider, that it could not have been said of God,
they are not heavy, but because there may be such an affection of the heart,
to which they are not heavy, and may ask that which he lacks, that he may
fulfill that which is commanded. And that which is said unto Israel, in
Deutronomie, if it be Godly, if it be holylie, if it be spirituallie
understood, signifies the self same thing: for when the Apostle had rehearsed
this testimony, The word is near in thy mouth, and in thy heart (which this
man has in thy hands, for in the heart are spiritual hands) this says he, is
the word of faith, whih we do preach. Every one theresore being converted, as
there is commanded, unto the Lord his God, with all his heart, and all his
soul, let him not account the commandment of God to be heavy: For how is it
heavy, when it is the commandment of love? For every man either loves not,
and therefore it is heavy, or he loves, and then it can not be heavy. He
loves, if, as Israel is there admonished, he be converted to the, lord his
God, with all his heart, and with all his soul. I give you, says he, a new
commandment, that you love one another: and he that loves his neighbor,
has fulfilled the law: and, love is the fulfilling of the law: according to
this is that also spoken, If they walked in good paths, they should have found
the paths of righteousness to be light. How then is it said, Because of the
words of thy lips, I have kept hard ways? but because both is true. They
are hard to fear, and liht to love. Therefore love begone is justice be
gonne, love proceeded, is justice proceeded, great love is great justice,
perfect love is perfect justice, love I mean coming out of a pure heart, and
a good conscience, and out of faith not fained, which then is greatest in this
life, when for it the life it self is contemned. But I marvel if it have not
wherein to increase, when it is departed out of this mortal life. But where
soever, and whenever it is so full, that nothing can be added unto it, yet is
it not spread in our hearts by the works of nature, or will which are in us,
but by the he lie ghost, which is given unto us, which both helps our
infirmity, and works with our health. for that is the grace of God by Jesus
Christ our Lord. to whom with the father and the holy ghost be ascribed
eternity and goodness for ever. In this discourse of S. Augustine is declared,
that the commandments of God are made possible, and not heavy to be
fulfilled by the grace of God, nor by the strength of man, either of nature or
will, and that by two means, faith and love. Faith, by which we crave and
obtain forgiveness of our imperfection, and love by which we cherefully
endeavor to accomplish in work, so much as we can, which we can not do
perfectly in this life, in as much asno man's heart is pure in this life, and no
man's love is perfect in this world. yet faith purifying our hearts, that by
themselves are unclean, obtains, as the sameS. Augustine says, that which
the law commands. But how far is this from the popish assertion, to wit, The
law is not abooue our abtlitie to keep it.

The curse that you cite out of Augustine, Sermon. 191. and Ierorme explan:
Symb. ad Damasum, is but a crack of a broken bladder in stead of a
thunderbolte. For both the sermon, and the explanation are counterfeit stuff,
being all one word forword, except a little (...) flue in the beginning and the
end, and yet are most impudentlieascribed both to Augustine and Jerome. But
that ne there of both is author of that sentence, I will prove by (...) of Saint
Jerome, who expresselie affirm ah that, which the sermon and explanation
accurseet. We curse the blasphemy of them (say the counterfeiters) which
say, that any thing impossible is commanded by God to man, and that the
commandments of God cannot be kept of every one, but of all in common. Saint
lerome dialog. aduers. Pelag. lib. 1. says: Possibilia praecepit (...), and
ego fateer. Sed haec possibilia cuncta singuli habere non possumus, non
imbeciliitate naturae, ne calumniam. facias deo, sed animilassitudine, quae
(...) simul and semper non potest habere virtutes. God commanded things
possible, and that I confess. But all these possible things every one of us
can not have, through weakness of nature, lest thou should slander God, but
through wearines of mind, which can not have all virtues together, and
always. And his whole discourse in that dialogue is, to prove that no man can
be without sin, the contrary whereof is flat Pelagianisine. He expounds
also at large, how the commandments of God are possible, and how impossible,
which may be seen of any man that will read his writings against the
Pelagians: and therefore it is very injurious unto him, to make him a patron of
that sentence, which he put posedlie and plentifully impugneth. To conclude,
Chrysostom and Basile mean not, that a perfect observation of Gods law is
possible in this life, but that God gives grace in some measure to keep them,
to those that are borne (...) in Christ, in whom only is performed that
which was impossible by the law, as the A postle says. These fathers and
diverse other, whose authority the Pelagians abused, as you do, to uphold
their heresy, by such speeches, meant to accuse the negligence and slothfulnes
of men, in keepeing Gods commandments, not to extol the power, and ability
of man's free will to keep them, as Saint Augustine proves by many
testimonies taken out of their writings, in his treatises against the
Pelagians.

The eleventh section, of de facing the scriptures, and doctrines by tradition.
THe Jesuits, you say, do not use these terms of defacing: that the
scripture is imperfect, maimed, or lame: and thereof I will not contend: but
the same in effect they hold, as Master Charke says: when they affirm that
all things necessarte to salvation are not contained in the scripture. Your
similitude of a merchant leaving his commandments partly in writings, and
partly by word of mouth, and referring the resolution of doubts unto his
wife, is not sufficient in this case. For our Savior Christ lives for ever,
whereas his servants and the men of whom his Church, which is his spouse,
consists, are changed in every generation. So that there can be no
certainty of his commandments, but only by his writings: which if they
contain not all things necessary to salvation, they are imperfect, lame, and
maimed. And where you say, that Saint Augustine proves the contrary at
large, lib. 1. cont. Cresc. c. 32. it is utterly untrue. For he says
expresselie, concerning the question of rebaptising them that were baptized by
heretics, Sequimur sane nos in hac re etiam Canonicarum authoritatem
certissimam scripturarum. We truly do follow in this matter also the most
certain authority of the Canonical scriptures, whereunto he adioineth the
consent of the Catholic Church after some disceptation about the matter, whose
counsel agreeable to the holy scripture, no man doubts bur it is to be
followed. Theverie same doctrine (you say) teaches the said father, lib. de
side and operibus cap. 9. and also ep. 66. ad Don. In the former is no word to
the purpose, he speaks of the Eunuch whom Philip baptized, whose confession
of Christ being very short, some thought to be sufficient for any man that
should receive baptism, whereas there is a more distinct knowledge, and
particular explication of this faith, in other places of scripture set down,
that is to be required of them, that are catechized and come to baptism. In
the last quotation I think there is a fault, either in your Printer, or in
your notebooke, which sets down ep. 66. for ep. 166. which is directed to
the Donatistes, whereas the other is to Maximus. But in this epistle to the
Donatistes there is nothing that proves this matter, that the scriptures
contain not all things necessary to salvation. Only he exhorts the
Donatistes to unity, showing that out of the same scriptures, which teach
Christ to be the head, his body the Church, is to be discerned and learned.

Touching the twelve points of doctrine set down by the Censure, as not
contained expresselie in the scripture, and yet to be believed, Master Charke
answers, that seven of them are in scripture, the rest not necessary to be
believed. But here you say, the question is of express scripture, and not of
any far fet place, that by interpretation may be applied to a controversy.
If you mean by express scripture, that which is expressed in so many words,
as the thing in co^trouersy, we deny that we have anysuch question with you.
For we hold that any thing, which by necessary demonstration can be concluded
out of the scripture, is as true, as necessary to be believed, as that which is
expressed in plain words. And so we mean when we say, all things
necessary to salvation are contained in the holy scriptures. And as for your
examples of invocation of Saints, prayer for the dead, purgatory, and the
like, if you can win them either by manifest words, or by necessary
conclusion, we are content you shall wear them, and we also wilyeald unto
them: otherwise you prate without proof, of expressed in the scripture,
trifling upon the term expressed, which either we use not in this question,
or else we mean therbie, certainly declared, and taught in the scriptures,
either in express words, or by necessary conclusion.

But now let us see how Master Chark is distressed in answering these twelve
particulers. For the first of the seven, which he acknowledges to be
contained in the scripscripture, which is, that there is two natures, and two
wills in Christ, he cites these words, Romans 1. of his son, which was made
unto him of the seed of David, according to the flesh. Also Math. 26. not as I
will, but as thou will. here you say, that the interpretation of the Church
being set aside, and the bare text only admitted, these places cannot convict
an heretic. yes verelie, the only authority of the textis sufficient to
confit me faith, and to convince an heretic. For the former point thus. The
divinity and humanity are two natures: in Christ is divinity and humanity:
ergo two natures. The mayor is manifest: the minor is plain by the text, the
son of God one nature, the seed of David an other nature. For the fecond
point. The will of God, and the will of man, the one contradictorie to the
other, are two wills. In Christ was the will of God contradictorie to the will
of man: ergo two wills. The minor is proved out of the text, not as I will, but
as thou will, seeing Christ was both God and man. That the Monothelits in the
6. Council of Costantinople could not be convinced out of the scriptures, it
is an intolerable slander of that reverend assembly: for even by this text,
and many other, their error was made manisest: whereunto albeit the consent of
the aun cient fathers was added, yet is there no word in all that 4. action,
which you quote, to prove that they were not sufficiently confuted out of the
holy scriptures.

The second point is, the proceeding of the holy ghost from the father, and
the son equally: for which Master Chark quoteth Ioh. 15. 26. When the holy
ghost shall come, which I will send you from my father, the spirit of truth,
which proceeds from the father, etc. Against this you cavil that it proves
not the proceeding equally, and cite Cyril for your witness in 15. Ioh. who out
of this place proves that ( equally) as well as the proceeding, seeing the
heretics might be ashamed to say, that the spirit of the father, was sent by
the son, as by a minister: which also if they should say, he disprooueth, for
that if the son were as a minister, he should be of an other substance then
the father, and the spirit proceeding from the father, being of the same
substance with the father, should be greater in nature then the fonne, whereas
the son says plainly of the holy ghost, he shall glorify me, etc. An other
cauil you have, that this place tells not, whether he proceeded by
generation, or without generation, from the father. But it is sufficient that
neither this place nor any other place of scripture teaches, that the holy
ghost is begotten, therefore we believe without generation.

The third point is, the union of the word unto the nature of man, and not to
the person of man. which because you Pet. Lumb. Lib. 3. did. 5.
did set down obscurelie, M. Charke did not rightly understand: yet the text
that the quoteth. 1. (...). 14. The word was made flesh, includes that
assertion also: seeing there was no person of the man, when the union was made
unto the nature of man, but the word in taking upon him the nature of man, did
unite him self to it, and in uniting took it, as it is evident, Luke 1. 35.
Mat. 1. 20.

The fourth doctrine is, the baptising of infants, for which Master Charke
quoteth. Genesis 17. 12. the infant of eight days shall be circumcised. Against
this you have many trifling cauills, that baptism is not expressed, of the
sex, of the eight day. Against which I oppose the authority of Saint
Augustine, which lib. 1. cont. Crescon. Grammat. cap. 31. confuteth the
rebaptization of such as were baptized by heretics, by example of them that
were circumcised, by the Samaritantes, whose circumcision was not to be
repeated: to whom the like might be objected. But it is sufficient, that
wherein baptism answers to circumsion, the reason is one in both.
Circumcision was the sacrament of regeneration, as baptism is: the one given
to infantes, ergo the other. The cerimonie of the eight day, had an other
reason, not needful to be observed in baptism. The distinction of the sex
is taken away by Christ, in whom there is neither male, nor female. That Beza
was stricken dumme with this question, in the conference at Poyssie, it is a
slander of Cladius de Xanctes, confuted by Beza himself. But you had rather
follow Saint Augustine, who contendeth and proves, that baptizing of
infantes is only a tradition of the Apostles, and not left us by any written
Scripture, lib. 10. cap. 23. super Genesis ad lizeram. So you write, but I will
set down Saint Augustines words, that the reader may see, what contention and
proofs he uses, having protested of his ignorance, how the reasonable soul
comes into the body, he concludes that the baptism of infantes favors
their opinion which think, that souls are procreated of the parents. And of
the baptism of infantes thus he writes. Consuctudo tamen matris Ecclesiae in
baptizandis paruulis nequaquam spernenda est, neque vllo modo superflua de
putanda, nec omnino credenda, nisi Apostolica esset traditio. Habet enim and
illaparua aet as magnum testimonij pondus, quae prima pro Christo meruit
sanguine^ fundere. Yet the custom of our mother the Church in baptizing of
infantes is not to be despised, nor by any means to be thought superfluous,
nor to be credited at all, if it were not an Apostolic tradition: for even
that little age has great weight of testimony, which first obtained to shed
blood for Christ. You see that here is neither contention, not proof, that it
is only a tradition, and not leftin writing: for he alleges one testimony
out of Scripture, of gods acceptance of that age to martyrdom, much rather to
baptism: and many other testimonies might be brought for the same purpose, as
Matt. 19. 14. 1. Cor.. 7. 14. etc. As for Origin, he does only make mention
of the baptism of infants, according to the observance of the Church, to
prove original sin. But whether it stand only upon tradition, and not
upon the scripture, he says not one word.

The 5. Doctrine is, the changeing of the Sabbath into Sondaie. M. Charke
quoteth Apo. 1. 10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day. Here you cavil
that there is no mention of Saturdaie or sondaie, much less of celebration of
either, and least of all of the changeing of the Sabbath into an other day.
But if it please your Censurship, are you ignorant what day of the week is
called dies Dominicus, the Lordsday? whether saturdaie or sondaie? if it be
sondaie, as al professors of Christ's name confess, here is as much mention
thereof, as is needful for the day into which the change is made. Or if that
be not sufficient, you may have further, Act. 20. 7. 1. Cor. 16. 2. And why
is the first of the Sabbath called the Lords day, but in respect of the
celebration there of, in honor of the redemption of the world by Christ? For
otherwise, all days of the week are the Lords days, in respect of their
creation. Thirdly, seeing the Lords day was one day in the week, used for
the assembly of the Church, for their spiritual exercises of Religion, it is
certain, that the change of the Jewish Sabbath was made into that day, except
you would be so waywatd; to say there were two days in every week,
appointed by God to be celebrated whereas the law of God requires but one,
and gives liberty of bodelie exercise in six days. So that the change of
the Sabbath day is sufficiently proved out of the Scripture, into the Lords
day.

The sixth point is, about four Gospells, and the Epistle to the Romans, which
Master Charke says to be proved out of the scripture, but yet he quoteth no
place of scripture, where only he says the inscription expresses the names
of the writers. But what a mocker is this? (you say) Are the bare names of the
Apostles sufficient to prove that they were written by them? who can prove by
scripture that these names are not counterfeit, as in the Epistle to the
Laodiceans, in the Gospells of Bartholomew and Thomas, etc. But abide you sir:
your question has two branches, the one, that the 4. Go spells are true
Gospells: the other, that the epistle to the Romans was written by Saint Paul,
and not that to the Laodiceans. To the former it is answered, that they are
proved, by other undoubted books of the scripture, both of the old
testament, and the new: secing they declare that to be fullfilled of Christ,
which was spoken in the law, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. To the
other it is answered, that admitting the Epistle to the Romans to be
scripture, the inscription of his name is sufficient to prove that it was
written by Saint Paull. And so of therest. Although the name of the writer is
not material unto salvation, when the book is received to be Canonical as
diverse books of scripture are received, whose writer is unknown. That Epistle
which is called to the Laodicians, is not received, and therefore the
inscription is insufficient, as the Gospelles of Bartholomew, and Thomas, and
such like, which are known to be countefet, by the dissent they have from the
other canonical scriptures. Whereas you require one place of Scripture to
prove all the four Gospelles to be canonical, you declare your wrangling,
and wayward spirit. But name you any one point of Doctrine written in any of
those four Gospells, and the same shall be aduouched by other textes of
scripture, and so may eucrie point contained in them, if need were. But you
affirm, that Origin says, he rejects the Gospel of Saint Thomas, only
for that the tradition of the Church received it not. Which is false. He says,
he has read the Gospel after Thomas, after Mathias, and many other, Sed in
his omnibus nihil aliud probamus, niss quod Ecclesia, idest, quatuor tantum
euangelia recipienda. But in all these, we allow nothing else, but that which
the Church allows, that is, that only four Gospells are to be received. In
these words he affirms, that he approoueth the judgment of the Church, he
says not, that the judgment or traditions of the Church was the only cause
why he rejected those Gospells: for he said before, they were received of
heretics: and wherefore? but in maintenance of their heresy, which is
contrary to the holy scriptures. That all counterfeit Go spells were rejected
by the Church, it is confessed: but the Church had this judgment of discretion
confirmed by the canonical scriptures, against which Epiphanius says nothing.
But when Faustus the Manichie lib. 1. cont. Hebion. and lib. 1. haer. 46.
denied the Gospel of Saint Matthew (say you) says not S. Augustine, Mathaei
Euangelium probatum aduersus Faustum Manichaeum per traditionem? The Gospel of
Matthew was alleged against Faustus the Manichie by tradition. August. lib. 28.
Cont. Faust. c. 2. If you ask me, I say no, he has no such words. Yet does
he avouch the Gospel of Saint Matthew in that Chapter, by testimony of the
Church from the Apostles, by continual succession even unto his time, against
the Maniches, but in far other words then you have set down in steed of Saint
Augustines words, by which the reader may once against perceive how
impudentlie and ignorantly you ailedge, whatsoever the note book, which was
never of your own gatheriug, because you understood it not, did minister unto
you. For these are the words of the collector of your notes, and not of S.
Augustine. May not the papists have great joy of such a Cenfure, and
defender? Yet you triumph like a Iustie champion, and ask, what can be more
evident then all this, to prove our opinion of the necessity of tradition,
and to confound the fond madness of this poor Minister? Alas poor defender,
what weighty euidencethou have brought to prove the necessity of tradition
which proves thee to be a blind beggarly, and yet a bold brocher of other
men's notes, which thou understand not thy self.

The seventh doctrine which is required to be proved out of the scripture, is,
that God the father begat his son only by understanding himself. Here
Master Charke in steed of these dark words out of Thomas, how the father
begat the son, wishes clear, and perfect words in so high a mystery:
which you say, are plain and usual to those which have studied any thing in
divinity. As though there were no divinity in the holy scriptures, and so
many of the ancient fathers, which have neither this question, nor these
words, but that al divinity were included in the breast of Thomas Aquinas, and
such doctors as he was. That he quoteth a place or two of the scripture, to
prove that Christ was the only begotten son of God, you make small account
of, seeing the question is of the manner how this generation maybe, which the
Church de fendeth against the adversaries. And here you insult against M. chark
as ignorant in those high points of divinity, whereas Catholics know what the
Church has determined herein against heretics and infidels, as though either
of both: cared for the Churches determination, if the one were not vanquished
by scripture, the other by right reason, whereunto scripture is consonant. And
here you swell as much as any to ade, in the opinion of your deep knowledge
in these matters. Nevertheless we ignorant and unlearned Protestants, think it
more safe to be ignorant of the manner of the sons generation with Saint
Ambrose, then to determine beside the scriptures thereof, with Thomas Aquinas.
When Saint Ambrose was pressed with the same question, that you set down, of
the adversaries, how can God, being a spirit, beget a son, and yet the same
not to be after his father in time or nature, but equal with him in both, and
how does the father beget? he answers thus, De side ad Gratian. lib. 1. cap.
5. Quaeris a me, quomodo sifilius sit, non priorem habet patrem? quaero item
abste, quando aut quomodo putes filium esse generatum? Mihi impossibile-est
generationis scire secretum. Men's deficit, vox silet, non meatantum, sed
angelorum. Supra potesta^^ supra angelos, supra Cherubin, supra Seraphin, supra
omnem sum est, quia scriptum est, pax autem Christi quae est supra ennem
sensum. Si pax Christi supra omnem sensum est, quemadmodum non est super omnem
sensum Gal. 5.
tanta generatio? Tu quoque manum ori admoue: scrutari non licet superna
mysteria. Licet scire quod natus sit, non licet discutere quemadmodum natus
sit. Illud negare mihi non licet, hoc quaerere metus est. Nam si Paulus ea quae
audiuit raptus in tertium coelum, ineffablia dicit, quomodo nos exprimere
possumus paternae generationis ercanum, quod nec sentire potu^^mus, nec audire.
Thou ask of me how if he be a son, he has not his father before him? I
ask likewise of thee, when or how thou think that the son was begotten?
For to me it is impossible to know the secret of his generation. The mind
fails, the voice stays, not of me (...), but even of the Angels. It is
above powers, above (...), above Cherubim, above Seraphim above all
understanding, because it is written, The peace of Christ which is above all
understanding. If the peace of Christ be above all understanding, how is not so
excellent a generation above all understanding? Thou also hold thy hand
before thy mouth, it is no^ lawful to search these high mysteries, it is
lawful to know (...) (...) begotten, it is not lawful to discuss after what
manner he is begotten. That to deny, it is not lawful for me, this to inqu^^
of, I am afearde. For if Paul says, that those things which (...), being taken
up into the third heaven, were unspeake^^, how can we express the secret of
the fathers generation (...) we could neither understand, nor hear, etc. If
the determination were no less to be beeleeued, (...) other mysteries of the
trinity, that are expressed in the scripture, as you affirm, Saint Ambrose
was short in his faith of the trinity, as every man may see by his answer.
Nevertheless, whatsoever is objected, that the soon should not be equal in
time and nature with the father, whereof ensues the plurality of Gods, is
manifestly confuted by all those scriptutes that affirm one only God, and
Jesus Christ to be God, and the only be gotten (...) of the father, which
must needs argue the (...) (...) in nature and time or eternity. How this may
be, (...) (...) the scripture affirms that it is, Christians (...) (...)
ought not, or need not to inquire. If infidels in (...), they are not to be
answered by authority of (...) scriptures which they beeleeue not, and much
less (...) the Church, which they know not. And then the (...) is out of the
matter in co^trouersy, whether (...), things that are to be believed necessary
to (...), be contained in the holy scriptures. Nevertheless (...) to
infidels, that Philosophical answer may be given, how the generation of the
son by the father (...) be without inequality in time or nature: but (...) it
is, or must be only by understanding of him self, he think it for all your
bragges you are not able to (...) the determination of your Church, to auow it;
(...) for all is not defined by your Church, that the (...) have wearied their
heads to dispute of. But if you could prove it of necessity to be so, the
scriptures that affirm Christ 1. Cor. 2. 24. Ioh. 1. 1. Luke 11. 49.
to be the wisdom of the father, the word that was in the beginning with the
father, etc. would give as much light for the manner of his generation as is
possible, and profitable for man to know.

Beside this of the (...) of the son, you have other questions of (...)
adversaries: what mean they (you say) to hold, that the (...) ghost
proceeds from the father, and that the son (...) not, but is begotten? To
this I answer, That the (...) ghost proceeds from the father, the text of
(...) is plain, John. 15. 26. that the son is begotten of the father. John.
1. 14. That the son proceeds not from the father (albeit he is begotten) it
is heresy and blaspemie to affirm. For he him self affirms John. 16. 28. I
proceeded from the father, and came into the world. and Ioh. 8. 42. Another
question you have like unto this: why is it heresy to say, that the son
proceeds from the father, or that the holy ghost is begotten? I answer, to
say the holy ghost is begotten, it is heresy, because the scripture
teaches, that the son is the only begotten of the father. But to say,
that the son proceeds from the father, is no heresy, but the contrary is
heresy, because it is against the express words of Christ, as I have showed
before. And Saint Augustine affirms expressly, that whatsoever Cont. Max.
Arr. lib. 3. cap. 14.
is begotten, proceeds, so that you cannot deny the proceeding of the son
from the father, except you deny his begetting: Neuertheleles although the
son and the holy ghost do both proceed, yet not both alike, as the same
Augustine shows, de trin. lib. 5. cap. 14. vbi and illud elucescit, vtpote
quod solet multos mouere, cur non sit filius etiam Spiritus Sanctus, cum and
ipse a patre exeat, sicut in Euangelio legitur. Exiit enim, non quo modo natus,
sed quo modo datus, and ideo non dicitur filias, quia neque natus est sicut
vnigenitus, neque factus, vtper Dei gratiam in adoptionem nasceretur,
sicutinos. Where that also is made clear, which is wont to move many men, why
the holy ghost also is not the son, seeing that he also proceeds from the
father, as it is read in the gospel. For he proceeded not as begotten, but as
given, and therefore he is not called the son, because he is neither
begotten, as the only begotten, nor made that by the grace of god he might be
borne into adoption, as we. Here you see that proceeding is common to both the
persons, yet one manner of proceeding proper to the son, and another to the
holy ghost. A third question you have: what difference is between these
speeches: namely of proceeding and begotten: which question you say with the
rest, though Master Charke seem ignorant in them all, and not to understand so
much as the very (...) themselves, yet Catholic divines know what the Church
has determined herein. But concerning this question Saint Augustine shall
answer for our ignorance. Cont. Maximin. lib. 3. cap. 14. Quid autem inter
nasci and procedere incersit, de illa excellentissima natura loquens, explicare
quis potest? Non omne quod procedit, nascitur, quamuis omne procedar, quod
nascitur. (...) omne quod bipes est, homo est, quam nis bipes sit omnis qui
homo est: haec scio. Distinguere autem inter illam generationem, and hanc
processionem, nescio, non valeo, non sufficio. Ac per hoc, quia and illa, and
ista est ineffabilis, stcut Propheta de filio loquens alt, Generationem eius
quis enarrabit? ita de spiritu sancto verissime dicitur, processionem eius quis
enarrabit, etc. What difference is between begotten and proceeding, speaking
of that most excellent nature, who is able to express? Not all that
proceeds, is begotten, although al proceeds, that is begotten. As not
every two legged thing is a man, although every one is two legged that is a
man. Those things I know. But to distinguish between that generation, and
this procession, I know not, I am not able, I am not sufficient. And for this
reason, because both that and this is unspeakable, as the Prophet speaking of
the son says, who shall declare his generation? so of the holy ghost it is
said most truly, who shall declare his procession? This is Saint Augustines
judgment of this question. Yea this is the Master of the sentences judgment
also, as well of this question, as of the proceeding of the son from the
father against you. Yet you say of these as well of as the other, they are no
less to be believed, then other mysteries of the trinity, wherewith your
conclusion is, that you would not have troubled Master Charke, if you had
supposed him so gross therein, as by examination you find him, Alack poor
Sir William. A lack for pity, what high points of learning you have showed,
which in the Master of the sentences, and whom soever he will, of an hundred
schoolmen, that wrote upon him, every sophister may find moved, debated,
and defined in less then one days study. no meruaill then if Master Charke
be so gross in them, as you by examination find him. But while you in your
own imagination are so subtle in them, that you think your crest perceth the
clouds, you have bewraied more shameful proud ignorance, then any of us
would have suspected that it might be found in such a great Champion of the
Papists, such a Lord he censuter, such a doughtie defender. When in some of
the questions propounded by your self, you neither know the doctrine of the
scripture, the judgment of the ancient fathers, the determination of your
Church, nor the conclusion of your own school doctors, in whole mysteries
nevertheless you would seem to be an other Mercury.

For the rest of the hands, that you draw against Doctor Fulke, you are
answered in this consutation of popish quarrelles, from page 48. until page
55. And where you say, that every little guess at our pleasure is sufficient
to prove what we will, whereas no testimonies of your part will serve, except
they be so plain and evident, as by no waits they may be avoided, and
thereupon charge us to be Lords of the scriptures, it is as many other of
yours, a detestable slander. For as I have showed before, in matters
necessary to salvation, we admit no gesses, but either manifest words of
scripture, or else that which is necessarily concluded out of manifest words,
and principles confessed: and such if you have any, bring them forth, and we
will hearken unto them.

Over against the article of punishing heretics by death, which, (you say) was
a long time denied by our selves to be allowable by scripture, you note in the
margent Luther against Latomus de incendiariis, of burners. For what purpose I
marvel, seeing in that book he complains of the Louanistes, not for burning
heretics, but for burning of his books. For the mention which Saint Paull is
thought of some to make of an Epistle written to the Laodicenses, you are not a
little netled, that Master Chark condemns both you and Saint Ieromes
translation of ignorance. You say he should not object ignorance so
peremptorily to you, you ought not so rigorously to have been reprehended,
and you name a great many ancient writers, which may be sufficient, to wipe
away Master Charkes bitter reproach against you. But let us see howrigorously,
and bitterly he has dealt with you, yea how peremtorilie he obiecteth ignorance
to you by his own words. The Episile to the Laodiceans, although many make
mention of it, Paull makes none: so that either you ignorantly passed over
the greek, or willfullie addicted your self to the old translation, being in
this place plainly corrupted. For by the original Paull speaks of an
Epistle from Laodicea, and not written to the Laodicenses, as you untruly
assirme. Here is all that he says: you are a dainty Parnell that count your
self so rigorouflie reprehended, and so bitterly reproched in those words,
where ignorance is not peremptorily objected, as you say, but either that, or
willful addiction to the old translation, which I know not upon what ground,
you do so peremtorilie call S. Ieromes translation. Master Charke has more
cause to complain of you, for that you affirm, that he says, the greek text
has of an Epistle written by S. Paull from Laodicea. For he says not, an
Epistle written by Saint Paull, but from Laodicea, by whom soever it was
written. Where you cite many that thought mention to be made of one written by
Saint Paull to the Laodiceans, he confesses as much.

But it is more against Master Charke, that you have two Greek editions, the
one of Pagnine, the other of Plantine which make for you, as you affirm. But
what if you be deceived in them, as great a clarke as you would seem to be,
that may not be touched with the least suspicion of ignorance. The most of the
copies, both printed and written have (...), the Epistle from Laodicea. Your
two editions leave out the preposition, and then it must be translated that
Epistle Col. 4. 16.
of Laodicea, which it seems your vulgar interpreter followed in sense,
though not in words, which says: eam quae Laodicensiumest, that which is of
the Laodiceans. Where is there now in any of these that which makes for you?
that Saint Paull speaks of an Epstle written by him, to the Laodicenses. For
the Epistle of Laodicea, which your two greek editions have, and the Epistle
of the Laodicenses which your vulgar translation has, cannot signify an
Epistle written to the Laodicenses, but from Laodicea, or from the Laodiceans,
which in sense may be al one with the most usual reading, that expresses the
preposition from. Therefore it is true that Master Charke says, by both the
editions, and by the vulgar Latin text also, that albeit many make mention of
an Epistle, written by Saint Paull to the Laodiceans, he him self makes none.

The 12. section, Of the Scriptures missalledged for the contrary by M. Charke.
THe text is 2. Tim. 3. 16. and 17. The wholl Scripture is inspired of God, and
is profitable, etc. The Censure had cauiled against his translation, which it
was nessarie for him to defend, against which defense you have nothing to
reply, and therefore begin with the first reason, about profitable and
sufficient. Hetahis profitable, sometimes shall import sufficient, and not
barelie profitable: as for example, when some reason is adjoined, why it should
be profitable, and nothing else applied or serving to that effect: as when the
Apostle writes, that godliness is profitable to al things, having the promises
of this life, and of the life to come. where profitable, imports sufficient,
for the obtaining of all good things of both lives. Against this you trifle:
First, that it is but a slender argument to infer one particular of an other.
But if your eyes were matches, your might see a particular inferred of an
universal. Whersoeuer some reason is alleged, why a thing should be so
prositable, that nothing else is necessary for the effect, there profitable
imports sufficient, as in that example godliness is profitable for all things
etc. But so it is in the text in question, therefore in that text profitable
imports sufficient. Nevertheless in your opinion M. Charke is vttrerlie
deceived in this example of godliness, which by the (...) of Saint Ambrose,
Saint Jerome, and Saint Augustine, imports no more, but that godliness has
her promises of reward in all actions, whether they be about matters of this
life, or of the life to come. So that the meaning is, that piety meriteth in
all actions, but is not sufficient to the obtaining of all good things of both
lives. First concerning Saint Ambrose, read him who will upon this text, and
he shall find the contrary. Pietati operam dandam commonet, quia grandem
habet presectum. Qui enim misericordiae student, senioribus (...) reddentes
parentibus, and in presenti vita auxilia Dei non (...), and in ^. He
admonishes to labor in godliness, because it has greas profit. For they that
are merciful (...) their old Parents love, they shall (...) mant the help of
God in this present life, and in the world to come, they shalhaue immortality
with glory. Again, omnis enim (...) discipline (...) in misericus dia and
pietate est. All the sum of our discipline is in (...) and piety. Now
piety, as you confess, comprehends charity, and the love of God. And
therefore in the end Saint Ambrose, after he has showed, that bodelie
exercise, taken for fasting, and abstinence without godliness, shall have (...)
punishment, concludes, that fasting and abstinence, of men that are
spiritual, being to the end of piety, is comprehended therein. S. Ieromes
words upon this text are no more but these. Et (...) tempus, and in futurum:
nam and ipsa vidua and in presenti casta est, and merces eius manetinea.
Godliness is profitable, etc. both for the present time, and for the time to
come. For even the widow her self is both chaste in the present time, and her
reward abides in her. What is here against the sufficiency of piety? S.
Augustine de morib. Eccles. lib. 1. c. 33. has only these words (...) to
this text, speaking of the godly life of Christians, living under discipline
in cities. Ita pietatem sedulo exercent: corporis vero exercitationem, vt ait
idem Apostolus, ad exiguum tempus (...) nouerunt. So they exercise godliness
diligently, as for corporal exercise, as the same Apostle says, they know
to pertain but to a short time. Where is here, either the insufficiency,
orthe merit of godliness? for the promise of reward is of mercy, not of merit.
This reason therefore of Master Charkes for the safficiencie of the Scripture
stands im mooueable seeing the Scripture is so profitable, to all points of
doctrine, that nothing else is required to perfection.

The second reason, you say, he frames in these words, That which is
profitable to all the parts, which may be required to perfection, cannot but
be sufficient for the perfection of the wholl: but that the Scripture is
profitable in such manner, the Apostle does fully declare in rehearsing all
the particular parts which are necessary, and adding also after generally,
that the man of God may be perfect, (...) the Scripture is (...). Here of your
charity you pray God to help Master Charke, (...) him that he is a simple
one to take controuerfies in hand. And then you ask, what boie in Cambridge
would have reasoned thus. And why all this? forsooth, every boie knows there
is a cause sine qua non, which is not only profitable, but also necessary to
all parts, whereof it is such a cause, and yet it is not sufficient alone,
either to the parts, or to the wholl: as the head is (...) for all the actions
of this life, as to sing weep, dispute, yet is it not sufficient alone to
perform these actions. Therefore it follows not that whatsoever is
profitable to all particular parts, should be sufficient to all. Dij te
Damasyppe (...) verunrob consilium (...) tonsore, Or, as we say in English,
the vicar of fools be your Ghosllie father. Did you learn when you were a
boic in Cambridge orOxford, to repeat your adversaries proposition by halfes,
and then to confute as much there of as you list? Look back and you shall
find, that his proposition is not, what soever is profitable to all particular
parts, is sufficient for the wholl, but whatsoever is profitable to all the
parts, which may be required to perfection, is sufficient for the perfection
of the wholl, or whatsoever is so profitable to every part, as makes the wholl
perfect, is sufficient to the wholl. Against these propositions, if you have
any thing to object, perhaps we shall have it in your next reply, for
hitherto you have said nothing, and his argument stands still.

His third reason is taken of the words of S. Paull immediately before, where
he says unto Timothy, That the holy Scriptures, which he had learned from
his infancy, were able to make him wise unto salvation. So the argument is
this, that which is able to make a man wise unto salvation, is sufficient: the
holy scriptures are of ability to make a man wise unto salvation: ergo they are
sufficient. But this you deny. What I pray you? for I hope the (...) be
rightly framed. In effect the minor, which is the very words of Saint Paull.
For as though either you knew not, or cared not for the original text, which
says (...), which are able to make thee wise, you harp only upon the word,
of instructing, which the vulgar interpreter uses, not sufficient to answer
the greek verb (...): and yet if it be rightly understood, as perhaps he
meant, it signifies to furnish, and not to teach properly: so the sense might
be, that the scripture is able to furnish thee with knowledge to salvation: and
that (...) a sufficiency.

Now to your pelting cauilles. You ask, if the Scriptures, which can show
Timothy the way to salvation, and bring him also to it, if he will follow
them, be sufficient for the wholl Church, so that all Doctrine by tradition is
superfluous? I answer, yea. For there is but one way to salvation for all the
Church. But you object, that every Epistle of Saint Paull enstructeth a man to
salvation, yet it not sufficient for the wholl Church. I answer, that every
Epistle of Saint Paull is not sufficient to instruct a man to salvation, or to
make him wise unto salvation. But that which Saint Paull spaketh, is of the
wholl scripture, not of every epistle. For you might as well object, that every
chapter and verse instructs a man toward salvation, rather then to salvation,
but not sufficiently: yet the wholl is able to make a man wise unto salvation.
Your second objection is, that the Apostle speaks principally of the old
Testament, and will Master Charke say that the old Testament is sufficient to
Christian men for their salvation, without any other writ? Yea I warrant you:
for there is no Doctrine in the new, but it was taught in the old. Saint Paull
affirms that he said nothing, but that which the Prophets, and Moses had
spoken of things to be performed. The new Testament has no other Doctrine
then the old, only it testifies the performance of those things in Christ,
which the old Testament foreshewed to be performed. Again, because you grate
so much upon the exclusion of other writ, Saint Paull adds by faith in Jesus
Christ, which contains all that is written in the new Testament, concerning
the story of performancet, and seals of this faith. And if the old were
sufficient, how much more is the old and the new together, a rich and
abundant Doctrine. The (...) that you make against his translation, of the
wholl Scripture, which you would refer to every Scripture is answered
before: the translation must be according to the circumstance of the place.
Every Scripture, which is every several book, or every several Chapter,
or every several verse, is not able to make the man of God perfect, and
perfectly prepared to every good work: but the wholl is: therefore the
translation must be, the whole scriptures, and not, every scripture.

But now to your tow reasons. In the first you say, that Saint Paull could not
mean to Timothy of all the scriptures together, which we now use, for that
all was not then written. To this you confess that he answers, there was
enough written then, for the susficient salvation of men of that time, and
therest is not superfluous. But this, you say, is from the purpose. Yea is?
how so, I pray you? you answer, it was sufficient with the supply by word
of (...) unwritten: but that is contrary to the purpose for Master Charke
tells you, that from the time that any, (...) was written, that scripture
contanied sufficient (...) to salvation, without any supply of any other
Doctrine, that was not in that Scripture comprehended, although preaching and
other means were necessary to reach men, which is beside the purpose. Before
the scripture was written, the same doctrine in substance was delivered by
revelation, that afterward was written. The continuance thereof was not only
by bare tradition, but also in every age renewed by revelation. Again, the
age of men was lo long, that there remained always faithful and ceratine
witnesses of the doctrine alive, so that it could not be corrupted, but it was
easy by those witnesses to be refuted. But when the age of man was drawn into
the streights of 70. years, or little more, as Moses Psalm. 90. 10.
shows, the Doctrine of the Church was committed to writing, even as much at
the first, as was sufficient for the instruction of the people unto salvation,
without any supply of traditions. The (...) of the Prophets, and Apostles
writings, is a more full, and plentiful declaration of the same Doctrine of
salvation, not any addition of any new Doctrine, or way to salvation.

Your second reason is, that (...) parts of scripture be wanting now, which
were in Saint Paul's time. But that you are not able to prove. For although
there is mention in the old testament, of diverse books written by Prophets,
which are not now extant, yet it follows not; that those were extant in Saint
Paul's time. And if any were, yet were they but explications, and
interpretations of the books of Moses, which are extant every syllable, and
prick, and shall be to the end of the world. But Epiphanius affirms, that
all things cannot be taken from the scripture; wherefore the Aposties (...)
somethings in writing, and somethings in tradition. To this I answer, first,
that Saint Paul is greater then Epiphanius. Secondly, that Epiphanius says
not, that any thing necessary to salvation cannot be taken out of the
scripture. For he speaks only of this opinion, that it is sin to marry,
after virginity decreed, which nevertheless, may be taken out of the
scripture, if the vow were advisedly taken and no necessity of incontinencie
requiring marriage. But of tradition we shall have further to consider in the
next section.

The thirteenth section, entitled, Of teaching traditions besides the
scripture. Art. 5.
GOtuisus reports the Jesuits, to saic, that the want of holy scriptures
must be supplied by peecing it out by traditions, Cens. f. 220. Here you
repeat your old frivolous quarrel, that the Jesuits have no such vnreuerent
words. Master Chark charge you out of Hosius, with a far worseisaying: that
if traditions be rejected, the very Gospel it self seems to be rejected.
For what else are traditions, then a certain living Gospel? But thereto you
answer not one word, and the meaning of those words, reported by Gotuisus,
you maintain egerlie, thorouhout this section, as you did in part in the 12.
section, that the scriptures are not sufficient, and that there must be
traditions received beside the scripture. To what end, but to supply the
want, and insufficiency of the holy scriptures? Nay, say you: Though both
parts of Gods word, that is, both written, and unwritten, be necessary unto
Gods Church: yet both of them do stand in their full perfection, assigned them
by God, neither is the one a maime, or impeachment to the other. You mean,
they are as perfect, as God made them, not that the written word is sufficient
to teach all truth, unto the perfection of the man of God. And so for all your
vain compass of words, the sense is all one. The scripture is but a part, or
a piece of Gods word, and traditions are an other piece: and this piece must
be added to that, or else it is not, a perfect or sufficient instruction of
itself for Gods Church.

The comparison you make of joining S. Lukes Gospel to that of Saint Matthew,
or Saint Paul's epistles to them both, to resemble your patching of traditions
to the written word of God, is both odious, and unlike, and, without begging
the wholl matter in question, gains nothing. For the adding of the writings
of one Evangelist to another, or of an Apostle to the Evangelists, is but the
heaping of heavenly treasure, to the further enriching of the Church in all
light of spiritual knowledge: so the accession of the books of the new
testament, is as it were the unfolding, or laying open of the same divine
riches, that was perfectly contained in the old testament, for the salvation
of all Gods elect, that, lived under that discipline. But your traditions (as
you maintain them) argue an insufficiency of the holy scriptures, which
also you confess your self, and are not a more plain, or plentiful
application of the mysteries comprehended in them. Therefore though you can for
manners sake, otherwhile, forbear odious speeches aginst the dignity of holy
scriptures, yet even that odious conclusion gathered by Gotuisus must needs
follow of your doctrine, concerning the insufficiency of scriptures, and the
necessity of traditions.

That your traditions are Gods word, and of equal authority with the
scriptures, you promise to show more largely in the twelft article, together
with certain means how to know, and discern the same. Sed haec in dicm
minitave Parmeno. You have taken a pretty pause of three years long, since you
were interrupted (as you (...) in the end) by a writ de remouendo. But the
day will come that shall pay for all. Whether any cause or matter has been
ministered by you, of odious speeches against the dignity of holy scriptures,
Mastet Charke declares by one example out of Hosius, which with all the rest
that he says, you omit to answer, as trifling speech to little purpose. So
whatsoever by any color of reason you can not avoid, by your censorious
authority you may contemn, and pass over.

But his conclusion seems worthy the answer, which he makes in these
words, To conclude it is a great iniquity, to add traditions, or your
unwritten verities, to the written word of God, whereunto no man may add,
Apoc. 22.
because nothing is wanting: from which no man may take, because nothing is
superfluous. But to him that adds, shall the curses, written in the book, be
added for ever. Against this conclusion, you note in the margent, great
iniquity to add one verity to another, or to believe two verities together.
A fine ieste: but a gross begging of the wholl cause. For who shall grant that
your unwritten vereties be truth, and not falsehood, falselie by you termed
verities unwritten. There is no verity of matters necessary to be known unto
salvation, which is not written in the holy scriptures, that are hable to make
us wise unto salvation. 2. Tim. 3.
But good Lord, what a stir you keep, because M. Chatk notes in the
margent, Apoc. 22. and ask how this place is alleged against you, etc. As
though that which is true of one book, yea of every book of the scripture,
may not justly be verefied of the wholl body, and book of the the Bible.
Because adding to the word of god, argues imperfection in the word of god.
Your stale objection of Saint John's Gospel written after the Revelation, is
already answered. For all books of scripture, that have been written, since
the five books of Moses, are no addition to the word of God, but a more clear
explication of the (...) first com mitted to writing by inspiration of God.
Neither do they teach an other way of salvation, then Moses did, but set forth
the same more plainly by demonstration, by examples of Gods justice, and his
mercy, by threatenings, by exhortations, by explication of his promises, by
showing the accomplishment, and the manner of perfourmance of them in Christ
and his Church. And this they do most absolutely, sufficiently, and
plentifully, to the salvation of Gods people. These things, says S. John, are
written, that you should Ioh. 20. 31.
believe that Jesus is Christ, the son of God, and that believing, you may
have everlasting life in his name. Here you may as well cavil, that not
only the Gospel of Saint John, or the miracles written in the same, is
necessary to be believed unto salvation, but all the rest of the scripture
also, foolishlie opposing things that are no way repugnant, but the one
including the other. For the believing of Saint John's Gospel, does not
exclude, but include, all other books, and parts of holy scripture, which
teach the same mean of salvation, or any thing thereto pertaining. But how
holds this argument (say you) no man may add to the book of Apocalips,
ergo no man may believe a tradition of Christ, or his Apostles. May we not as
well say, ergo we may not believe the acts of the Apostles? No sir, for we
make our argument in this man ner, No man may add to the book of the
Apocalips, much less may any man add to the wholl Bible, of the old, and
new testament. And consequently, there are no traditions of Christ, and his
Apostles, to be credited, as needful to salvation, which are not contained in
the holy scriptures. Thus we allege scriptures, and thus we argue upon them,
not as it pleases you to deseant upon our allegations, and to dissigure our
arguments.

But it is lamentable (you say) to see the (...) dealings of these men in
matters of such importance. It is very true, understanding you, and your
accomplices, to be the men that use such fleightes in (...) weighty causes. As
for our doctrine is plain, and without any seame, that the scriptures are
sufficient to salvation, and therefore al tradition, besides them, are (...) to
that purpose. But let us see who (...) sleightes by your judgment. First you
ask Master Charke what he (...) by adding? Who does add? Or in what sense? as
though his meaning, and sense of adding were not manifest, as also his
accusation, that the I suites, the Papists do add, to the word of God, their
traditions, a necessary to salvation, yet not expressed, or contained in the
word of God. But if God (say you) left any doctrine by tradition unto the
Church, and our ancetours have delivered the same vuto us, especially those of
the (...) Church, what shall we do in this case? Shall we refuse it? It seems
dangerous, and I see no reason. The question is not, whether we should refuse
any thing that God has left: but whether God has left any such tradition to
be believed unto salua tion, which is not contained in the holy scriptures.
But if our ancetours of the primitive Church, have delivered any such
tradition unwritten, as left by Christ, what shall we do? you see no reason to
refuse it. But if you will learn reason, when it is showed, you may see more
then you do now. Are your ancetors of the primitive Church greater then Saint
Paull? Is there any testimony of man, greater then the witness of an Angel
from heaven? yet if Saint Paull him self, or an Angel from heaven, should
preach an other Gospel then Saint Paull had preached, and is contained in the
holy scriptures, that false Gospel were to be resused, and the author thereof
to be accursed. Now that Saint Gal. 1. 8.
Paull preached nothing, beside the doctrine, contained in the scriptures, he
is a sufficient witness himself. Act. 26. 22. But why see you no reason to
refuse such traditions so obtruded? Forsooth because the same men, that
delivered unto you the scriptures, and said this is Gods written word, and
said of other forged scriptures, this is not Gods written word, the same
delivered to you these doctrines, saying; this is Gods words unwritten. So
that by this reason, you have no other foundation of your faith, but the
testimony of men: who as they may speak the truth in one matter, so they may
lie, or be deceived in an other. As even by your own reason the Grecians, the
Armenians, the Georgians, the Moscouites, and all other sectaries are bound to
believe all that to be the word of God unwritten, which the same men affirm to
be such, that delivered the canonical scriptures to them, and said it was the
word of God written. But in stead of this unsure, and sandy ground, the
children of God have a more firm rock, to build their faith upon: namely
the spirit of truth, sealing in their hearts the testimony of men,
concerning the truth of Gods word written. In which the same spirit also
testifies of the sufficiency of the word written unto salvation in such sort,
as if we receive the word written for truth, we must needs condemn for false,
what word soever speaks either the contrary, or adds any thing as wanting,
and not set forth in the word written. And this I say, not as though the
primitive Church, or the godly fathers of the same, have brought in any thing
under the name of tradition of Christ, or his Apostles, as necessary to
salvation, although some of them in matters of rites, and ceremonies, have
alleged tradition beside the scriptures, yet in such things as are now for the
most part abolished, either because they were not delivered by the Apostles, as
it was pretended, or else because such matters are mutable, and not perpetual,
though they were received from the Apostles.

But let us examine the examples that you join to your reason. First, Saint
Augustine, and Origin do teach us, that baptizing of infantes is to be
practiced in the Church, only by tradition of the Apostles. For which you
quote. August. lib. 10. ad genesis lit. cap. 23. Origin. in cap. 6. Epist. ad Romans
What Saint Augustine says and how the baptism of infantes is practiced by
authority of the scripture, I have showed before, sect. 11. As for Origin, in
the place quoted, has never a word to any such matter. But of these impudent
allegations, we have had too many examples already. The second example is,
Saint Hierome and Epiphanius tell us, that the fast of the lent, and oher the
like, is a tradition of the Apostles, Hierom. Epist. 54. ad, Marcella.
Epiphann. Haer. 7. 5. Hieromes words are these against the Montanistes. Nos
vnam quadragesimam secundum traditionem Apostolorum, toto anno, tempore nobis
congruo, ieiunamus, (...) tres in anno faciunt quadragesimas, quasi tres passi
sunt saluatores, non quod and per totum annum, excepta pentecoste, ieiunare non
liceat; sed quod aliud sit necessitate, aliud voluntate munus offerre. We fast
one lent or forty days according to the tradition of the Apostles, in the
wholl year, in a time convenient for us: they make three lentes, or forty
days fast in a year, as though three saviors had sussered: not but that it
is lawful all the year long, except in the pentecostor fifty days, but that
it is one thing to offer a gift of necessity, an other thing to do it of free
will. Here Hierome says, that one forty days fast, is of the tradition of
the Apostles, but other writers say otherwise. For Damasus in his Pontifical
says, that Telesphorus Bishope of Room did institute this seven weeks
fast, before Easter. Telesphorus himself, in his decretall Epistle, says,
that he, and his fellow Bishops gathered in a Council at Room, did ordeine
this forty days fast, only for clerks, and contendeth in many words,
that there must be a difference between clerks, and lay men, as well in
fast, as in other things. If you say, these authorities, are counterfeit
(...), as I thin (...) you may truly, though Eccles. (...). l. 5. cap. 26.
you will not willingly, yet what say you to (...), an elder witness then
Hierome, who testifies out of years, that two hundred (...) before his time
there was great controversy between the next successors of the Apostles,
concerning the day of the celebration of Easter, and that the coutrouersie was
not only of the day, but also of the fast: some fasting one day, some two
dates, some more. So that of the Apostles tradition, we have no certainty in
any monument of antiquity. Again it is to be noted, that Hierome holds it
unlawful to fast between Easter, and Whitesontyde, which he calls
Peatecoste, by the same tradition of the Apostles, which yet in the Popish
Church is not observed at this day: for beside the fridaie fast, they have
also the gang week fast in that time, which in Saint Hieromes age was
accounted unlawful to fast in. Your other witness Epiphanius speaks not of
your forty days lent, but of a shorter, and yet a streighter. For these are
his words: Aquo vero non assensum est in omnibus orbis terrarum regionibus,
quod quarta, and prosabbato ieiunium est in Ecclesia ordinatum. Sivero etiam
oportet constitutionem Apostolorum proferre, quomodo illic decreuerunt quarta
and prosabbato ieiunium per omnia, excepta pentecoste, and de sex dieb.
paschatis quomodo praecipiunt nihil omnino accipere, quam panem, and salem, and
aquam, qualemque diem agere, and quomodo dimittere in illucescentem dominicam,
manifestum est. And of whom is it not agreed in all regions of the world, that
one wednesdaie and fridaie fast is ordained in the Church: But if we must also
bring forth the constitution of the Apostles, how they have there decreed one
the wednesdaie, and fridaie a fast, thoroughout all except pentecost, and of
the six days of Easter, how they command to take nothing at all, but bread,
and salt, and water, and how to spend the day and how to give over against
the dawning of the Lords day, it is manifest. Here he speaks but ofsixe
days before Easter day, and of an other manner of diet, then the Popish
Church holds to be necessary. Secondly, he speaks of the fourth days or
Wednesdaies fast to be appointed by the tradition of the Apostles which yet
nevertheless the Romish Church does not observe. Thirdly, that the Pente
cosse or fifty days, by the tradition of Apostles, are exempted from the
Fridaie fast, which tradition is not kept in the Popes Church, except you will
say that Pentecost is taken for whitson week, and then the custom of the
PopishChurch is directly contrary to the tradition of the Apostles: for
Wednesdaie and Fridaie that week are (...) days. And as for the Wednesdaie
fast, as well as the Fridaie, Epiphanius is so earnest, that he adds further,
Deinde vero, st non de eodem argumento quartarum, and Prosabbatorum, ijdem
Apostoli in constitutione dixissent, etiamaliter vndique demonstrare possemus:
Attamen de hoc exact scribunt. Assumpsit autem ecclesta, and in toto mundo
assensus factus est, etc. And moreover if the same Apostles in their
constitutions had not spoken of the same argument of wednesdaies, and Fridaies,
we could otherwise thoroughly make proof of it. But they write exactly ofit,
and the Church has taken it up, and assent has bin given in all the world. You
see he alleges not only a decree of the Apostles, but also the consent of
all the world, for the wednesdaie fast, as well as the Fridaie fast. So that if
the Apostles tradition beside the scripture be necessary for lent, why is it
not also for wednesdaies fast? And if wednesdaies fast is not necessary, no
more is lent fast.

Further you affirm, that Dionystus and Tertullian say, that prayers, and
oblations for the dead, are traditions of the Apostles, De Eccles. hier. c. 7.
de corona milit. but Dionystus, al beit we do not acknowledge him for a man of
such antiquity, as the papists would obtrude him, yet has not any mention of
traditions of the Apostles, in that Chap ter touching prayer for the dead, but
either of tradition in scripture, orels at large endeavoring to prove that he
says by scripture. Tertullian in the place quoted, speaks only of
oblations for the dead in that yearly day, which may signify thanksgiving,
as pro nataliliis, for their birth, does in in the very same clause. Not
denying yet, but Tertullian, when he forsook the Church, and became a
Montanist, yealed to prayer for the dead, as a thing revealed by the spirit,
and new prophecy of Montanus.

Last of all you say, Saint Basil teaches that the consecration of the fant,
before baptism, the exorcisme upon those that are to be baptized, their
anointing with holy chrisme, and diverse like things, are delivered to us by
prescript of Christ and his Apostles, lib. de. spi. 5. cap. 27. Of consecration
or blessing of the water to the holy use of baptism and of those that are to
be baptized, there need no tradition to be alleged, the scripture is
sufficient in the institution of baptism, whereby both the water, and the
perfon are dedicated to God, and his holy work of regeneration. The anointing
with chrisme, seems at the first to have been the sign of the gifts of the
holy Ghost, which were wont to be granted with baptism: which though it had
been vfed by the Apostles in baptism, yet that particular grace being ceased,
which to signify it was used, it has no longer any profitable use in the
Church. As for exorcisme upon those that are to be baptized. Is is your own
addition, for Saint Basil has it not. But where you say, he has diverse like
things, as delivered by traditian, it is very true, and among them this sor
example, that it is necessary for the children of the Church, to pray
standing, on the Lords day. But this necessity, even in the popish Church, is
notacknowledged: therefore whatsoever he says, is a tradition of the
Apostles, is necessarieto be kept of all Christians, although all the Church in
his time believed it, as that which Epiphanius reports of the wednesdaies
fast before spoken of.

You demand, upon what ground you shall discredit, or reject these traditions,
delivered by such fathers, chief Doctors, and pillars of the Church? Even by
the same ground, that you give over other traditions, delivered by the same
persons, either because they are not true traditions, or else because they are
not necessary for the Church, albelt they were delivered (as no doubt some
ceremonial matters were) even by the Apostles them selves. Your other reasons
are frivolous: That they were nearer the Apostles then we. For the nearest, and
most immediate successors to the Apostles, Policarpus, and Anicetus, could not
agree upon the tradition of the Apostles, one of them building upon John, the
other upon Peter, as is testified by Eusebius, out of Irenaeus in lib. 5. c.
10. Eccl. bsst. (...)
the place before cited. An other reason is, that they were honest men, and
would not deceive us willingly. And so much we acknowledge: yet might they be
deceived, in ascribing the common practice of their time, to Apostolic
tradition, and so deceive us unwittingly: nor be controlled, because the
custom, and general acceptance of that ceremony restreined men. Which
things considered, it is a great iniquity, as Master Charke says, to add
traditions to the written word of God, as if of it self it were not sufficient
to instruct the Church in all things necessary to salvation. That which
follows of Doctor Fulkes handling the old Fathers about traditions, is
answered by himself in his confutation of popish quarrels from page 55. to
page 61.

After this you cite four sever all Doctors in defense of traditions
unwritten: whereunto as some of ancient writers were too much inclined, so
have you not so sure ground out of them for your popish traditions, as you
purpose. And to begin with Basil, who by lib. de sptr, Sanct. c. 27.
Apostolic tradition defends the custom of the Church, which was to sing,
Glory be to the Father, and to the son, with the holy Ghost, whereas the
heretics would have it, in the holy Ghost, and cauilled that the other form
was not in the scriptures, Saint Basil mainteineth it as agreeable to the
scriptures, by authority of ancient tradition, although it were not expressed
in so many words in the scriptures, as many other things are, which have
like force unto piety, with those that are dilinered in express words: as
for example, he alleges the confession of the faith in the (...), which no
man doubts to be sufficiently tanght in the scriptures, although the very
words of our creed are not expressed in such for me. As we rehearse our
creed. I omit (...) things (says he) the very confession of faith, in which
we believe in the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, in what scripture
have we it? Again, And if they do reject the manner of glorifying of god, as
not written, let them bring forth demonstration in writing of the confession of
faith, and of other things that we rehearse. By which it is manifest, that the
traditions he speaks of are of two sorts: the one necessary to salvation,
not expressed in so many words, and syllables, yet in full sense contained,
and to be plainly concluded out of the holy scriptures, and these we receive
to be of as great credit as any thing, that is expresselie contained in the
scriptures. The other kind of traditions, was rites and ceremonies, which are
not necessary to salvation, but are in the Churches power to alter, as it may
stand best with edification. Among which. S. Basil rehearses some, that long
since are abolished, as the rite of standing in prayer one the Lords day, and
between Easter and Whitsontid, which of it self is a thing indifferent, as
also that manner of glorifying, in which they said. with the holy ghost,
whereas all the Church long since, has said neither in the holy Ghost, nor
with the holy Ghost, but to the holy Ghost. To believe that the holy Ghost
is to be glorified equally with the Father and the son, it is necessary to
salvation, but in what form of words, that shall be song in the Church, it is
indifferent, and the later Church has used her liberty herein, to alter that
form which Saint Basil says was delivered by the Apostles themselves without
writing. By this I hope it is manifest, what kind of traditions are of equal
force, or authority with the scripture, even they which have their ground in
the scriptures, and none other. For as the same Basil affirms, Every Moral.
reg. 26. and Reg. 80.
word or deed ought to be confirmed by testimony of the holy Scriptures.
Again, For if all that is not of faith is sin (as the Apostle says, and
faith is of hearing, and hearing by the word of God, whatsoever is beside the
holy Scripture, being not of faith, is sin. Thus Basil whatsoever he
speaks of unwritten traditions, he means not against the insufficiency of
the holy scriptures, except you will say he is contrary to himself, in
many places beside these that I have noted. Tr. de vera and piafide. Epist.
80. in Reg. Breu. Inter. 1. and. 65. 68. de ornatu Monachi.

Your next testimony is out of Eusebius, lib. 1. Eu. Demonst. cap. 8. whole
words you mangle after your manner, leaving out at your pleasure, more then
you rehearse. Eusebius having showed the excellency of Christ above Moses,
declares also that there are two manners ofliuing in Christianity, the one of
them that are strong and perfect, the other of them that are subject to many
infirmites, and that whereas Moses did write in tables without life, Christ
has written the perfect precepts of the new Testament in living minds, and
his disciples following their Masters mind, considering what Doctrine is meet
for both sorts, have committed the one to writing, as that which is necessary
to be kept of all, the other they delivered without writing, to those that were
able to receive it, which have excelled the common manner of men in knowledge,
in strength, in abstinence, etc. And this is the meaning of Eusebius in that
place, not of any traditions necessary to salvation of every man, which are
not taught in the holy scriptures, but of certain precepts, tending to
perfection, not enjoined to all, but written in the hearts of some.

The third man is Epiphanius, who (you say) is more earnest then Eusebius,
writing against certain heretics called Apostolici, which denied traditions,
as our Protestants do. Which is but a tale: for they were more like to Popish
monks and friars, then Protestants: For they professed to abstain from
marryage, and to poslesse nothing, and such other superstitions they observed.
But what says Epiphanius for traditions? He says that we must use tradition.
For all things can not be taken out of the scripture: wherefore the holy
Apostles delivered somethings in the scriptures, and something in tradition.
Mine answer to Epiphanius, is the same that it was to Basilius, Namely, that
such things as were not expressed in plain words in the scripture, were
approved by tradition, being nevertheless such things as were to be concluded
necessarily out of the scripture. As in the question, for which he alleges
tradition, it is manifest: Tradiderunt, etc. the holy Apostles of God (says
he) have delivered unto us, that it is sin after virginity decreed, to be
turned unto marriage. This the Papists doubt not, but that they are hable to
prove out of the scripture, except where the Pope dispenses. And we
acknowledge, that where the vow was made a duisedly, to a Godly purpose, and
ability in the party to perform it, that it is sin to break it, neither
can the Pope dispense with it. In the other place, where he rehearses many
examples of traditions, he speaks (...). 75.
of rites, and ceremonies, as is before declared, whereof many are not observed
in the Popish Church, neither is there any of them necessary to salvation.
But Epiphanius (you say) proves it out of scripture, 1. Cor. 11. 14. 15.
vhere Saint Paulsaith, as I delivered unto you. And again, so I teach, and so
I have delivered unto the Churches. and, If you hold fast, except you have
believed in vain. To the first, I answer, that it proves no traditions
necessary to salvation, which are not contained in the scriptures: as is more
manifest, by the second and third text: for where Saint Paul says, so I teach
in all the Churches of God. 1. Cor. 14. 33. he says immediately before, that
God is not the God of sedition, but of peace. and 1. Cor. 15. 1. 2. 3. the
Apostle speaks manifestly, of the doctrine of the resurrection, whereof he
himself in that place writes plentifully, and in many other places of
scripture, the same article is taught most expresselie. You see therefore how
substantiallie Epiphanius proves tradition unwritten, out of the scripture,
to be necessary to salvation: which is our question.

But with Epiphanius (say you) joins fully and earnestly 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Saint Chrysostom, writing upon these words of Saint Paul to the purpose.
Stand fast, and hold traditions: out of which clear words Saint Chrysostom
makes this illation. Hinc patet, etc. Hereof it is evident, that the Apostles
delivered not all by epistle, but many things also without writing, and those
are as worthy credit as these. Therefore we think the tradition of the Church
to be worthy of credit, it is a tradition, seek no more. The sense of these
words is, that the Apostles, in their preaching, did express many things,
more perticularly then in their epistles: not that they preached any thing
necessary to salvation, but that the same was contained either in their
epistles, or in other books of the holy scripture. And so I say of the
tradition of the Church which is a doctrine contained in the scriptures, though
not expressed in the same, or in so many words: as the three persons, and one
God in trinity, and trinity in unity to be worshipped, etc. is of equal
credit with that which is expressed in the scriptures: because the ground of
our faith, stands not upon the sound of words, but upon the sense, and
true meaning of things themselves. And this is Chrisostomes meaning, not of
traditions altogether without the compass of the scriptures, and yet held
necessary to salvation. For of the sufficiency of the scri ptures he speaks
in diverse places, and namely upon that clear text. 2. Tim. 3. Hom 9. of the
scripiure he says. Siquid vel diseere, velignorare opus sit, illic addiscemus.
If any thing be needefisli to know, or not to know, in the scriptures we shall
learn. But because you say, those words of Saint Paulare clear. 2 Thessalonians.
2. for unwritten tradititions, I pray you, what argument can you conclude out
of them? Saint Paul delivered to the Thessalonians, something by preaching, and
something by writing, ergo he delivered something that is not contained in the
holy scriptures, written either by himself, or any other of the holy men of
God, appointed for that purpose. Who is so childish, think you, to grant you
this consequence? therefore for any thing you have brought or can bring, or
any thing that the fathers have said or can say, the word of God writ ten is
perfect, and hable to make a man wise to salvation, by faith in Jesus Christ,
which is to be had sufficiently in the holy scriptures, as Christ himself
does witness. John. 5. 39. And so the former conclusion does still stand. It is
great iniquity to receive traditions altogether beside the holy scripture, as
necessary to salvation, which must needs argue the holy scriptures of
imperfection, and insufficiency. Neither does the consent of Antiquity refute
this assertion of Master Charke, seeing the ancients, as it is said, spoke
either of doctrine not expressed in word, but contained in deed, in the
scriptures, or else of rites, and ceremonies: the perpetual observation where
of is not necessatie to eternal life, as is proved by the discussing of many
of them, which the elder fathers do father upon the tradition of the Apostles,
as much as any other that they name. And if you say, they were deceived, in
such as are abolished, how shall we know that (...) not in such as are
retained? For in their (...), they were all generally received as (...) (...),
as well such as are discontinued, as those (...) remain.

(...) if any man will ask you, what be these Apostolical (...) in
particular, you could allege him testimonies (...) ancient fathers, for a
great number: But you referr (...) Saint Cyprian, Sermon. de ablut. pedum.
Tertullian (...). milit. and Saint Hieron. dialog. contra Luciferianos: (...)
say, he shall find store. Belike your note book (...) you thither, although
you listed not to take so (...) (...) your self, but turn it over to your
(...). Howbert he that is disposed to read the sermon (...) Cyprian, shall
find no store at all, but of the necessity of washing offcete, which
ceremony was taken by the example of Christ, yet is not thought necessary in
the Popish Church at this day. Tertullian in deed has some pretty store, yet
not to mantaine popish traditions so much, as to overthrow them. For he (...)
some things, that are taken out of the scripture; as to renounce the devil in
Baptism, etc. some that are grown out of use many hundred years ago: as
that the baptized should taste of milk and honey: that they should abstain
from washing seven days after. That men should sign their forheade at every
step and proceeding going forth, and coming home, at putting on of apparel,
and at pulling on of shoes, at washings, at table, at lighting of candells, at
beds, at stools, at all times and places. Saint Hierome also in the person
of the heretic, rehearses traditiones, and among them, such as Papists do
not observe, namely the mixture of milk and honey given to them that are
newly baptized. On the Lords day, and during the wholl time of Pentecoste,
neither to kneel in prayers, nor to fast. These are part of those Apostolical
traditions in particular, which if they had been necessary to salvation, must
have been perpetually continued. If they were untruely ascribed to the
Apostles, what wartant can we have of any other, seeing the most ancient
writers commend these as much as any other, for Apostolical traditions.

Yet a few other examples, you will add out of Saint Augustine, who proves
baptism (you sare) by tradition of the Church. lib. 10. de. genesis ad lit. cap.
23. to this answer has been made sufficiently in the 11. section, that
Saint Augustine does not defend baptism of infants only by the custom of
the Church, but also by the scriptures. Likewise you say he proves by the
same tradions, that we must not rebaptize those which are baptized of
heretics, lib. 2. de bapt. capt. 7. and lib. 1. cap. 23. and lib. 4. cap. 6 It
is true, that he perwsadeth him self, that this custom of not rebaptizing,
came from the Apostles tradition, yet does he by many arguments out of
scripture prove, that such are not to be baptized again, which have been
once baptized, although by heretics, and therefore he says of the same
matter, Hoc plane verum est, quia ratio and veritas consuetudini praeponenda
est. Sed cum consuetudini veritas suffragatur, nihil oportet firmius retineri.
This is plainly true, that reason, and truth is to be preferred before
custom: but when truth consents with custom, nothing ought more
steadefastlie to be (...). You see therefore, that he builds not only upon
custom, or tradition, which is the matter in question, but upon truth and
reason, which is founded by the holy scriptuers. Your middle quotation, de
bap. lib. 1. cap. 23. you may correct against your nextreplie, for there are
but 19. Chapters in that book.

Again, you say, He proves by tradition the celebration of the Pentecost
commonly called Whitsontide. ep. 11 etc. 1. If it were as you say, it is but
a matter of ceremony, not necessary to salvation, but in the power of the
Church to alter, as many like, which are abrogated. But in truth he proves
it not, as you say, by tradition. For these are his words. Illa autem quae non
scripta, etc. But those things which are kept, being not written, but
delivered, which are observed thoroughout all the world, it is given to be
understood, that they are retained as commended, and decreed, either by the
Apostles themselves, or by general Counsels, the authority of which is
most whollesome in the Church, as that the passion of our Lord, and his
resurrection, and ascension into heaven, and the coming of the holy ghost
from heaven, are celebrated with yearly solemnity. You see by his own
words, that he is not certain whether he should lay this ceremonial
celebration upon delivery of the Apostles, or upon decrees of general coun
cells. And whencesoeuer they came, the matter is not great in such things, as
of their own nature are indifferent, and therefore alterable by discretion of
the Church in all times. Whether the Apostles were baptized, which is the next
matter, that you say, he prnoueth by tradition, it is a question not so
needful to be decided, although it may be proved out of scripture that some
of Math. 3. 5. 7.
them which were John's disciples, were baptized by him, and so it is like were
all the rest: seeing Jerusalem, and all Jury, and all the coast near unto
Jordan were baptized Luke 3. 12. 14
by John, even to the Pharisees, and Saduces, Publicans, and soldiers, it is
not probable, that the Apostles, who before their calling by Christ, were of
honest, and devout conversation, did neglect that divine institution, which all
men, that would seem to be religious, made have to receive.

Furthermore, you say, he proves by tradition the ceremonies of baptism, as
delivered by the Apostles. lib. de. fide and Oper. cap. 9. The question is,
whether the Eunuch whom Philip baptized, made such profession of his faith,
etc. renouncing of the devil, as is required of them that are baptized, when
the scripture makes mention only of a short confession, that Jesus Christ is
the son of God. Where Saint Augustine shows that the holy ghost would have
us to understand, that althinges were fulfilled in his baptism, which though
they be not expressed in that scripture, for breuities sake, yet by order of
the tradition we know that they are to be fulfilled. Where tradition is not
taken for that which is altogether beside the scripture, but that which
according to the scripture delivers what is to be observed, concerning the
celebration of that sacrament, which is the seal of mortification, and
regeneration. That the Lords supper should be received before other Epist. 118.
meats, he thinks of it as of other ceremontall matters, that it came either
from Apostolic tradition, or from decrees of general council, yet is it a
thing not necessary always to be observed: for your selves do housell sick
folks, at all times of the day, or night, without respect, whether they have
tasted any thing or no: otherwise as a matter of order, and decency, it is
observed of us also, to minister that sacrament before dinner, and to them that
be fasting, if the case of necessity require not the contrary.

Yet again, you say, he proves by tradition the exorcisme of such as should
be baptized. l. de nupt. and concu. cap. 20. and l. 6. cont. Julian. c. 2. But
the truth is, that by the ceremony of exorcisme, exsufflation, and
renunciation, that is used in baptism, he goes about to prove, that infantes
before baptism be in original sin, and in the power of the devil: as is
evident by both the places, which prove not exorcisme to have been received
by tradition, but by the end of that ceremony (upon what beginning soever)
used in the Church at that time that infants are borne in original sin, and
subject to the power of Satan, before they be baptized. The words of the
former place are these. In veritate itaque non in falsitate, etc. In truth
therefore, not in falsehoode, the devils power is exorcised in infants, and
they renounce him by the hearts and mouths of their bearers, because they
cannot by their own, that being delivered from the power of dark nes, they
may be translated into the kingdom of their Lord. Here is never a word of
tradition. The second place has these words: Sedetsi nullaratione indagetur,
nullo sermon explicetur, verum est tamen quod antiquitas etc. But although it
(original sin) may be sought out by noe reason, by no speech it may be
expressed, yet is it true that by true Catholic faith from ancient time is
preached, and believed thoroughout the wholl Church, which would neither
exorcise, nor exsufflate the children of the faithful, if she did not deliver
them from the power of darkness, and from the prince of death. Here the
ancient doctrine of original sin is confirmed by the old ceremonies of
exorcisme, and exsufflation, which were used in baptism, to signify that
infants were by that sacrament delivered from the guilt of original sin, by
which they were under the power of darkness and death. But that these
ceremonies were Apostolic traditions, he says not, or that they are of
necessity to (...) used in baptism, when the one of them, namely (...), is
not used at this day, for ought I know, in the Popish form of baptism. The
Moscouites, in place of it (as it seems) use excreation. For when the
Godfathers, and Godmothers, answer that they renounce the devil, they spit out
one the earth, as it were in sign of detestation. In Saint Augustines time
they used to blow out.

In the last place you say, he proves by the same tradition, that we must
offer up the sacrifice of the mass for the dead: lib. de cura pro mort.
agenda. cap. 1. and 4. sermon. 32. de verbis Apostoli. Of the sacrifice of the
Mass Saint Augustine speaks nothing, but that prayers were offered for the
dead at the celebration of the Lords supper, which he calls sacrifice: he
says, it was by authority of the whole Church, which was notable in that
custom, and that the wholl Church observed it, as delivered from their
fathers. But seeing the elder Church for more then an hundred years after
Christ had no such custom nor doctrine, and especially, seeing the same
custom is against faith, taught in the holy scriptures, that the dead in the
Lord are blessed, that judgment follows immediately after death, etc. The
authority of faith and truth is to be preferred before the tradition, and
custom of men. Neither is it to be thought, to have proceeded from the
Apostles, which is disprooued by the writings of the Apostles, the only
certain witness of the doctrine delivered by them, which is necessary for us
to beeleeue, and follow. And therefore this new sir Censurer does greatly
abuse the old saints, whom he would have patrones of his unwritten verities,
partly in charging them to refer unto tradition many things that they do
not, partly in drawing to doctrine necessary, that which they speak of
ceremonies mutable, and not the least in picking out one or two ouersightes to
be pardoned, under color of them to maintain all the gross heresies of
Popery, that are intolerable.

The fourteenth section, Whether the Jesuits speak evil of scripture. Art. 6.
entitled, Nose of wax.
IF you had ser down Master Charkes reply between your Censure and your
defense, as reason would you should have done, for men to judge indifferently
between both, you might have spared more then two pages, which you have spent
in charging him with a slander of the Jesuits, where he reports, that they
say, the scripture is a nose of wax, when they say, it is as a nose of wax.
For no reasonable man can make any other sense of those words, the scripture
is a nose of wax, but even the same that you confess, to be the saying of the
Jesuits: the scripture is as a nose of wax, as Master Charke tells you. And
moreover that Paiua says, the fathers of Colene, in a most apt similitude
called the scripture, a nose of wax, and Pighius the leaden rule of the
Lesbian building. But now concerning the matter it self: You would shift it
of, by saying: The Jesuits do compare the heretical wresting, and detorting
of scripture, vnso Orth. expl. lib. 2. page 104.
the bowing of a nose of wax, upon certain circumstances; which are these.
First not in respect of the scripture it self, but in respect of heretics,
and other that abuse it, and that before the rude people, that cannot judge:
thirdly to the end to flatter Princes, or the people in their vices. Thus
much was said before in the Censure. But it was replied that Andradius
confesses the fathers of Colene do say: that the holy scripture is as a
nose of wax. So does Pighius: and it is a thing more commonly known, then
that it can be denied. Therefore the wresting of the scripture is not compared
by them, to the bowing of a waxen nose, but the scripture it self to a nose of
wax, as that which is as easy to be drawn into any sense, as a nose of wax
may be turned every way. The words of Pighius are plain. Sunt enim
scripturae velut caereus quidam nasus, qui sicut Cont. 3.
hor sum illor sumque facile se trahi permittit, and quo traxeris haud inuitus
sequitur, ita and illae se flecti, duci, atque etiam in diuer sam sententiam
trahi accomodarique ad quid-uis patiuntur, nist quis veram illam
inflexibilemque earundem amussim, nempe Ecclesiasticae traditionis
authoritatem, communemque sententiam ilsdem adhibeat. For the holy scriptures
are as it were a certain nose of wax, which as it easelie suffers it self
to be drawn this way and that way, and whether soever you draw it, is
follows not unwillingly: so also they do suffer them selves to be bowed, to
be led, and also to be drawn into a contrary meaning, and to be applied unto
what you will, except a man lay unto them that true, and inflexible rule of
them, namely the authority, and common understanding of the Churches
tradition. These words declare (if the sense of all Papists be the same) that
the Jesuits do not only compare the scripture it self, but also that they
make this comparison in respect of the scripture it self, which suffers it
self as easelie to be wrested, and abused, as a nose of wax abides to be
bowed: nor before the rude and ignorant only, nor to flatter Princes, and
people in their vices alone, but before any persons, or to any purpose
whatsoever: and that there is not in them a certain and infallible sense, to
judge of the Churches doctrine, or to find out the true Church from all false
congregations, by the truth taught in the scriptures, but that the authority
and common understanding of the Popish Churches tradition, is the only true
sense, and inflexible rule of the holy scriptures. wherebie also it is
manifest, though you deny it never so stoutly, that you do impute the
wresting of the scriptures, unto the imperfection of Gods word set forth in
them, and not only to the malice of the wrester. For if the will of God be
but as well expressed in them, as the will of princes is in their written
laws, and proclamations, the one may as well be found out, by reading and
weighing of the holy scriptures, as the other may be out of profane writings,
especially where the spirit of God, granted unto the prayers of the elect,
opens their understanding, not only to conceive, as the natural man may,
by study, and ordinary helps, the true scope and purpose of God uttered in
them, but also to believe, and embrace whatsoever the Lord their God has
propounded in them. Therefore though the scripture may be wrested to the
destruction of the ungodly, as Saint Peter shows, yet Master Charke tells
you, that it cannot so be wrested, but that still it remains the light unto
our feet, and the lantern unto our steps: and every part thereof, is like
the arm of a great Oak, which cannot be so wreste, but that with great force
it will return into the right position, to the shame and peril of the
wrester, which answer of his you do so dissemble, as though you had never
seen it. And you do wisely, seeing otherwise, then by silence, you could not
avoid it.

But howsoever Master Charke storm, you will defend your blasphemy of the
nose of wax, not only in a kingdom, where the Gospel is preached, but
also in the kingdom of us ministers, where the letter of the scripture is
worsse wrested by us to all errors and licentiousnes, then every waxen nose
was yet bended, to diverse fashions. O ye senseles papists, had you never a man
of moderat judgment, to set forth against us, but this loosetongued Gentelman,
which so he may rail with full mouth against us, has no care how his
slanders may be colored? Do we pervert the scriptures to all errors? then
surely, we hold no truth: there never was any heresy, neither can there be
any heresy, but that with many errors, it maintains and holds many
truethes. Yea the Devil himself the father oflies, believes some truethes,
and for shame dare not profess the maintenance of all errors. We think very
hardly of Antichrist, and his brood the papists, yet we may not say, that
they wrest the scriptures to all errors, and licentiousnes: for if they so did,
they should not deceive so many by show of truth in errors, except they did
profess some articles of truth in deed. As for the wresting of the Scripture
to all licentiousnes, let God and all the world of reasonable and indifferent
men judge, how justly we may be charged therewith. If we be licentious in our
lives, God will find it out, and let man, where he finds it, punish us. But
if we wilfully pervert the scriptures to the maintenance of all licentiousnes,
the Lord reward us according to our deeds, and be not merciful to them, that
sin of malicious wickedness.

But it is no fault in the scriptures (say you) that they may be abused. For
Christ himself was called, the rock of offense, and the stone of scandal,
not for any fault or imperfection in him, but through the wickedness of such
as abuse that benefit. So if the Jesuits had said no more, but that the
scripture may be abused, no man could have found fault with them. And Christ
is called a stone of offense or stumbling, not altogether in respect of the
wicked that abuse him, for he is called a stone most precious, and necessary
to build upon, of stumbling, to those that refuse to build upon him, which
meeting with him, must either stumble and fall, or else if it fall upon them,
they must be ground to powder. But the the scripture is compared to a nose os
wax, because it is in their imagination, that use the comparison, as pliant to
follow every way, and to yeald as probable a sense one way, as an other, as
a nose of wax is easy to be turned and shaped on every side or sort, which if
it were so, must needs be a great fault in the scripture it self. A hundred
positive laws and statutes in England are so well penned, as all the
sophistical heads in christendom cannot find a starting hole in them by any
perverse interpretations, but thatall they, which have but a mean skill in the
laws, will laugh them to scorn. And tha I we think so irreverently of the
holy scriptures, given by inspiration of god, that every foolish heretic may
turn them about, like a nose of wax, but rather that in his said attempt of
turning, his folly shall be made manifest to al men? Pighius, Cont. 3.
says expressly, the scriptures are dumb judges, as though Godspake not in
them, and by them unto us: whose profane comparison of the holy scriptures
with profane laws, which require Magistrates, and judges to punish the
offenders of them, every Christian man may perceive to tend to the derogation
of the majesty of them. As also every child that has studied logike but
half a year, may understand his beggarly petition of the principle, when
appealing from the judgment of the scriptures, he will be judged by none, but
by papists, in controversies and questions that we have against the papists. As
for the black Gospel, and Inkie divinity babled by Eccius against the
written Gospel. If Jesuits can maintain as Catholic: surely Christians can
not hear it without horror of blasphemy.

If there be no fault or imperfection in the scriptures, Cont. 3. math.
how says Pighius, that every man may evidently know without the scriptures,
in what order the Church is appointed, by her author. Again, of what moment is
the holy scripture, if it be not necessary, to decide all doubts and
controversies in the Church? for thus says Pighius: If we receive the
authority of the Churches tradition, quam si recipimus, omnis facile etiam
sine scriptur is inter nos componetur concertatio and controuersia, cum de
singulis nonfuerit admodum operosum inuenire, quid Catholica ab initio Ecclesia
senserit. Which if we receive, all strife and controversy between us may
easily be compounded, even without the scriptures. Seeing it is no very hard
work to find out, what the Ca tholike Church from the beginning has thought
of every question. Thus the Ecclesiastical tradition is set a loft, and the
holy scriptures excluded, as superfluous and unnecessary, seeing all
questions may easily be decided without them.

But to give a better color to your nose of wax, you In cap. 1. ep. ad Gal.
say, Saint Jerome does call the scriptures alleged corruptly by Marcion and
Basilides, the devils Gospel, because the Gospel consists not in the words
of scripture, but in the sense. But so does not Christ call the scripture, when
it was alleged by the devil: neither does Saint Jerome so call the scripture,
but the false sense feined by heretics. His words are these. Grande periculum
est in Ecclesia loqui, ne forte interpretatione peruersa, de Euangelio Christi
hominis fiat Euangelium, aut quod peius est, Diaboli. It is great peril to
speak in the Church, least perhaps by perverse interpretation, of the
Gospel of Christ, be made the Gospel of man, or that which is worse, of the
devil. And it is true which he says, The Gospel is not in the words, but in
the sense of the scriptures. Yet it is also true, that the sense of the
scriptures is expressed in those words of the scriptures, and not included in
the Popes breast, as the Papists would have us think, that al labor bestowed
in seeking the sense of the scriptures, is in vain, except we take the
interpretation of the Popish Church, which sthe judgment of the Pope, as the
sure rule to guide us by. But Saint Augustine (you say) calls the scripture
the bow of heretics. Which is not so: for he compares In Psalm. 10.
their wresting of the scriptures, to the bending of a bow. Ecce, inquiunt,
peccatores tetenderunt arcum: credo scriptur as, quas illi carnaliter
interpretando, venenatas inde sententias emittunt. Behold, say they, the
sinners have bent the bow: the scriptures I believe, which while they
interpret carnally, they send forth poisoned meaninges from them.

Further (you say) Irenaeus compares it abused by heretics (...). 1. cap 1.
to a Jewel stamped with the form of a Dog or Fox. Irenaeus speaks not of
the body of the scriptures, but of words, sentences, and parables of
scripture rent not only from their sense, but also from their place, and
patched together with old wives fables, to make a show for heresy: which is
all one, as he says, as if a man should break an excellent Image of a king,
and when he has fashioned the pieces, being pearls or precious stones, into
the shape of a Fox, or Dog, he would yet be so impudent to say, this is that
excellent Image of the king, which was made by a not able workman. This
sounds nothing like the nose of wax.

Likewise you say, Gregory Nazianzen compares the (...) Nicob.
scripture to a silver scabberd with a leaden sword in it. The comparison you
speak of, is in his poemes which I verelie am persuaded, that you never read,
but were mocked by your notebooke, as many times before. For Gregory compares
not the scriptures, as you slander him, but an hipocrite, a man that has
nothing, but an external show of religion, to a leaden sword in a silver
scabberde: his verses are these, if you could have construed them.

To these that you might seem bountiful, though In praescrip. Cont. baer.
you be a very beggar of your own reading, you add Tertullian, and
Vincentius Lirinensis, of which the former (you say) compares the scripture
to the deceitful ornaments of harlottes, the other to poisoned herbs covered
in the Apothecaries shops with fair titles. Wherein you slaun der them both:
for they compare not the wholl scripture, as you do in your nose of wax, but
the heretical bragges of scripture, which as they may abuse a piece for a
show, so are they confounded by the wholl, when the same is rightly weighed.
Therefore the comparisons of these ancient Doctors, are no more like to your
nose of wax, then your nose of wax is like to the holy scriptures. Neither
does the example of Luther, calling the scriptures the book of heretics,
expounding him self why he so calls it, namely because it is depraved by
heretics, defend the Jesuits, which to the deprauation of the scriptures use
that similitude, as Luther did not in his, albeit he might as well have
forborne that title, as his rash judgment, against those whom you call
sacramentaries: for as the one was unprofitable, so the other was unjust.

But if the Jesuits (say you) had rejected any one book of the scripture, as
the Protestants do many, we might justly accuse them. It is as great a fault
to add to the word of God, as to take from it. The Protestants reject no
book of the canonical scripture, which was received by Christ, and his
Apostles, and the primitive Church long after them. But the Papists add of
their own authority, to the holy canon, and therefore, as much are they
subject to gods curse, as if they did take away. Neither does Luther discredit
or deface the whole epistle of Saint James as (you say) although in comparison
of some other books of scripture, by a similitude, he makes it far inferior
to them What Doctor Fulke and Fulk confuse of Popish quarrels, fol. 61.
Whittak. Cont. Dur.
Master Whitaker have written, the one of the book of Maccaebees, the other of
Tobie, they have sufficiently maintained in their replies, whereunto I remit
the reader: and for Master Charkes reuiling of Judith, to the report of the
disputation, in which your impudent slander is confuted.

Where you conclude that no man in the world ever spoke more reverently of
holy scripture, then Jesuits do, you over reach very much, as you do very
often. They which teach that the holyscripture is sufficient to make us wise
unto salvation speak more reverently, then the Jesuits, whichdeny the
sufficiency of the scripture, for the instru ction of the Church. Last of all the Censure ridiculously charged M. Charke with fraudulent translation of this
word Immaculata, when he alleges this text psalm. 19. as oppo sit to your
nose of wax. The law of the Lord is perfect, out of the original tongue, and
the best translations, from which the greek in sense dessenteth not, and not
out of the old latin translation. Now you trifle to no purpose, about the
Hebrew, Greek and Latin terms, which to those that are but me anelie
learned, are well enough known what they signify. And first, if you should
grant all that M. Chark said, you think he had gained nothing. For you also
confess, that the law of the Lord is perfect, but not in that sense, wherein M.
Chark vsech it, to wit, that because the law of the Lord is perfect, therefore
the scripture cannot be wrested. And afterward when you have told us, that
these words, vnde filed, irreprehensible and perfect (which answer the latin
greek, and Hebrew words) (...) not much in sense (for whatsoever is
irreprehensible, and unspotted, may also be called perfect) you conclude that
this does not prove the scriptures to be perfect in sense, in such sort, as it
may not be wrested or perverted. You say true, but it is false, that Master
Chark makes any such illation, as you charge him. For thus he infers, the
law of God is perfect, ergo it cannot be wrested as a nose of wax, or as his
own words are, the scripture is perfect, and manteineth her perfection
against all corruptions, as a right line shows it self, and bewraieth that
which is crooked. The law of a wise man (as has been said before) may be so
perfect, as it cannot be wrested like a nose of wax, into any sense that the
wrester will imagine, but that his vain cauillation shall be odious, and
ridiculous to al men. Much rather is the law of God so perfect, as though all
the deuilles in hell should break their brains to wrest and peruertit, yet
can they never wrest it like a nose of wax, to every side or shape, but that
the perfect sense of the scripture remains full constant, and manifest to them
that have the spirit of God: yea even to them that will judge but
indifferently according to right reason. Cont. Max. Arr. lib. 3. cap. 14.


By the way you charge Master Charke with railing, and inueighing, against
your old translation, and with running he cares not whether, forging he
cares not what, and reprehending he cares not whom. yet in all that
discourse he has no more words of it, but these: your old translation does
go alone. In which words what railing, running, forging, reprehending,
inueihing, may be contained, let ihe wiser sort judge, and fools learn to be
wiser. But where he says, that the best translations differ from the old
translation, you ask, what best, or better, or other good latin translation
has he then the old? As though none might be good, but your old translation.
I perceive you would not acknowledge any good of them that were set forth by
Munster, Leo, Jude, or any other professed protestant: yet what say you to
the translation of Vatablus, a famous and learned reader of Paris? How dare you
condemn the translation of Pagnine of the old testament, and Erasmus of the
new testament, as naught, which the Pope allowed as good? Finally what
exceptions can you take to the translation of Isidorus Clarius censured and
approved, by the deputies of the Council of Trent? may none of these be
good, better or best, but that your old translation has the prerogative in
goodness in all degrees, that it leaves all other behind it, as naught? O
weighty censure of a wise Papist. But let us see wherein the excellency of
the old translation does consist, as you suppose. First you say, it was in
use in Gods Church above 13. hundred years past, as may be seen by the
citations of the fathers which lived then. But even those very citations do
prove the contrary, at the least, that it was not in general use in the
latin Church. Saint Augustine in the place by you quoted, for the bow of
heretics, where In Psalm. 10. ver. (...).
your translation has in obscuro, did read in obscura luna, and stands much
upon exposition of the dark moon. Yea throughout the wholl Psalter, whosoever
will compare the text which Saint Augustine used, with your old translation,
shall find great difference between them. But this your old translation (you
tell us) was afterward oueruewed, and corrected by Saint Jerome. we know very
well, that Saint Jerome did oueruew and correct a certain ancient translation
of the septuaginta, that was vfed in his time. But how are you hable to prove,
that this your vulgar translation is the same, either corrected, or
uncorrected? For it appears by the citations of diverse of the latin Church,
which lived after Saint Jerome, that they used an other text, then this
translation, even until the days of Bernard. When you say, that this your
old translati on was highly commended by Saint Augustine, you make such a
shameless (...), as you object without shame to M. Charke, when he says, that
the Septuaginta agree with the hebrew, in signification of the word perfect:
for they say irreprehensible, which must needs be perfect: but so is not your
latin (...), unspotted, or undefiled, which you your self in your censure do
egerlie contend to be differing from perfection. You name the translation of
Erasmus and Luther, of which the one translated only the new testament, which
Leo. 10. and Clemens. 7. did both allow, the other translated not the Bible at
all in latin, except perhaps some parts, upon which he wrote commentaries.

Here your Printer will make us believe, that you were removed with a writ de
remouendo, so as you could proceed no further: but now there is a writ de
renouando, sued against you, if you dare abide by your censure, to renew your
defense, or else to pas on to the rest of the confutation, of the rest of Master
Charkes reply, and so to take his answer altogether.

LAVS DEO.
A CONFVTATION OF A TREATISE MADE BY WILLIAM ALLEN IN DEFENSE OF the usurped
power of Popish Priesthood to remit sins, of the necessity of Shrift, and of
the Popes Pardons.

BY WILLIAM FVLKE.

Imprinted by THOMAS THOMAS Printer to the University of Cambridge.

A CONFVTATION OF A TREATISE MADE BY WILLIAM ALLEN IN DEFENSE OF THE VSVRped
power of Popish priesthood to remit sins, etc.
ALLEN. BEcause the unjust clyame and challenge of any power not given does
highly displease God, from whom only all pre-eminence of man proceeds, no
doubt all Priests and Bishops, who have so long practiced pardoning and
punishing of sin, if they hold not the right of the excellent function of
Gods own grant, they have built this many hundredth years toward hell, and
can neither avoid the heavy indignation of god, in wose office and prerogative
they have unjustly intermedled, nor yet marvel at their disdain amongst
men, seeing it is said, that the usurper of power is worthielie hated: Qui
Eccl. 20.
potestatem sibi sumit, unjust odietur.


FVLKE. IF the rest of your arguments were as good as this, we should not need
to write any confutation of your treatise: for true it is, that they which
usurp so great a power without Gods own grant, deserve condemnation of him,
and hatred of men, neither of which (except they repent) they can be able to
avoid. Neither are they in better case, which though they pre tend to have some
color of grant, yet abuse the same, perverting the right meaning of the
graunter to a far other end, and exersize the same, after a far other sort,
then their commission, by which they claim authority, in any wise does
import. And such is the case of popish priesthood, which under pretense of
power of remitting or retaining of sins committed against the Church of
Christ, and the true pastoures thereof, arrogate unto them selves, which are
but Idolles, and therefore not the persons authorized, an absolute authority of
pardoning, according to their own judgment, not a ministry of
reconciliation, according to the will of God, by a certain devised form of
words, or writing, and not by preaching of the Gospel. For which causes and
many other, although the grant of Christ be never so ample unto his Church,
yet it includes not them, which be his adversaries, which for their own
glory, and luker, under shadow of Christian authority of binding and loosing,
do practice antichristian tyranny, to be Lords of men's conscience, and to
make marchaundise of their souls.


ALLEN. But if that most holy order, do by good right and reason, and by the
son of God Christ Jesus his own warrant and special commission, occupy the
seat of judgment, erected in the Church for the government of our souls and
needful search of our secret sins, then it stands lamentably with the
disobedient captains of this contempt, through whose continual call to
sedition, so many have been carried away, from that cbaisance that is due to
the soueraing power given to Gods annonited.


FVLKE. But when neither the popish order of priesthood has any institution of
God, neither has the son of God erected any such seat in the Church for
government of our souls, and needful search of our secret sins, as is
pretended and practiced: they which call men, not one lie to the contempt, but
also to the detestation of such usurped tyranny, are unjustly charged with
sedition and disobedience against Gods anointed, seeing they purpose and
practice nothing, but the honor of Christ, the Lords anoninted with the oil
of gladness above all other, and the due estimation of those his servants,
whom he has appointed to be the true dispensers of the graces, and heavenly
treasures of his word and Sacraments upon earth.


ALLEN. They remember well (such is their exercise in the word) how that
disdain of Moses and Aarons (...) over the people that then God chose to be
his peculiar, moved his Majesty to so great indignation, that he drove down
Core and all his confederacy to the depth of hell both body and soul,
themselves alive, and all the people looking on their fall so fearful. The
example had bin of less respect, if his heavy hand had staid upon the
principal of that proud sort: but it did not. For there perished, by strange
fire, of the accessaries to that Schism, two hundredth and fifty more. And the
grudge, alas, of the people not ceasing so, God sent fire from heaven, and
wasted 14. thousand and 700. of them at once. And all this says Moses,
Vtsciatis quia blasphemauerint Dominum, that you may be well assured, that
they blaspemed our Lord God. So near does the contempt of Gods ministers touch
his own person, that in disdain of the one, there is account made of horrible
blasphemy of the other. This Cores, as Josephus writes, was a man that had a
cast in talk to please the people, as the seditious often have: and this was a
great flower of his persuasion of the people to sedition and disobedience, as
holy write reports, Cur eleuamini super populum Domini? It is sufficient for
our purpose, that the whole multitude is sanctified, and the Lord is in them:
why do you exalt your selves above the people of God? Thus said the seditious
against Gods Priests then: and now truly, both the people and the preacher
do pipe Cores note of cur eleuamini, in every play and pulpit, never having
in mind their lamentable fall, whose steps they like so well to follow.


FVLKE. The example of Cores rebellion, if we had forgotten, by so many
treasonable devises of the papists, against the Prince, and Religion, breaking
forth into sundry actual rebellions, both in Ingland and Ireland, we might
easelie be put in remembrance, whose often disapointed purposes, and sometime
punished practices, if at length they move nothing to surcease from their
wickedness, let them remember, that the Lords long suffering so much contemned,
will add infinite torments to their endless damnation, which sleeps not,
although the execution be deferred. As for the application of Cores example,
which Allen makes, is very ridiculous, while the papists dancing after the
Popes seditious pipe, charge us for piping, and that in every play and
pulpit, Cur eleuamini, as though either they had proved themselves to be Gods
Priests, which be rather the devils paragons, or we refused to yeald any
honor, which to any of Gods ministers, either Ecclesiastical, or Civil, by
his appointment appertains.


ALLEN. Mary I cannot tell well, whether the cases be comparable, though I
nothing doubt but ours is much worse: For. S. Chrysostom says, that the
disobedience of Dathon and the rest of that consederacie, rose rather upon the
affectation of so high a function. De sacer. lib. 3.
with admiration of their dignity, then upon any contempt of that power, in
which the priest of god were placed. But the dishonor and the derogation that
now is done to the much more excellent office, st anacth upon vnfaithfullnes,
mistrust of Gods promise, love of sin, liking of liberty, loath somnes of
truth, and vnminde fullnes of salvation. In which case though neither the
heavens yeald fire for the present punishment, nor the earth open for their
speedy passage to eternal pain, yet the perpetual fight which they keep
against Gods ordinance, their disordered life, and disobedience, their
darkness of understanding in such light of approved truth, and the
continual course of the Church, which inmarucilous misery they do willingly
sustain, does, me think, fully resemble the lamentable slate of the damned
and for saken sort, and therefore being yet a live, in goodliking, and
liberty, I fear they wittinglie and wilfully perish.


FVLKE. And we nothing doubt but the contempt of the ministers of the ghospel,
is a greater offense, the^ theirs which despised the ministers of the Law. 2.
Cor. 3. But that our neglect of popipsh shrist, for which we are so heinouslie
accused, should stand upon unfaithfulness or mistrust of Gods promise, it is
very incredible: but for that the faithful trust of gods promises, without any
such ordinance of man, offers us free remission of our sins, we are bold
to reject it. And that love of sin, and liking of liberty therein, should
move us to refuse popish absolution, it is altogether unlikely. For where
absolution may be bought for a little money at the hands of men, who is so
mad to present him self before the Judgment seat of God? and who that
delights in sin, will not think to have liberty therein, when he may
compound with his judges for a trifling matter, in such cases as deserve
eternal damnation? As for the hell, in which Allen places us alive, is like
the purgatory, in which he teaches men to be placed, when they are dead. For
what ordinance of God does he dream of, against which we should fight? popish
priesthood, shrist, and pardons, they are not yet, nor ever shall be proved to
be gods ordinance. And what discord sees he in our life, more then the common
frailty of mortal men, which never be free srom sinning? or greater then
every man may see in the lives of popish Priests and people? Touching
disobedience, lettreason and rebellion speak, whether they be found in us, or
in them. Finally our darkness of understanding, in so great light of Allens
approved truth, when it appears, shall either argue us to be very blind,
or Allen to dream when he is awake. And the continual course of the Church,
if it bring not Allen into a confused case, worse then purgatory, before he
can show it, for popish shrift and pardons, we refuse not to lie in such an
hell, as he places us, until he and his fellows of their charity, will say
maste, to bring us out of it.


ALLEN. And yet I am not so void of all hope of their recovery, that I would
refuse to confer with them, touching that aut horitie of remission of sins,
or other pre-eminence, which the Priests of Christ's Church do claim, and
they so ear- they so earnestly control. Though the rather I would do it, for
the help of the more humble sort, which in these days of disobedience, be
rather driven out of the way by force of the common tempest, then by malice or
misbehauiour toward the ministry, whom in Christ's name I must aducrtise to
consider carefully, in what doubt and danger they and all their dearest do
stand, in this pitiful vacation and long lack of the practice of priesthood
for the remission of their sins and other needful succor of their souls.
For if Christ, by whose blood we obtain pardon of our offenses, have by his
ordinance made man the minister of our reconciliation to God, and the bestower
of his mercy in remission of sins, then doubtless whosoever neglects to
walk the known way of salvation, and refuses the ordinary means of
mercy, which Christ means to be applied to our use none otherwise, but by
the office of mortal men, he lives in sin perpetually, he dies in sin
without hope of recovery, and for sin without doubt shall perish
everlastingly.

Therefore the matter of so great importance, standing on so doubtful terms,
it were no wisdom to sleep so soundly in such present peril, nor to continue
without care and singular respect of most dreadefull state. In which, if we
pass our days without hope or possibility of Gods mercy, because we refuse
man's ministry, then all our life and studies, all our pains or pleasures,
all our works and ways do nothing else, but drive us in disobedience to
extreme death and desperation.


FVLKE. Though I have small hope of your recovery, which so long have bin
frosen in the dregs of popish heresy: yet will I not refuse to confer with you
after this manner, or any other that is convenient, both to justify such
contempt of Popish priesthood and pardons, as we teach, and also to let the
doubtful sort plainly see, that such usurpation, as you pretend to
maintain, has no good ground either in scripture, or in the most ancient
writers, or practice of the eldest and syncerest primitive Church of Christ. As
for that point, which you take such pains to prove, that the contempt of man's
ministry, for reconciliation unto God, and remission of sins brings
damnation, is no matter of controversy between us: for we believe, confess,
and teach even as much, and in as many words, ready to subscribe, and swear
to the same, if it were lawfully required of us. But whether it be the
ordinance of Christ, that Popish priests, Bishops, and Pope him self,
should exact auricular confession, as they do, and give absolution and pardon
in such manner as they use, this, I say, is that, which you should occupy
your style in: for this is that, which we deny.


ALLEN. I make the more matter hereof, for that not only such as be led into
folly and falsehood by the persuasion of some, to whose teaching and lyking
they have unadvisedly addicted themselves, but also diverse, even of the
faithful, that be not fallen (thanks be given to God) so far as to contemn
the Church, and Christ's appointed ordinance, are not yet so touched, as in
such case of extreme miscrie, Christen men should be. For heresy is such a
creeping and contagiouse canker, that albeit she utterly (through mercy and
Gods grace) kill not all, yet she dulleth the conscience, dries up the zeal,
and infecteth the minds of most. The like lack of Christian comfort has
been often else amongst the people in such storms of the Church: but so little
care and consideration thereof, I do not lightly remember.

In the persecution of the Vandalles and Arian Goths in Affrike, the people of
God were siuered from their pastors, and thereby wanted succor of their
souls, as we now do: but thereof they conceived such grief and heaviness, that
it is surely lamentable to remember. The story is recorded by Victor, and Li.
2. de de persecut. Vandal.
the words of the sorrowful people vitered in the ways, as their holy
Bishops did pass toward their banishment, he reported thus: A marvelous
preasse of faithful people, that the high ways could not receive, came down
the hills with tapersin their hands, and laid their dear children at the
Martyrs feet (so they termed the witnesses of Gods truth then) and pitifully
complained thus; Alas to whom do youleaue us so desolate, whiles your selves
go to the crown of martyrdom? who shall now baptize these poor babes, in the
fountes of lively water? who shall loose us tied in the bands of our
offenses, by pardon and reconciliation? who shall prescribe to us the due of
penance for our finnes past? For to you it was surely said: whatsoever you
loose in earth, it shall likewise be loosed in heaven. Such you see was the
carefulnes of the people then, in that little lack of so necessary a thing:
where now in so long desolation of most holic things, and our greatest
comfort, few there be that take any grief of so much misery at all, and,
that hartelie lament the case, almost none. If we assuredly believed (as it is
surely true) that all which pass this present life in the bonds of mortal
sin, shouldeuerlastinglie perish without all hope of mercy, and then to be
undoubtedly bound in their offenses, whom the priests of the holy Church
had not loosed in this life (excepting only the case of extreme necessity,
where by no means possible man's ministry can be obtained) then truly,
besides the fear of our own dangerous state, our hearts would bleed for
pity and compassion of so many that depart this present world, in the debt of
eternal damnation, not only of our Christian breethren commonly, but of our
dearest and best beloved particularly.


FVLKE. That heresy hurts much, where it destroieth not altogether, it was
cleerelie seen in the blind time of Antichrists greatest exaltation, joined
with so sharp persecution and strong delusion: in which although there were
many, whose hearts were not infected with that deadly poison, yet there were
few, which openly showed their full detestation of it: which you should less
marvel at, in so general a plague as that was, considering how few you do
acknowledge to be found on your side, in this short time of small trouble, and
weak means (as you count them) of persuasion. The pitiful complaint of the
Christians in Africa for the banishment of their Catholic Bishopps (although
the time were such as all things were not sound therein) yet makes it no
resemblance with your case, which are not banished by tyrants and heretics,
as they were, but rather being tyrants and heretics, do wilfully withdraw
your obedience from a Christian Catholic Prince, and from the execution of her
Godly laws.


ALLEN. It is not my timorous conscience, nor scrupulous cogitation, that
raises this fear: but it is the grave sentence of Gods ordinance, it is Saint
Augustines own judgment, that moves me of pity tomooue, and of duty to
admonish my breethren and friends, of a thing that pertains to all so near.
Saint Augustine, concerning the manifold miseries of the Christian people in
the absence of their true Pastors in times of persecution, does lively set
forth the godly endeavors of faithful folks in these words. Do we not
consider, when the matter is brought to an extreme issue, and where it can not
be by flight avoided, what a wonderful concurse of Christian men of every
kind, state, and age, is unto the Church? where some cry out for baptism,
some for reconciliation or absolution (for so I interpret, ipsius panitentiae
actionem, which also may mean a request to have penance appointed of the
Priest) and all generally call for comfort, confession, and bestowing of the
holy sacraments? In which extremity, if there lack such as should minister
these things unto them, Quan tum exitium sequetur eos, qui de isto seculo vel
non regenerati exeunt, vel ligati? quantus est etiam luctus fidelium suorum,
qui eos secum in vitae aeternae requie non habebunt? what utter destruction
shall fall on them, that must pass this life, either not christened, or else
fast bound in sin? And what passing sorrow will it be for their faithful
friends, which shall not have their company in eternal rest and joy? Thus
far said he, for proof that the Pastors should not forsake their flock: and
thus say have forsaken their pastors: the lack is like in both. But ours so
much worsse, because it was procured willingly, and theirs the more excusable,
because it was both borne of necessity, and lamented Christianlie.


FVLKE. It is neither your timorous conscience, nor Saint Augustines judgment,
but your traitorous affection toward the state of your native country, and
your ambitious desire to be advanced in the multitude of your disciples, that
moves you to complain, that the flocks have now forsaken their pastors,
where as in old time, the pastors did in times of heresy forsake their
flocks. For admit you were, that you are not, name lie shepheardes, where as
you are wolves, how have the flocks forsaken you, rather then you forsaken
them? should they have followed you into Flaunders, France, or Italy? or else
should they have stuck to you manfollie, and have by force defended you, that
you needed not to have been chased away? although rather hope of preferment,
by speadie alteration of the state, then fear of punishment in so mild a
government caused the greatest numbers of you to turn the soil.


ALLEN. Neither may we think our selves here much to be relieved, by them,
that pretend the like practice of such things as now Note.
we lack. For that ever augmented the sorrow and just dolor of the faithful.
Much it is, God knows, to want their Pastors and priests so dear, and with
them for most part all the due of Christianity: but to sustain in stead
thereof, a kind of apish imitation of such holy functions, which in deed, by
what pretense of holiness soever it be used, is and always has been accounted
most detestable, that is the great calamity which wastes most in all
tempestuous times of Gods religion. For the only use, acquaintance, and
familiarity of this false face or resemblance of truth and holy actions of
the Church, drives many into a kind of contentation and rest in such things,
as them selves otherwise do abhor, at least turns away sheirearnest appettie
and desire of those matters, which no man can without peril of damnation
miss. It is not yet meant herebie, that every sacrament is frustrate always
that is by such made, or ministered, although for the most they be so profaned,
that they be not only nothing beneficial, but also damnable, both to the
geuer and receiver: but my meaning is, that even those sacraments, which be of
necessity, that by Gods special mercy they may be received of such as be
not otherwise co^petent ministers, where the present peril of any man's life
forces thereunto, that even then when they may be beneficial to other, that
without schism call for the sacraments, yet they shall be damnable unto
themselves. For hereof let every man be bold, that takes upon him any
ministry in schism and disorder, that so often he has practiced it, so often
has he provoked gods ire toward himself, and procured, as much as in him
lies, his indignation to all that are partakers thereof. S. Basil the great
complains hereof very much in his days, by these words: Epist. 70.
In the doctrine of impiety and wickedness the Churches babes be now brought up.
For how can it be otherwise? Baptism is ministered by heretics, they help
forth such as pass hence, they keep visitation of the sick, they have
comforting of the sorrowful, they take on them the ease of such as be burdened
in all cases, and to be short, they minister the mysteries of holy communion:
so that in time, though the liberty of Christ's religion be restored again,
the youth shall take such liking in heretics practizes, to whom by love and
custom, they are so fast knit, that it will be hard to reduce them home to
truth again. Thus far spoke Saint Basil of his days: and right good cause
have we no less to complain of ours. They were then encumbered with Arians,
and we with a legion of new devises and bold practisioners of such high and
heavenly functions, as neither by God nor man they are rightly and orderly
called unto. By these now only our souls seem to live, but by these alone
we suerlie die everlastingly. In all which great desolation of Christian
comfort and all spiritual unctions this were some solace, if either the elder
sort could consider what they have lost, or the poor children, which are
nurced in these nouelities, might learn what they lacked.


ALLEN. My meaning is therefore, to move al parties to the necessary care and
heed of the matter, by the treatise following: trusting that some one or other
of my good brethren, who all be to me most dear, will awake at my earnest
call, and consider of the matter deeply, how it fares with him and other
touching their souls, since the sacrament of penance has been banished, and
the priesthoede of Gods Church spoiled of jurisdiction and right in remission
of sins, and to help him in so necessary and fruitful advise of
himself, and other, whom in such cases I mean always to serve, I will seek
out the ground of this authority, that has been so long practiced of the
priest, and honored of the people, to the singular glory of God, the
notorious increase of virtue, weal public of the whole Christian world, that
both the good Catholic may have reasonable proose of that, which to his
immortal weal he has so long both loved and reverenced in Christ's ministers,
and also the contemners of so heavenly power may learn in humblenes of heart
to like and fear the excellent function, which by pride they did before
unadvisedly disprooue. It may please any man, that is doubtful of this
article, which is so necessary to be known, to consider, and give good
attendance to the wholl course of my talk. I promise him as before god (who
will sharply judge al sinister endeavors in causes of his honor) that I will
deal sincerely in all points and faithfully: I will not cover my self nor
the light of the cause in cloud of words, neither by any artificial slight
(as new doctors now a days often do) circumuent the sense of him that is
moss simple, such indifferency shall be used every where in trial of the
truth, that I will seem for his sake, to doubt of the matter my self. Though
in deed (so god save me in my common sense, and so god spare me for my sins) I
ca^ never mistrust any point of that faith in which I was newborn and
baptized. But that notwithstanding I will not spare to rippe up that, which men
most reprove in gods Church and ministers, that all the disobedient children
may see, how free they be from falsehood, and far from beguiling the flock
of Christ to them committed to keep, we will call the high magistrates (though
it be exceeding unseemly for subjects) to account of their gouernent: the
principal pastor must give a reason of his pardons, and answer for the
limitation of his indulgences by years, days and times, both he and all other
Bishopes shall be accomptable for such grave censures exercised upon men's souls,
with them all inferior priests must be posed for searching the secrets of our
cansciences, for releasing man's misaeedes, enioyning penance, and requiring
satisfaction for sins. Thus bold will we be with truth, the rather therebie to
deface falsehood.

And all this in that order, that may in least room contain most matter, with
both brevity and light, so much, as so deep and large a cause can bear, from
all contention I will so far refrain, that even the adversaries themselves
of Cristes truth and doctrine, albeit they be persons infamous, by law, and
consent of al nations, shall not yet without meet and reasonable moderation be
touched or talked of, requiring of them this courtesy again, that they
reprehend nothing in this discourse pri uily, which they can not, nor dare not
answer to openly. And of my loving brethren that be Catholic, I must farther
require one thing (the suit is for them selves) that, when in a manner they
sensibly feel the truth, they would not refuse to follow the same, that by
outward work they may declare their inward will. Here of I am more careful,
for that I see heresy and falsehoode to be of that countenance and color,
that it is often liked, before it be believed: where gods truth, for terror
and bitterness that it bears, is not always followed, where it is well known
and trusted. But surely truth is not profitably understood, till it be
willingly practiced.

Therefore whoesoeuer acknowledged in his conscience the power of Gods Church
and mynisterie for the remission of sins, and uses not humbly con fession of
his sins, that that power may redound to his saluati on, he is so much farther
from God, by how much more he knows the right way to come to God. Man's will
must in all such cases of terror and difficulty, give over to Gods ordinance,
whose commandments, though they seem to the worldly burdenous, yet to the
good and ghostly, and paucis amantibus (says Saint Augustine) they are sweet
and exceeding pleasant. And this let every man assuredly know, that whosoever
counts confession so heaiue, he neither feels the weight of sin, nor yet
sufficiently fears the appointed pain for the same. Al these vntowardlie
affections, that sin and the world have planted in us all, let vt seek by
love and zeal of Gods truth and ordinance, to amend: and join with me
(geucle Reader) I beseech thee, in prayers, that our endeavors may please God,
and profit his people.


FVLKE. In that you allow no necessity, that should drive any man to take any
sacrament of such as you count heretics, but only the sacraments of baptism
and penance in present peril of death, and yet account the receiving of
sacraments so necessary, you insinuat whereunto you would bring the matter, if
it lay in your power, and persuasion. Your late attemptes by excommuncations
and invasion, have made open your meaning. But he that sits in heaven shall
laugh you to scorn, the Lord himself shall have you in derision: and all
reasonable men shall think you ridiculous, while by declaming generally
against heresy, and the hurt that comes thereby, you labor to bring your
falsehood into credit, and the truth into disdain. It is a great part of
popish rhetoric in these days, to enueie mightelie and eloquently against
schism, heresy, salsehood, errors, etc.and let the trial go, whether party
may be justly charged with these crimes. But Master Allen, albeit he likes
that kind of disputing, and uses it much himself, yet his purpose is in
this treatise to examine the matter so thoroughly, that men shall be able, not
only to understand the truth in their minds, but also to feel it with
their hands. Of which truth he has so great assurance, that he swears as
deeply as any Christian man can do, not only that he doubts nothing,
but also that he can never mistrust any point of that faith, in which he was
newborn, and baptized. How well he performs this large promise, as also of
such moderation as he will use, in touching the inmous persons of his
adversaries, the book following will declare: wherein if auricular confession
be so sensi blie proved out of the holy scriptures, as he makes vaunt it
shall be, I my self will join with him, that if it were ten times as burt
henous as it seems to be, no Christian man ought wilfully to omit it in pain
of eter nall damnation: but if the scriptures of God will afford no
commandment for it, and the most ancient Catholic Church on earth never
thought it necessarily to be required, I may reasonably require, that such
as thought it needles before this treatise was written, when they see as much
as can be said for it, to be disprooued, they will acknowledge, that without
tyranie to men's consciences, it cannot be imposed.


That Christ did forgive sins, not only by proper power and nature, as he
was God, but also by ministry, as he was a man, and as he was a Priest, and
head of the Church: and that upon that ground the priests power, in remitting
sins in the Church, does stand.

THE FIRST CHAP.
ALLEN. CHrist Jesus the Son of the living God, being everlastingly of the
same substance, power, and nature, that his Father and the holy Ghost be of,
as being equal and one God with them both, works mightelie all things in
heaven and in eartb jointly with them both: and therefore by excellency of
power, property of nature, and by full and perfect dominion over his own
creature, he remitteth man's sinnos by the same soueraingne right that they do.
Who being thus in all excellency equal with God, has notwithstanding
vouchsafed of his singular bountifullnes, joined with marvelous humilitis, to
abase himself to the receiving of our nature: in which now he has wrought
the same things in earth, by service, suit, and commission, which before he
only did by might and majesty of his own power procure, Even the self same
God, that by will and commandment might most justly both have punished and
pardoned whom he list, of love and wisdom infinite (continuing always in
like excellency as before) became the minister of our reconcilement to God. In
which state he offers sacrifice as a Priest for sin, he uses sacraments
for the remission of sin, he prayed to God his Father for the sinful, he
is made the head of the Church, the Governor of the Church, and the judge of
the Church. All which functions perteine to our Savior, in respect and
consideration of his humane nature: according unto which, power is given him of
the Father, thorugh the holy Ghost, to practice the same.


FVLKE. THat the ignorant be not overtaken with the subtlety of this
Sophister, which to derive his popish absolution from the person of our savior
Christ, plaieth on while the Nestorian, another while the Eutichian, It shall be
good for them to remember, what they are taught in their Creed concerning the
person of Christ, which is very God and very man, consisting of two most
diverse natures, so united into one person, as they may neither be divided, nor
confounded, without horrible blasphemy. In which person each nature so
retains the essential proprieties of it self unconfounded, or destroyed,
that he is but one person our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. Whereupon it
follows, that some actions arepeculiar to his godhead, some proper to his
manhood, and some proceeding jointly from him, as he is God and man. As God he
John. 5. 17. Mat. 9. 4.
works even as his Father, he knows the th oughts of men's hearts, he
knows the last day, whereof he is ignorant as man. Again that he did eat,
drink, Mar. 13. 32.
sleep, sorrow, die, it was proper to his humanity. Finally that he preached
the Gospel, wrought miracles, offered sacrifice for our sins, rose again,
etc. and such like things, he did as the Mediator God and man. And although
by reason of the unity of the person, that is often spoken of the whole
person, which is peculiar to either nature, or of God, which is proper to man,
or of man, which is proper to God: yet to preserve the essential properties of
each nature, we must wisely distinguish, that which is proper unto the
divinity, from that which is proper unto the humanity, whereof we see Master
Allen has small regard. while he affirms that all these functions of Christ,
whereby he offers sacrifice as a Priest, uses sacraments, prayed to God, is
made the head of the Church, the governor of the Church, and the judge ofthe
Church, pertain unto him in respect and consideration of his humane nature.
For of the sacrifice ofhim-selfe, the Apostle expresselie affirms, that it
was made by his eternal spirit, which being offered by an inferior nature,
could not have been acceptable unto God. Heb. 9. 14. Also that Christ God and
man, is the head of the Church, and advanced in his humanity, to be judge of
the world, it is in respect and consideration ofhis godhead, unto which his
humanity is united. For as he is the image of the invisible God, by whom all
things are created in heaven and earth, he is the head of his body the
Church, Col. 1. 15. etc. And the Apostle Phil. 2. 10. showing his exaltation
from the base shape of a Servant to be the most honorable judge of the world,
using the words of the Prophet Esaie, cap. 45. in which God challenges the
judgment to him self, shows plainly, that Christ has this honor in
respect of his godhead, which is proper unto it.

Andwhatsoeuer in holy scripture is read to be exercised of him through the
might of Gods spirit, by the virtue of his anointing, by the finger of God, by
the sending of the Father, by power received from above, by Priesthood, prayers
or sacrifice, by the Son of man, of the head of the Church, or judge of the
living and dead: whatsoever is in this sort said to be done, it is not
otherwise lightly meant, but in respect of Christ's humanity, by which and in
which he works the same, not as by the proper and natural power or force
thereof, but as by jurisdiction received of the blessed Trinity, and employed
upon the son of man, for the procuring of salvation to his people, whereof he
is become in our very nature the head.


FVLKE. This general rule is so abridged with the exception lightly, that it
is hard to bring any instance against it: but Allen would have his starting
hole in it. Nevertheless seeing he concludes the examples before remembered,
to be included within this rule, we may be bold to charge him with a spice of
Nestorianisme, seeing those works which are certain to have been the works
of the Mediator God and man, he ascribes to the only humanity by
jurisdiction received from the blessed Trinity: whereby it should follow,
that the work of Christ in this respect, should not differ from the works of
Moses, Elias, David, or any of the Prophets, who received jurisdiction from
the blessed Trinity, whereby they performed many works, which the same
blessed Trinity had appointed for the procuring of salvation unto his people.


ALLEN. Therefore no Christian man may doubt, but as our Savior, by the
omnipotent power of his Godhead; might and did forgive sins to the penitent,
so likewise, that, as he was Priest, and the son of man, he might by the
right of his office, unction, and ministry, in the virtue of the holy Ghost,
remitte sins also. And for that cause principally in the Prophet Esaias it is
said, Spiritus Dominisuper me, eo quod vnxerit me, ad annunciandum mansuetis
misit me, vt mederer contritis cord, and praedicarem captiuis indulgentiam,
and clausis apertionem: The Spirit of the Lord vopn me, because he has
anointed me, and sent me to signify unto the meek, that I should heal the
contrite in heart, to preach pardon to the prisoners, and freedom to the
closed. The which place of the Prophet our Savior applied unto him self in
the Church of Nazareth, and is to be understood only of preaching, and
pardoning, by the holy unction of the Spirit of God, and his Fathers calling.
And therefore, it must needs, according to Saint Augustines judgment,
concern the shape of his service and manhood taken on him, in which he
preached so, that yet it pleased him to affirm, that his Doctrine was not his
own, but his Fathers that sent him: and healed the contrite in heart, which is
nothing else, but to forgive sins to the penitent, after such a sort, that it
might well appear to be received and practiced by the unction of the Spirit of
God, and sending of his Father, whereby the Son of man might do that as Gods
minister in his manhood in earth, which both he, and his eternal Father, with
the holy Spirit of them both, do work by their own, one, and equal
authority in heaven everlastingly.


FVLKE. And seeing he wills us to note the ground of the cause, which is,
that Christ as he was Priest, and the son of man, might remit sins by a
ministeriereceiued by unction of the holy Ghost, it is not lightly to be
passed over. That the son of man had power upon earth to forgive sins, he
himself affirms Mat. 9. 6. but this was the power of his godhead, which was
not restreined, nor abased, by the shape of a servant, in which he appeered on
earth. That he was authorized by unction of the holy Ghost, to preach
remission of sins unto the penitent, it pertaneth indeed unto him, in
respect of his manhood, although Saint Augustine in the place by Allen quoted,
says not so, but cites the place of Esaie, to prove that Christ, in respct
of his humanity, was inferior to the holy Ghost, but that this is all the
power, that Christ had upon earth to remit sins, it is not proved by any
argument. For this ministry of reconciliation to remit sins, by preaching
of the Gospel, does remain still with the Church: the other, that was proper
to his Deity, no mortal man without Sacrilege can arrogate, or usurp.


ALLEN. And though God has never (...) man's fall, used the means and service
of man, to his restore again, and to the relief of his lackes, and therefore
has given authority by his holy spirit and unction, to diverse of the old
law to offer sacrifice, prayer, and procure remission to the people of all
their offenses: and no less (...), occasion served, and the matter required,
to correct their misdeedes by judgment and jurisdiction given unto them, for
which sovereign calling they were called the anointed of God, an external
ceremony of anoyting being solemnly annexed thereunto: yet our Lord an
Master, whether you consider his high Priesthood, by which in most ample
manner through commission received, he may procure our pardone, or his calling
to be head of the Church, by which he rules and keeps all the body in due
subjection and order, or his ministry of preaching, whereby, far above all
the Prophets and preachers of the old law, he opens to his flock the Church,
the secret mysteries of Gods truth; Christ, I say, in all these respects
being man, is yet much more abundantly blessed, and anointed without
comparison, above all his fellows and copartners, as the holy Prophet David
does testify. Upon whose words touching that matter, Saint Hilarie writes
thus: Vnxit te Deus, Deus tuus oleo exultationis prae participibus tuis: non
secundum sacramentum aliud, quam secundum dispensationem assumpti corporis.
Vnctio enim illa, non beatae, illi and incorrupt, and in natura dei man enti
natiuitati profecit, sed sanctificationi hominis assumpti. Nam and in Actis ait
Petrus, vnxit illum Deus in spiritu sancto and virtute. Thus he means in
English: God etien thy God has anointed thee with the oil of joy, far above
thy copartners, not in any other meaning, but according to the dispensation of
a body received. For that unction could not be beneficial to the holy,
unspotted, and everlasting nativity in the nature of his Godhead, but only
it was agreeable to the mystery of his manhood and flesh assumpted in his
temporal nativity: whereof Saint Peter speaks in the Acts, that God has
anointed him with the holy ghost and with power.

The holy Father also Saint Cyrill agrees hereunto, confessing that all this
honor, power, and authority, which the Prophets have signified so long before
by the anointing of the son of God, came unto Christ in consideration of his
manhood: thus he says, Quod vnctio sit secundum humanitatem, nemo qui recte
sapere solet, dubitabit, quia absque omni controuersia minus a maiore
benedicitur. That the anointing of Christ should be meant of his humanity, no
man doubts that is of any right understanding. For without all controversy
the inferior and less ever receives blessing of the superior and greater.
There can be no question then, but all sovereignty and supreme jurisdiction,
which he exercised over the Church, being his body and spouse, in that respect
that he was either Priest and Bishop of our souls, as Saint Peter calls him,
or else as he was out head and pastor, it is certain, that all this came unto
him by his fathers sending, and the unction of the holy Ghost, and the
benediction of the holy Trinity, to which he was inferior accor ding to his
manhood.


FVLKE. That our savior Christ by his unction received no gift or blessing of
God, but in respect of his humanity, it is more clear then it needed to have
been declared, by the testimonies of Hilarious and Cyrillus: but that all
sovereignty and supreme inrisdiction, which he exercised over the Church in
respect that he was Priest and Bishop of our souls, or as he was our head and
Pastor, came only to his manhood (as Allen makes it certain) it is
utterly false, and blasphemous against his godheade. For unto all sovereignty
and authority, he has full right in respect of his divinity. and therefore
the Apostle Heb. 3. 5. etc. says that Moses was faithful in Godds house as a
servant, but Christ as the son over his own house, which was builded by
himself, as God which has made all things. For what cause Allen speaking of
the sovereignty of Christ over his Church uses the time past, saying he was
our Priest and Bishop, he was our head and pastor, it is easy to guess,
seeing he labors to establish such a sovereignty and supreme jurisdiction
on earth, as is derogatorie to the high authority of Christ in heaven. But the
scripture teaches us, that he is an eternal Priest. Heb. 7. and 9. etc. that
he is the shepherd and Bishop of our souls, 1. Peter. 2. that he is and shall
be to the end of the world, the head of his Church. Ephesians. 1,


ALLEN. If thou doubt of his Priesthood in this case, hear Theodoretus:
Christus autem, quod ad humanitatem quidem attinet, Sacerdos appellatus est,
non aliam autem hostiam, quam suum corpus, obtulit: Christ Dialog. 1.
( says he) touching his humanity, was called a Priest, and he offered no
other host, but his own body. But we may have more forcible testimony
hereof in Saint Paull him self, who in sundry other places that are known,
professes every Bishop to be elected and chosen out among a number of men, to
offer sacrifice for sin. Heb. 5. 5.


And that he is made the supreme governor and head of the Church in his
humanity, yea and in respect thereof, is appointed to be the high minister of
God the father in pardoning or iudgeing the world, it is an assured ground of
our faith, approved not only by the consent of all Doctors, but also by the
Scriptures, every where protesting, that all power in heaven and earth is
given to Christ: in so much, that the Apostle calls him, the man, in quo viro
statuit iudicare orbem tetratum: In which, or by which appointed man he will
judge the world. All these things, though they may Act. 7.
seem to the simple to be far from the matter, yet they be both near our
purpose, and necessary to be laid up in memory for the further establishing
of our faith in the Article proposed, and diverse other profitable points of
Christian belief now impugned.


FVLKE. We doubt not that Christ was a Priest, as touching his humanity, as
Theodoret says, but we believe that he was a Priest, as he was the mediator,
God and man. Fot as some ministerial parts of that office did require that he
should be a man, according to which nature he might be subject, so other parts
of the same office required the authority of God. For none but God, has
authority to reconcile man, and to bring him into the holiest place, into the
presence and sight of God, whereunto he has full right of his own nature and
dignity. The forcible testimonies that Master Allen cites out of the Apostle,
Heb. 5. and 9. have no force to prove, that Christ is not a Priest, as he is
God and man, although they prove that he is a Priest, as he is man. But
contrariwise if these scriptures be well marked, which the Apostle does allege
out of the second Psalm: Thou art my son, this day have I begotten the: and
out of the 110. psalm, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchiseaech, they will make evident proof unto us, that Christ not only in
respect of his humanity, but also in respect of his deity, is our eternal
high Priest, as he is our savior, our mediator, our redeemer, as in other
places the Apostle shows more plainly, and I have argued purposelie, and
plentifully against the slanderous note of the Rhemistes in my confutation of
the Papists quarreils against my writings. page 64. unto the end, whereunto I
refer the reader for more full satisfaction. That Christ in his humanity is
made the supreme governor and head of his Church, we do constantly bleeue:
but that he has this excellent authority, in respect of his humanity alone,
and not in respect of his divinity, we can not acknowledge. For in respect of
his divinity his person is capable of all honor, glory, power, and
authority, which in the only respect of his humanity it were not. That he
is appointed to judge the world also, in his humanity, we confess according
to the scriptures: but seeing I have proved before, that to be judge of the
world, is Genesis 18. 25.
proper to the deity, we must needs confess, that the man Jesus Christ, is
appointed to be judge of the quick and the dead, not only as an high minister
deputed of God, in respect of his humanity, but as God himself, of supreme
authority in respect of his divinity. For to hold that Christ, is no
otherwise judge of the world, but as an high minister, as kings and Princes are
judges of the earth, as high ministers by deputation only of Gods authority
committed to them, and not by right of their nature, I see not how it can be
excused from gross Nestorianisme. The scriptures which protest, that all power
in heaven and earth is given to Christ, are to be understood in deed of the
exaltation of his humanity, and crowning of his manhood, with glory and
majesty: but thereof it follows not, that Christ enjoys all that power,
that is given to him, by the only right of his humanity. For except Christ
were God, as verily as he is man, he were not able to receive such a gift,
which no creature can have, except he be also creator and God himself,
therefore Christ truly as man, receives that which is given, but in respect
and right of his godheade, he is able to receive and exercise that power, which
none can have but God only. These things indeed may seem unto the simple
to be far fetched, and far from the question of priests power to remit
sins, but they are much farther from the truth of our Catholic faith and
Religion, that our savior Christ in respect of his Divine nature, should be
spoiled of his authority, or else should thereby work nothing in a manner, in
the chief and most necessary parts of our redemption, that Popish priests
might be made equal, or not far unlike him, in the power of pardoning sins.


ALLEN. For as the due consideration of Christ's authority and excellent
office touching his manhood, will help up the decayed honor and jurisdiction,
that the guides of Gods Church, by the right of his high calling, do justly
challenge: so it shall express the boldness of certain miscreants of this
age, who, to further their sundry evil in tents, and detestable doctrines,
have dishonored Christ's dignity, touching his incarnation and office of his
redemption, exceeding much, both in himself, and in persons of his Pristes and
substitutes, some of them fearing (as I take it) lest the honor and office of
Christ's Priesthood might, by participation, descend to the Apostles and
Priests of the Church, let not to hold that Christ was his fathers Priest
according to his divine nature: of which blasphemy John Calvin was justly
noted, wherein the wicked man, Vide Orichouii Chimer.
whiles he went about to disgrace the dignity of mortal men, became exceeding
injurious to the second person in Trinity. One other of that school, and of
his own neast, denied that Christ in his manhood should judge the world, lest
there might seem to be some force of punishment and correction of wickedness
practiced by man's ministry in this life, for the resemblance of Christ's
judgment to come. And so taught one Richerius, of a Carmelite a Caluinist.
Other deny Vide Villegag. contra articulos Caluini. Ita Hartop. Monhem and
alij. Heb. 7.
Christ being now in heaven, to make prayer for us according to his manhood,
because it tends toward the intercession, as Saint Paulin express words
records of him: Quod saluare in perpetuum potest, accedens ad Deum per
semetipsum, semper viuens ad interpellandum pro nobis. That for ever he is of
power to give salvation, having access to God by himself, and always Iiuing
to make intercession for us. Yea most of the Sacramentaries, for the advantage
of their ungodly assertion, that Christ in his own person as he is God and
man should not be present in the sacrament, do covertly blaspheme the blessed
and highly Vide Ciril in Joan lib. 3. Cap. 4.
sanctified fleshof our savior, auouching it to be unprofitable: whereby they
unadvisedly dishonor the dreadful incarnation of Christ, and all the works
wrought by the mean of his flesh and blood, and ministry of his manhood,
for the remission of our sins, and purchasing salvation to his Church.


FVLKE. The due consideration of Christ's authority, and excellent office
touching his manhood, will nothing help to restore the decayed honor and
jurisdiction of Popish priesthood, except you can both prove your Popish
priests capable of such honor and power, as the son of God is, and also
bring forth the records out of the holy scriptures, for that high calling,
whereof you boast. That any faithful Christian, whom you to maintain an
Antichristian authority, call Miscreantes, have dishonored Christ's dignity,
touching his incarnation and office of his redemption, it is a slander
strongly aduouched, but slenderly proved. For first Calvin affirming Christ
to be a priest in his wholl person, God and man, derogateth nothing from that
dignity, neither is he injurious against the second person in trinity: for
Christ is an high priest after the order of Melchesidech, and our redeemer, not
as a minister and servant only, but as the son, as the King os peace and
righteousness, without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither
beginning of his days, nor end of his life, al which things can not be
restrained to the humanity of Christ, but are proper to him as he is equal
and eternal with his father. That Richerius should deny that Christ in his
manhood should judge the world, it might well be a slander of that gross
potheaded Cyclops Villegagnon, which when he durst not abide the invasions of
the barbarous people in Gallia antarctica, where he had enterprised a conquest,
he quarelled with Richerius, and other godly persons, to have a color of
return, and a welcome of the Papists. And as touching his slanderous libell,
that you send the reader unto, I refer you and them to the answer and
confutation of Richerius. Thirdly that Christ does make prayers for us
according to his manhood, it is not sufficiently proved by the text of the
Apostle to the Heb. 7. because he may and does make continual intercession for
us, by the virtue and worthiness of the sacrifice of his death, although he
conceive no prayers for us, in form of words. as men use upon earth. And if
it be granted that Christ so prays for us, yet it tends nothing toward
the intercession of Saints, but rather against it, because the interceffion of
Christ is sufficient without them, yea if the intercession of Saints were
proved, it draws not of necessity prayer unto Saints after it, and therefore
there were small purpose in them that deny Christ in such form to pray for
us, to control the invocation of Saints, which thing being either granted or
denied, proves neither too nor fro, that Saints are to be prayed unto or
(...). That any one of those, whom you call Sacramentaries, does either ouertly
or covertly blaspheme the blessed flesh of our Savior, auouching it to be
unprofitable (otherwise then our savior Christ himself avouched, if it were
separated from his divine, and quickening spirit, does profitte nothing) you
are not able to justify, and therefore you send us in the margent to Cyrill
upon John. lib. 4. Cap 14. who shows in deed that the flesh of Christ, as
it is the flesh of the son of God, has quickening virtue and power in it, to
our eternal redemption, but otherwise affirms nothing thereof, that we all
are not ready to subscribe unto.


ALLEN. Let us therefore Christianlie confess with the scripture and with the
Church of Christ, that our savior not only by power equal to his father
concerning his divine nature, but also by the sending and grant of his father,
and unction of the holy spirit, being far under them both in his humane
nature, does remit sins. Whereupon it orderly follows, that, whosoever
denies man to have authority, or that he may have power granted him by God
to forgive sins, he is highly iniuriouse to our saviors own person, and
dispensation of his flesh, and mystery of his holy incarnation. For though
there be great diversity betwixt his state and others, because in one person
both God and man be perfectly united in him, and therefore much more
prerogative might be, and doubtless was given to his humanity, as to him that
was both God and man, in respect of his baser nature, then to any other of his
brethren being but mere men: yet this is assuredly to be believed, that he
which could without derogation to his Godheade, communicate with the son of
man, and grant him, in consideration of his assumpted nature, the rule and
redemption of his people, the assoyling of our sins, and to work all wonders
in the power, finger, and force of the holy ghost, the same God, without all
doubt, through his son and our savior, may at his pleasure without all
vnseemelines or derogation to his eternal honor (andso it shall be proved)
that he does give power to the governors of his Church and houshodle, to
pardone and give penance, to judge and rule the people in the right of our
said Savior, to the edefying of his body and making perfect of his saints.


FVLKE. We do Christianly confess according to the scripture, and with the
Church of Christ, that our savior Christ not only by power equal to his
father, concerning his divine nature, but also by grant of God his father, in
his humane nature, which is far inferior to his father, does remit sins
absolutely, and of sovereign authority, in respect of his divinity, as the
mediator God and man and that he did the same upon earth also, as a minister
and preacher of repentance and reconciliation, according to his humanity. But
hereupon it follows not, by any order, or necessity of consequence, that
whoesoeuer denies mere man to have authority, or power to forgive sins, is
injurious to Christ's person, and the dispensation of his flesh, or mystery of
his holy incarnation. For although that man have this authority which is God,
yet it follows not that such me^ as are only men, are capable of the same
authority. The diversity betwixt the state of our savior Christ, and others
is so great, that nothing can be communicated to others, which is proper to him
in respect of his divine nature. And such a thing is the absolute power to
forgive sins, for which he has made satisfaction to the justice of God,
which, whenever we speak of the remission of sins, may not be forgotten. For
the mercy of god forgiueth no sin, but that for which his justice is
thorouglie satisfied in the obedience and justice of our Lord and redeemer
Jesus Christ. Therefore as no other man has the dispensation of his
satisfaction, but himself, so no other man can give absolute forgiveness of
sins but himself. But as all his ministers have power to pronounce forgiveness
of sins to the penitent, which is noe more but to express his will and
pleasure, concerning the remission of sins, and in what sort and condition he
bestows the same, so have they power to teteine sins, not of them whom he
will pardon, but of such as do not repent, and therefore by his word, are
denied of forgiveness: so that man in this case follows the judgment and
authority of God, not God the judgment and authority of man. For if a true
priest, elder, or minister, of the gospel, lawfully authorized, would forgive
the sins of an hypocrite, that faigneth repentance, they are not forgiven
before God: and if man would retain the sins of a true penitent, yet are
they forgiven before God. For to man is given no absolute power to forgive
sins, any more then there is given to man an undoubted judgment, to discern
between hypocrites and true faithful persons.

But where you say, that God could without derogation to his godheade,
communicate with the son of man, and grant him in consideration of his
assumpted nature, the rule and redemption of his people, the government of our
souls, the assoyling of our sins, etc. I must know how far you extend your
consideration. For if you mean therebie, that God in respect of, or according
to this assumpted humane nature, did communicate to our sauiout Christ, none
other but such power as he might without derogation to his deity, have
communicated unto Moses, Samuel, or any other, which was a mere mortal man,
for the redemption of our souls, and forgiveness of our sins, I do utterly
abhor your Nestorian, and worsse then Nestorian blasphemy but if you mean,
that such pow er, as might without the derogation of his godhead be
communicated to the son of man, is by him delivered to the ministers of his
Church, which execute the office of shepheardes, and teachers in his place, I
do gladly confess, that without all unseemliness and derogation to his
eternal honor, the ministers of the Church have power, by his grant to
retain, and forgive sins, that is, to declare the judgment of God, in
forgiving or reteining of sins, according to such conditions as he has
expressed in his holy word: which judgment, according to those conditions,
is so ratifyed by God himself, that it is as certain, as if it were
pronounced, and uttered by his own voice out of heaven. But where you speak
of pardoning, and giving of penance, I must once again distinguish of your
meaning. For if you mean, by your Popish term of penance, repentance, so that
you say, man has power to give repentance, which is a conversion of the heart
unto God, and a change of the mind from sin to obedience of God, I spit at
your blaspemous saying. For it is proper only to God, to give repentance to
Israel, and to all true Israelites of the gentiles his elected children, as
the holy ghost teaches, Acts. 5. and 11. in which places, your pupills the
Rhemists, durst not for gal of conscience, and shame of the world, translate
the latin word paenitentia (as they do commonly else where, except it be
taken in the evil part) penance, but repentance. Yet if by the word penance you
mean a time, or exercise of trial of true repentance, which the ancient
writers do sometimes metonimically call (...), and paenitentia, which was
granted by the elders of the Church, to such as had greeuouslie fallen, that
they might have some experience of their true conversion, before they were
admitted into the communion of the faithful, I may yeald to your term. And
further I will not deny, but that God has given power unto the governors of
his Church and household, to pardon such penance, thatis, to remit upon due and
good consideration, some part, or the wholl of that time, and exercise, which
to such penitents by them is enjoined: but that any mortal creature has power
to pardon penance, in such sort, that the party which is to receive the
pardon, need not to be penitent for his sins, I stand still to the flat
denial.

Neither must we here make any great account of such as shall object to the
priests of gods Church, as the Scribes did unto Christ himself, when they saw
him in express words absolve many of their sins, conceiving in their
hearts, as it is recorded by Saint Matthew in the history of the healing of
the man that had the palsy, that Christ did injury to God, and Cap. 9.
committed blaspemie in taking upon him to remit man's offenses. whose malicious
minds and cogitations, Christ did so reprehend, that they might well perceive
by his sight of their inward secrets, that he was very God, who only by
nature looks into man's heart, and therefore did therebie well insinuate, that
they could not justly reprehend his doings, seeing he was God in deed, and
might as God pardon man's offenses. Yet that notwithstanding, he stood not with
them then upon the right of his Godhead for the doing of this excellent
function, which in deed by nature and property is only perteining to him,
but he gave this reason of his doing, that the Son of man had power to remit
sins in earth: wherebie me seems (wherein yet I submit my judgment to the
more learned) that he plainly professed, that by power received, he might in
respect of his manhood and calling forgive sinners, and that in earth, as
meaning therebie to institute an order and way, how to remit sins here in
the world, either by himself, or by his ministers, at whose sentence past in
earth, the penitent should be frree by judgment of God in heaven. For so our
savior two or three times talking of man's ministry, in the remission of
(...), terms it, loosing in earth, and the contrary, binding in earth, as
also he calls Gods high sentence in the same cause, loosing and binding in
heaven. Neither does the interpretation of Saint Hilarie any whit hinder my
meaning, who upon that place affirms Christ to have remitted this Mat. 16.
and 18. In expla^. Mat. Can. 18
man's sins by the might of his Godheade: for it stands well, that one work
should be wrought by the principal cause, and yet by the office and ministry
of some secondarie cause appointed by the ordinance of God for the same use, as
we see in baptism to the remission of the childs sin, both the might of
God, and the ministry of man to concur at once, whereof we shall have, I
trust, better occasion to speak anon.


FVLKE. It is well that you can make such light account, of such as shall object
against you, that it is not lawful for man to usurp any thing, which is
proper to god, as is the absolute power to forgive sins, which none can
properly and absolutely forgive, but he against whom they be committed.
Therefore there is a broad difference between the power of God, and the (...)
of man, in forgiving of sins. God does absolutely and properly forgive
sins committed against his law, and majesty. Man by his appointment does
assure the penitent sinners of his sins forgiven by God: and therefore in
some phrase of (...) is said to forgive sins, as he is said, to save men's
souls, to whom he preached the salvation by Jesus Christ. The Scribes did
rightly affirm, that none could forgive sins, but God only but they erred
in that they did not acknowledge Christ to be God, who in the person of the
mediator, even in that state of humility, in which he was conversant upon
earth was no whit abridged of his divine authority, but that he might by the
same power forgive sins, that he did heal diseases. And whereas he says, that
the son of man had power to forgive sins upon earth, he means not that he
had it, as mere man: but as God and man in one person, and that his manhood
was no let unto him, to exercise that power of his Godheade. John. 3. he says,
the son of man came down from heaven, and that the son of man is in
heaven. But this is not to be understood of the son of man, according to his
manhood, but according to his Godhead, as many other such speeches are in the
scripture, which in respect of the unity of the person, ascribe to the one
nature, that which is proper to the other, as Act. 20. to feed the Church of
God, which he has redeemed with his own blood. where redemption by his
blood is affirmed of God, which is proper and true, in respect of Christ's
humanity. Your modesty is commendable, that you do submit your self to the
judgment of other, in that your conceit of Christ's meaning, thereby to
institute an order, etc. for the order that he has instituted, and the power
that he has given, of binding and loosing in earth, is else where plainly, and
purposedlie set forth, that we need not such unnecessary and unlikely
conjectures to ground it upon. And whereas you affirm, that the interpretation
of Saint Hilarie does not any whit hinder your meaning, because one work may
be wrought by the principal cause, and yet by the office and ministry of
some secundarie, I answer, the questions is not, what may be, but what was
done in that case, whereof Saint Hilaries judgment is flat against you. His
words are, in Mat. com. Canon. 8. Mouet Scribas remissum ab homine peccatum.
Hominem enim tantum in Jesus Christo confitebantur, and remissum ab eo quod lex
laxare non poteratifides enim (...) iustificat: deinde murmurationem eorum
dominus introspicit, dicitque facile esse filio hominis in terra peccata
dimittere Verum enim nemo potest dimittere pecoata, nisi solus Deus: ergo
quiremittit, Deus est, quia nemo remittie nisi Deus: deus in homine manens
curationem homini praestabat, and nulla ei agendi aut loquendi erat
difficultas, cui subest totum posse quod loquitur. Porro autem vt ipse in
corpore positus, intelligi possit esse, qui and animis peccata dimitteret, and
resurrectionem corporibus prestaret, ait, vt siatis quoniam silius hominis
habet potectatem in terra dimittendi peccata, etc. It moves the Scribes that
sin is remitted by a man. for they did behold a man only in Jesus Christ,
and that to be remitted by him, which the law could not release. For faith
alone does justify afterward our Lord looks into their murmuring, and says,
that it is easy for the son of man on earth to forgive sins. But none
truly can forgive sins but God alone, therefore he which forgiueth, is God,
be ause no man remitteth but God. God abiding in man performed healing to the
man, and there was no difficulty to him of doing or speaking, who has power
so be able to do all that he speaks. But that he being placed in the body,
might be understood to be the same which forgiueth sins to men's souls, and
performs resurrection to their bodies, he says, that you may know that the
son of man, has power on earth to forgive sins, etc. Let the reader judge
whether Saint Hilarie do any whit in these words hinder your meaning. And yet
more plainly Saint Chrysostom controlleth your meaning, and speaks
expresselie, and directly against it, in Mat. Hom. 30. entreating upon this
place. Illud vero non praetermittendum, quod quando peccata paralytici dimisit
non aperte potestatem suam manifesiauit. Non enim dixit, dimitto tibi peccata
tua: sed dimittuntur tibi peccata tua, inimicis autem vrgentibus manifestius,
suam potestatem oftendit. Ait enim, vt sciatis quia potestatem habet filius
bominis in terra peccata di mittere: perpendisne quam long abest, vt nolit
aequalis patri putari? non enim dixit, potestatem habere a deo filium hominis,
aut quia dedit sibi Deus potestatem, sed potestatem habet filius hominis: nec
ad gloriam dico, ait, sed vt vobis persuadeam, quia non blasphemo, cum meip sum
patri aequalem faciam. But this thing, is not to be passed by, that when he
forgave the sins of the palsy man, he did not openly manifest his power: for
he did not say, I forgive thee thy sins, but thy sins are forgiuenthes.
But when his enemies urged him, he shows his power more manifestly: for he
says, that you may know, that the son of man has power on earth to
forgive sins. Do thou not mark how far of it is, that he would not be
thought equal to his father? for he said not, that the son of man has
power from God, or that God has given him power, but the son of man has
power: neither, says he, do I speak it for to glory in, but that I might
persuade you that I do not blaspheme, when I make my self equal with my
father. The same interpretation has Euthymius upon the place. S. Ambrose also
acknowledges the divinity of Christ to be proved by forgiveness of sins, in
Luc. 5. Cognosce interioris hominis sanitatem cui peccata donantur, quae cum
Iudoaei asserunt a solo Deo, posse donari, deum vtique confitentur, suoque
iudicio perfidiam suam produnt, vt opus astruant, personam negent, etc.
Acknowledge the healing of the innar man to whom his sins are forgiven,
which when the Jews do affirm that they can be forgiven by God alone, they
do confess verily, that he is god, and by their own argument bewray their
falshoode, that they allow his work, and deny his person. Therefore even of
them the son of god receives testimony of his work, and requires not the
suffrage of their voice. For falshoode can confess, but it cannot believe.
Therefore there wants no testimony to his divinity, but faith is wanting to
their salvation: for both it is more strange for credit which they confess
unwilling, and also more pernicious to their fauls that they deny, which are
convinced by their own assertions. Great therefore is the madness of the
unfaithful people, that when they have confessed that it pertains to God
only to forgive sins, they will not give credit to God, when he does
forgive sins. And a little after, where he also acknowledges the power of
remitting sins, which is granted to men, he does nevertheless affirm, that
God only does forgive sins. Quamuis igitur magnum sit hominibus peccata
dimittere (quis enim potest peccata dimittere, nisi solus Deus, quiper eos
quoque dimittit, quibus dimittendi tribuit potestatein?) tamen multo diuinius
est resurrecti onem donare corporibus. For although it be a great thing to
forgive sins to men (for who can forgive sins but god alone, who also
forgiueth by them, to whom he has given power of for giving?) yet it is a
much more divine work to give resurrection to men's bodies. This (...) of S.
Ambrose, shows not only, that Christ by his divine power, as god, forgave
sins in this place, but that God only does properly (...), when he uses
the ministry of men: so that not (...) S. Hilarie, but even the consent of all the ancient writers is a against your new imagination.


ALLEN. But to return (...) to our (...): when Christ had declared that the
Son of man had in earth power to remit sins, he then by this farther proof
and argument ouerturneth the wholl cause of their (...) and inward (...)
against him for the same: whether is it more easy to say, thy sins be
forgiven thee, or to say to the incurable person, take up thy bed and walk? I
due the one in all your sightes, and he is cured at my word: why then mistrust
you the other? It was no less the property of God alone to he all him
suddenly of his corporal infirmity, that had been desperatclie sick so
long, then to forgive sins: but the one power though by (...) it was proper
to him self, yet he gave it in the sight of you all to the son of man in
earth: why then mistrust you but he might well give the other? This reason
proceeding from the wisdom of Gods own son, shall help our faith much
touching this article, and shall not a little further the dignity of the (...),
who also after their masters example, may prove the force of their authority
upon men's souls, which cannot be open to our bodelie eyes, by the apparent
power that their words shall be seen openly to work on men's bodies,
especially if it be well weighed, that Christ wrought miracles also, not
only by the excellent dominion and force of his godhead, but also, as Saint
Augustine proves, by the spirts of God, in respect of his manhood: In quo
spiritu sanflo (says he) operatus est virtuies, dicens: Si ego in spiritu dei
De Trin. lib. 1. c. 11.
eiicto daemonia, certe superuenit in vosregnum Dei: In the pow er of which
holy ghost Christ wrought miracles, according to his own saying in these
words: if I expel out devils by the spirit of god, then surely the kingdom of
God will come on you. The Jews therefore seeing themselves thus overcome in their
cogitations, waxed affraied, and glorified God, who gave such power to men. For
though no man ever had equal authority or like power to Christ, who was both
God and man, yet of this plentiful spirit and unction, many of his brethren
have through his ordinance recciued part, as shortly now is shall be proved.
In the mean time arm thy self against (...) with this approved and certain
truth, that not only God by his passing prerogative, may forgive sins,
but that he has so soueraignclie (...) Christ our Priest and head, that as he
is man, and occupies the said functions in earth, he may remit by the virtue
of the holy Ghost our offenses also.


(...). That which before, but doubtinglie, and under correction of better
learned men, you propounded, to the end that like a subull serpent you might
writhe in your head, now as a conqueror of the wholl cause, you thrust in your
wholl body: and as though you had gained your purpose, you affirm
steadfastlie, that although, it was no less the property of God alone to
heal the man suddenly of his corporal infirmity, then to forgive sins,
yet as he gave the one power to the son of man, which was proper to
himself, so he might well give the other. Your argument in a posse adesse,
which is not worth a straw, among them that know that arguments do mean.
That power which God might give to mere mortal men, who doubts but God
might also give to Christ his son, to exercise according to his human
nature: but that he did exercise the same only as man, and not as God, by
what argument is it proved? we know that in casting out of deuilles, he used
his divine authority, and in his own name commanded them to come forth, and
they obeyed. Mark. 1. 27. he raised the dead by his own authority as God,
and in his own name, Luke. 7. 14. Saint John restifieth, that of the eternal
word, which was made flesh, and dwelt among us, he and his fellow Apostles
did see the glory, as the glory of the only begotten Jonne of God, full of
grace and truth. From whence come you therefore, with a Gospel, to teach us
that Christ did forgive sins, heal the sick, cast out devils, and do
miracles, but as a man only, by power received from God? whereby you show
your self to be a good procter for the Arrians, if those works which were
proper to Christ, in respect of his divinity, you will draw down to his
humanity, so that he raised the dead. cleansed the leapers, etc. not otherwise
the^ by power received from; god, as Elizeus did, or as any of his Apostles,
which did al things in his name: whose dignity you are so careful to further,
that you care not how you abase the honor of their Master, and al to bring in
a popish, that is, an Antichristian tyranny over men's souls, which is
blasphemous against the authority of God. For if the plain text of the
scripture, John 20. 23. whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven, etc. would
yeald you so much authority, as you would gladly exercise, you would not
trouble your self, to make such impertinent, and inconsequent collections, by
which you would have it seem, as though Christ in respect of his divine
nature, was unoccupied, as concerning the work of our redemption in the world,
but that he did all things in respect of his humane nature, by power received
from God. But Saint Augustine (you say) proves, that by the spirit of God,
in respect of his manhood, Christ wrought miracles, which although it be not
the matter in question, yet you draw S. Austen to another matter, then ever
was in his meaning. For although it be true, that Christ did cast out Devils
in the spirit of God, as man, yet it follows not, that he did not cast out
devils by his own authority as God, seeing the works of the Trinity are
undivided, and Saint Augustine, in the place by you quoted, distinguishes
between those sayings that speak of him, as in the form of God, and those
that pertain unto him, in respect, of the shape of a servant.

But an other argument you have, of that the Jews, which seeing themselves
thus overcome in their vain cogitations, waxed afraid, and glorified God, who
gave such power to men. That the Scribes and Pharisees which first moved the
question of forgiveness of sins, were moved with reverence of our savior
Christ, or yealded glory God, I find not: but that all the rest of the people
glorified Math. 9. Mark. 2. Luke 5.
to god, which had given such power to men. What power say you? to forgive
sins. The text says not so, but of working such miracles, to heal the man
sick of the palsy, so that he was presently changed from extreme weakness,
to perfect strengh. whereof: as S. Luke reports) they said, we have seen
sirange things to day, and as S. Mark rocordeth it, they said, we never saw
it thus. But as for the ordinary power of making atonement for sins, which
the Priests used according to the law, it was no strange thing unto them, and
they had seen it often times before. These therefore are the best interpreters
of S. Math. which did write by the same spirit. But because man's authority with
you is many times preferred before god, you shall hear what S. Hilarie says in
that place, which ere while you affirmed to make nothing against your meaning:
his interpretation of the text, Et honorificauerunt deum, quod tanta^ dedit
potestatem hominib. etc. is this. Conclusa sunt omnia suo ordine, and cessante
iam desperationis timore, honor Deo redditur, quod tantam dederit hominibus
potestatem: sed soli hoc Christo erat debitum, solid communione paternae
substantiae hoc agere erat familiare. All things are concluded in due order,
and the fear of disperation now ceasing, honor is rendered to God, because he
has given so great power to men. But this was due only to Christ, to him
alone it was familiar or accustomable to do these things by the communion of
his fathers substance. These words do plainly show that Saint Hilary
dissenteth every whit from your meaning: and that you arm your scholars with
no armor of proof, when you will them to look for the like power, of
remitting sins in Christ's humanity, which he did exercise according to the
authority of his divinity.


ALLEN. Let the proud cogitations of men here attend, that so highly disdain
the ministry of mortal men in the remission of their sins: let them
controulle the wounderfull wisdom of God, which would no otherwise save the
pitiful sores of our souls, but by the servile form of our own nature,
joined meruelouslie in our person, to the word and eternal Son of God the
father: let them reprehend the unsearchable secret council of the holy
Trinity, which being of power infinite to work their will in all creatures, yet
would not repair the world, nor remit our sins any otherwise, but by the
service of the Son of man: let them mislike, that flesh, blood, and the soul
of our blessed savior being al creatures, should join with the only
almighty creator of all thinger, in the remission of all our offenses: let the
presumptuose thus do, and let us humbly reverence Gods ordinance, and
glorifye him in his Sons high calling in our kind, through whose singular
prerogative we shall undoubtedly find exceeding power to be given to his
body and brethren in earth, to his most dear spouse the Church.


FVLKE. The ministry of mortal men in remission of sins, no man I hope is
so mad to disdain, when Christ himself in so plain terms has authorized
the same. But where you say, that the wisdom of God, would no otherwise salve
the pittifuli sores of our souls, but by the servile form of our nature,
joined meruelouslie in one person to the word and eternal son of God, I
cannot but marvel at your Nestorian blasphemy. For although it be most
certain, that in the form of a servant, the wisdom of God preformed that,
which to the glory of his justice was expedient, yet that the deitic was
altogether idle, or unoccupied, in the work of our redemption, yea that the
godhead did not work the principal and most necessary part thereof, it is
too too abominable, and intolerable heresy. Out of the like stinking puddle
it proceeds that you say, that the holy Trinity, being of infinite power to
work their will in all creatures, yet would not repair the world, nor remit
our sins any otherwise, but by the service of the son of man. That the
service of the son of man was necessary to be used, it is most true, but
that authority of the son of God, was not necessary for so great a work,
as well as the seruise of the son of man, it is such an impudent blasphemy,
as I think the Pope himself would condemn it, if his opinion without
partiality thereof might be known. As for the work of Christ's humanity
joined in one person to his deity, and the commission granted to his
ministers to remit sins, are nothing hindered by acknowledging, that God
only does properly and absolutely forgive sins, even when his ministers,
according to his commandment, do forgive sins, as S. Ambrose says, and
all antiquity does accord.


Here it is declared by the scripture, that the same power of remitting sins,
which God the Father by commission gave unto his Son, as he was man, was also
by Christ bestowed on the Apostles after his resurrection.

THE SECOND CHAP.
ALLEN. IN what high reputation man has ever been with god his maker, it is
not my purpose now to treat of: neither will I make any tediouse talk, though
it be somewhat more near the matter, how estimation is increased by the
honorable and most merueilous matching of Gods only son with our nature
and kind: whereof whosoever has any conside ration, he shall nothing wonder,
I warrant him, at the soueraingtie of such, as be placed in the seat of
judgment and government, for the rule of that comonwealth, whereof Christ is
the head. These things, though they be well worthy our labor and deep
remembrance, and not very far from our matter, yet so will I charge my self
with continuance in my cause, that I will only seek out the dignity of
priesthood, touching the right, that the order: laimeth in remission and
retaining of man's sins. In all which cause, I take this a ground, that our
Masters messenger stood upon, when his disciples grudged that Christ had his
followers, and practiced Baptism no less then him self did, which is: That
no man can rightly receive any thing, that is John. 3.
not given him from above. Therefore if it may be sufficiently declared, that
the order holds by good warrant this their pre-eminence of pardoning, or
punishing of the peoples offenses, and that by commission from him, who without
al controversy is the head of the Church, then the contrary must learn to
leave their contentious reasoning, and unjust contempt of that order, which is
honored by power and prerogative proceeding from Christ Jesus.


FVLKE. That God of his mere goodness and mercy has vouchsafed man of so
great honor, that of him self deserves eternal shame, it is more reason to
wonder at Gods mercy, then to insinuate any piece of man's dignity or
worthiness. That it has pleased god to advance some men to the government of
his Church upon earth, we have cause to magnify his majesty, that disdaineth
not our base condition, but puts his honor and authority upon them,
drives us not from them by the excellency of their nature above ours, but
familiarly inuiteth us to obedience of his will, that we may attain to his
promis of eternal happiness. The title of this chapter, That our savior Christ
gave unto his Apostles, the same power of remitting sins, which God the
father by commission gave unto his son, as he was man, we do all agree: but
that Christ did exercise a more sovereign authority in forgiving sins, then
he did bestow upon his Apostles, or their nature was capable to receive, it is
proved sufficiently in the Chapter going before. Nevertheless I will examine
all parts of this chapter, and if in any thing I dissent from you, I will
show that you dissent from the truth. And first where you profess only to
seek out the dignity of Priesthood, touching the right that the order
claims in remission and retention of man's sins, you should have done
better, to have sought and set out the duty of such persons also, to whom
such dignity is committed, lest, as it falls out in your bastard Popish
Priesthood, the dignity be only sought for, the labor and duty almost, or
altogether neglected. The ground you take out of Saint John, is infallible:
Ioh. 3.
and therefore your Popish priesthood does blasphemouslie usurp a pretended
power, to offer up our savior Christ unto his father, as a sacrifice
propitiatory for the sinnns of the quick and the dead for grant of which
power from above, you can show no warrant out of the written word of God, the
only true record of Gods grant, and sufficient evidence for so great an
authority.


ALLEN. And of two or three places in holy scripture pertaining to this
purpose, that shall be first proposed, which with most force drives down
falsehood, and most properly pertains to the pith and principal state of
the cause which we have in hand. Thus then we find of Christ's words, will,
and behavior, concerning the commission granted out to his holy Apostles for
the remission and punishment of our sins, in the 20. Chapter of the Gospel
of Saint John. Where the Evangelist thus reports, that Christ after his
glorious resurrection, came into a secret chamber, where his disciples were
together, the door being shut for fear of the Jews, and there after he had
given them, as his custom was, his peace, and his blessing, and she wed him
self to their infinite comfort, that he was perfectly risen again in the same
body that so lately was buried, he then straight afterward, to make worthy
entrance to so high a purpose, gave them this peace again, in manner of a
solemn benediction, and therewith said: Sicut misit me Pater, and ego mitto
vos. Even as the father has sent me, so I do send you. And when he had so
spoken, he breathed on them and said, Accipite spiritum sanctum: quorum
remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis: and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt.
Receive you the holy ghost: whose sins soever you shall forgive, they are
forgiven them: and whose sins you shall retain, they be retained. This is
the place, lo, in which the judgment and rule of our souls with all
authority in correcting our sins, in most express and effectual terms,
and in most ample manner is given to the Aposiles and their successors.
Christ him seife does communicate unto them the jurisdiction that he received
of his Father: he gives them in a solemn ceremony that same spirit of God,
by which in earth himself did remitte sianes: hemaketh them an assured
promis, that whatsoever they pardoned or corrected in man's life, the same
should stand in force before God.


FVLKE. Our savior Christ in this place, does first of all authorize his
Apostles, to execute the office of public preaching of the Gospel in all the
world, unto the which he had before chosen and appointed them. Then does he
furnish them with gifts of the holy Ghost meet for so high and painful a
calling: last of all he ratifieth the effect of their ministry, to be
accomplished in the remission of the sins, of all them that believe their
preaching: and in the retaining of their sins, that do not obey the voice of
the Gospel, to believe it. For the power of remitting sins, must not be
separated from the office of teaching, whereunto it is annexed by our savior
Christ: who does not give his Apostles authority to remit sins, so that he
would transfer into them any thing that is proper unto himself. For it is
proper to him to remit sins: which honor, so far forth as it pertains to
his only person, he does not resign to his Apostles, but commands them in
his name to testify the forgiveness of sins, that he might reconcile men to
God by their ministry. For I have showed before in the words of S. Hilarie,
that to speak properly, God only by men remitteth sins, not following the
sentence of man, but man following the judgment of God, which is to pardon all
penitent sinners, and to retain the sins of unbelievers, unto eternal
condemnation. Therefore it is much more then the place does afforde, that you
affirm the judgment and rule of our souls, with all authority in correcting
our sins in most express and effectual terms, and in most ample manner
is given to the Apostles, and their successors in this place. For Christ in
this place does constitute Apostles, and not Judges, messengers and declarers
of his good pleasure and will unto men, not rulers of men's souls: he gives
them power to remit or retain sins in his name, to the inestimable comfort
of all penitent sinners, and to the terror and in crease of damnation of all
unbelievers: he gives them not al authority, and that in most ample manner
in correcting our sins: neither are there in the place any express or
effectual terms, our of which such omnipotent authority can be concluded, as
afterward when we come to your syllogism, we shall platnlie declare. Again,
there is no mention in the text, of any jurisdiction communicated unto them,
but of the office of teaching, whereunto Christ was sent for a time, which he
commits to his Apostles and their successors. For these words of our
savior ( As my father hrth sent me, I also do send you) can not be enlarged
generally, to all such purposes as God sent Christ: but must be understood,
according to the matter he speaks of, that is, of the office of Preaching and
teaching, which Christ at that time did cease to execute in his humanity,
remaining yet still the only doctor and teacher of his Church, because he is
author of the doctrine that is taught, and by his holy spirit teaches
continually, in giving effect to the labors of his Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, Pastors, and teach ers, which he has given unto his Church, for the
external ministry of instructing the same in all truth necessary to the
eternal salvation of his elect: He substituteth therefore his Apostles in that
necessary office of preaching the Gospel, he enableth them by his spirit,
which he testifies vntothem by an holy sign, to proceed from him. He makes
an assured promis, that they should not labor in vain, but that in pardoning
and retaining sins according to the doctrine of his Gospel, whatsoever they
did, should stand in force before God.


ALLEN. What dignity could ever be given more? in what terms more plain? by
what order more honorable? for surely if either Christ could remit sins, as
we have at large proved that he could, by commission and sending of his
father, or if the holy spirit of God may remit sins, or if Christ's word
will procure man any power to remit sins, then undoubtedly may the
Apostles remit sins: For they have the express warrant of them all. Much
said Paul, when he affirmed in the Apostles name and person of all Priests,
Quod (...) erat in Christo mundum reconcilians sibi, and posuit in nobis verbum
reconciliationis. 1. Cor. 5.
Pro Christo ergo legatione fungimur: That God was in Christ reconciling the
world to him self, and has put in us the word of reconcilement: therefore our
calling is to serve as an Embasy in Christ's own stead. These words be of
great weight, and exceedingly set forth the vocation of the spiritual
governors, as of those, that hold by the warrant of Gods sending, and thereby
occupy Christ's own room. Marie the place for all that appertains to their
calling generally, as well to preach, as otherwise to guide the people of God
in the behalf of their Master, to whom we al be subject: but this present
text, whereupon we now treat, does properly concern the commission given to
the Apostles for the sacrament of penance and remission of sins. For it does
in most clear and undoubted sense give to them the like right in that case,
that Christ him self had by the sending of God the father: that is to say,
the very same authority that he had in respect of his mediation and manhood: A
Equalem patri filium nouimus (says Saint Augustine) sed bic verba Mediatoris
agnoscimus: medium quippe se ostendit dicendo, Super hune locum.
ille me, and ego vus. We know the son to be equal with the father, but here
we must acknowledge the words of a mediator. For he showed him self to be as
a mean, when he said: He sent me, and I send you. That is to say (as
Theophilact expounds In Ioannena cap. 20.
it) Take upon you my work and function, and do it with confidence: For as my
father did send me, so I send you again, and I will be with you to the end of
the world.


FVLKE. There is no dout, but the Apostles had power to remit sins, but yet for all your thetorical interrogations, none other, then I have expressed before;
nor greater, then may stand with the glory of Christ, who makes not men equal
with him. when he authorizeth them as his servants, to be ministers of his
mysteries, and stewardes of his gracious gifts. And Paul truly said much,
when he affirmed, that god was in Christ reco^ciling the world to himself, not
imputing to them their offenses (which clause I know not why you have omitted)
and has put in us that word of reco^ciliation. We are therefore ambassadors
for Christ, etc. For he said, that it is proper to god to reconcile the world,
to forgive sins, or not to impute them, and that is but a ministry of
reconciliation, which he has given unto men, and she weth how this ministry
is executed, namely by preaching reconciliation, as the ambassadors of God, to
desire men, to be reconciled unto God: which only mean of preaching expressed
in this place you (with a Marie for all that) fumble up, with I cannot tell
what guidance because you cannot content your self to be a minister, a
servant, a subject: but you must be a Lord a Prince, a ruler.

But the other text of Ioh. 20. (yousay) does properly concern the commission
given to the Apostles, for the sacrament of penance, and remission of sins.
But whether I pray you in the scripture shall we read of this your sacrament,
or the institution thereof? what is the visible word or element thereof? yet
you say, that this text does in most clear, and undoubted sense, give to
them the like right in that case, that Christ himself had, by the sending of
God the father: that is to say, the very same authority, that he had in
respect of his mediation and manhood. So that be like Christ, as Mediator, has
no authority peculiar to himself, in respect of the excellency of his person,
but that which is communicable unto others, and is communicated to his
Apostles. But that is a strange doctrine, never heard of before in the Church
of God, except it were from the mouth of Nestorius, or any of his disciples.
For our savior Christ received in his manhood, that which no other man is
able to receive, because he one lie is God and man: he received the spirit, not
according to measure, John. 3. 34. as all men must do that receive it:
therefore no man can receive such power by the spirit in measure, which he
received by the spirit infinitely or without measure. But Saint Augnstine is
called to witness, that this text does give theverie same authority to the
Apostles, that Christ had in respect of his mediation, and manhood. Whereas
Saint Augustines words import no such thing, but only show, that Christ,
though equal to his father in respect of his Godheade, yet as he is our
Mediator, is sent of his father in respect of his manhood. But of the very
same authority that Christ had in respect of his mediation, given to the
Apostles, he speaks not a word. That you join his ma^hood to his mediation,
as though the mediator were nothing but man, or as though the man Jesus Christ,
which is our only mediator, were not Immannell, that is, God with us, it is
not without some smack of Nestorian heresy, wherebie you seem so to separate
the man from God, as though any thing might be verified of the man, which in
respect of the unity of person, might not be verified of God, or as though
there were not such a perfect union ofthe two natures in one person, that
although they both continue unconfounded, reteining their essential
properties, yet any part of the office and authority of Christ, which he
exercised in his humanity, might as latgelie, as fully, and with the very
same authority, be committed over to any other mortal man, to be exercised,
as it was by Christ himself. But Theophilact is cited to be an interpreter of
Saint Augustine, who says upon these words, as the father has sent me, etc.
in the person of Christ: take upon you my work, and be sure that I will be
with you, meaning that he commits to them the office of teaching, whereunto
he was sent by his father, but of equal authority with him, he speaks no
word. Which place you have very licentiously translated, to draw it to your
purpose. For the words are no more but these, as Philippus Montanus has
translated them: Meum opus, inquit, suscipite, and confidite quod vobiscum sum
futurus. And in the end he wills men to consider the dignity of priests,
that it is divine. For it pertains to God to remit sins: so therefore are
they to be honored, as God. For although they be unworthy, what is that? they
are the ministers of Gods gifts, and grace works by them, even as he spoke
by Balaams ass. For our unworthiness hinders not grace. so because by means
of priests, grace is granted, they are to be honored. Thief words of
Theophilact declare, that although he ascribe much to the dignity of Priests,
yet he does not allow them the very same authority, that Christ had in
respect of his mediation, but a far inferior ministry.

And excellently to our purpose wrote the holy father Cyril, as well for the
dignity of the Apostolic vocation, as for the Super. 20. c. Ioannis.
honorable legacy, in these words. Ad gloriosum Apostolalatum Dominus noster
Jesus Christus Discipulos suos vocduit, qui commotum orbem firmarunt,
sustentacula eius facti: vnde per Psalmistam de terra and de Apostolis dicit,
quia ego firmaui columnas eius. Columnae enim and robur veritatis
discipulisunt, quos ita dicit se mittere, sicut a patre ipse missus est, us
Apostolatus dignitatem ostenderet, and magnitudinem potestatis eorum aperiret.
These words and the residue following concerning the same purpose go thus in
english. Our Lord and master Christ Jesus promoted his disciple, to a glorious
Apostleship: who becing made the proppes and stays of all the earth, have
established the wavering world: whereupon the Psalmist says thus of the
earth and the Apostles: I have surely and firmly set the pillars thereof.
For the disciples no doubt be the very pillars strength, and stay of truth,
whom Christ says that he does send, even as his father did send him, that
thereby he might declare to the world as well the dignity of their
Apostleship, as open to all men their excellency and the might of their power:
and no less signify unto them, what way they had to take in all their life
and studies. For if they be so sent as Christ him self was sent of the father,
it is requisite to consider, for what work and purpose the father everlasting
sent his son in flesh to the world. And that him self else where declares:
saying: Non veni vocare iustos, sed peccatores ad poenitentiam: I came not to
call the just, but sinners to repen tance: Math. 9.
and in another place it is said. God sent not his son Joan. 3.
into the world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved by him:
al these things and other he touched briefly in these few words: Sicus misit
me pater, and ego mitto vos. vt hinc intelligant vocandos esse (...) ad
poenitentiam, (...) corpore simul and spiritumale habentes. Like as my father
sent me, so I send you: that sinners should be called to repentance, and be
healed both in body and soul. Thus far spoke S. Cyril of the excellent
calling of the disciples, and of the cause of their large commission not
restricted by any streighter terms, then Christ's own commission was, which
he received from his everlasting Father.


FVLKE. The words of Saint Cyrillus declare no more then I have said before,
that the Apostles were sent of Christ as Christ was sent of his father, to call
sinners to repentance by their ministry of preaching, not that they were sent
with as large commission, in every respect, as Christ was sent, to be our
mediator and redeemer. The words of Cyrill which you have mangled and chopped
at your pleasure, I will recite wholl together, that the reader may see, how
iniutiouslie you would draw to far other meaning, then his saying will yeald.
In Ioh. lib. 12. C. 55. upon these words. Dicit ergo eis iterum, pax vobis:
sicut misit me pater, and ego mitto vos. He writes thus. Ordinauit his verbis
orbis doctores, etc. He ordained the^ by these words, teachers of the world,
and ministers of the divine mysteries, whom he sent as lights, to the
lightening, not of the region of the Jews only, which according to the
measure of the legal commandment, extended from Dan to Bersebe, as it is
written: but he commanded them to lighten the wholl world. Therefore Paul
says truly, that no man takes honor upon him, except he be called of God.
For our Lord Jesus Christ called his disciples unto the glorious Apostleship,
which stayed the world that was moved, being made the pillars thereof. Whereof
by the Psalmist, he says, of the earth, and the Apostles,: I have strengthened
the pillars thereof. For his disciples are the pillars and strength of truth.
Whom he says that he does so send, as he himself is sent of his father:
that also he might show the dignity of their Apostleship, and open to all men
the greatness of their power, and with all might show, what way they ought to
follow in their studies, and in their life. For if they be so sent, as Christ
is sent of his father, how is it not necessary to consider, unto what the
father sent his son? for so, not otherwise, they may be able to follow him.
But if expounding to us the cause of his sending many ways, one while he
said: I came not to call the just, but sinners to repentance: an other while,
The holl have no need of the Physician, but such as be diseased: And moreover,
I came down from heaven (says he) not that I might do mine own will, but
the will of him that sent me: And again, God sent not his son into the
world, that he should judge or condemn the world, but that the world might be
saved by him. All which things he signified in most few words, saying that he
does so send them, as he was sent by his father: that hereof they might
understand, that sinners are to be called to repentance, that they which are
diseased might be healed both in body and in mind. And in the dispensation of
things they must not do their own will, but the will of him that sent them,
and that the world by preaching and the doctrine of faith must be saved. All
which things with what great diligence they performed, you may learn with
small labor, in the book of the Acts of the Apostles and in the Epistles of
Paul. Thus far Cyrillus whose saying if you had not clipped and gelded for
your advantage, would have made no color for your purpose, but against it.


ALLEN. And truly it was the singular providence of God, that before^ the
grant of the government of men's souls to his Disciples being but mortal men,
mention should be made of his own right therein, that the wicked should never
have face to disgrace the authority of them, that depends so fully of the
sovereign calling, and commission of Gods own son. This high wisdom was
practiced also, to the utter confusion of the wicked and wilful persons, at
their calling to the office of preaching and baptizing. The which function lest
any contemptuous person should in such base men disdain, Christ alleges his
own power and pre-eminence, to which the dignity of priesthood is so near,
and so everlastingly joined, that every dishonor and neglecting of the one,
is great derogation to the other. And therefore he says: Omnis potest as data
est mihi in coelo and in terra. All power in heaven and Math. 28.
in earth is given to my hands. Therefore go you forward and teach all
natious, babtizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
holy Ghost. Thus before the institution of sacraments, whereof God him self
must only be the author (as says Saint Cyprian) Christ voutchsafed for the
quiet instruction of the world, to declare his authority and Sermon. de bapt.
Christ
prerogative, that all men might farther understand thereby, that the
ministry and excllent founction in the use of the same, did orderly proceed
of that authority and supreme power, that Christ has received over all
mankind.


FVLKE. Cyrillus tells you there is none other grant of the government of
men's souls, contained in these words, but to be teachers of the Gospel, and
to be ministers of the divine mysteries, to preach remission of sins to the
penitent, and to seal it up with the sacraments, to denounce vengeance to the
impenitent and unbelievers, and in all things to attend, that they do not their
own will, but the will of him that sent them. And in so doing their authority
is exceeding great, derived from God him self, the only author of their
Doctrine, and of the sacraments they do minister. Wherein you seem somewhat
to forget your self, which hitherto have maintained, and still affirm, that
Christ did remit sins, and gave his Apostles authority to do the same, by
power received from God in his manhood, and that the holy Trinity would not
remit our sins otherwise, then by the seruise of the son of man. But now
you confess with S. Cyprian, that God himself, must be the only author of
Sacraments. Wherefore if this power of remitting sins, be a Sacrament, as you
hold, Christ must be the only author of it, as God himself, and not as man,
by power received from God, by the holy Ghost.


ALLEN. And this sequel of Christ's reason has marvelous efficacy and force,
if we will consider thereof: All power is given to me both in heaven and earth,
therefore go you and preach, and baptize, and remit sins. If a man would
ask the Priest or Apostle, how he dare be so bold to exercise any of these
functions? he might upon Christ's word be so bold to make him this answer:
marie sir, I baptize, because all power is given to Christ: I preach, because
all power is given to Christ: I remit sins, because all power was given to
Christ. For in my ministry he practices daielie all these functions: in his
power I am become the lawful worker of all actions, that are so proper to
Christ him self. Therefore it was Christ (says Saint Augustine) Supertract.
4. 5. and 6.
that baptized, and had more Disciples then John: and yet Christ baptized not,
but his Disciples only. So say you to all contemners of Gods ordinance: it
is Christ that pardons and enioyneth penance for man's sins, and yet he does
it not himself as in his own person, but Christ does it daily, by the power
which he established after his resurrection, and which continues for ever in
the high ministry and service of the Church. Thus (I say) does he remit
sins: Hunt Act. 5.
principem and Saluatorem exaltauit dextra sua ad dandam poenitentiam Israeli,
and remissionem peccatorum. This our Prince and Savior has God exalted with
his right hand, to give penance and remission to Israel of all their sins.
This power has our high priest de served for his obedience, and therefore as he
received it, so he has left it in his Church: his own holy words dot
protest that same. For upon his power and sending, which he did receive of his
father, all the Priests do everlastingly hold the right of al holy functions,
which else, but by Christ's own commission and sending, they could never, nor
never durst have practiced so long.


FVLKE. It were a more direct sequel, for a Priest or Elder of the Church, to
maintain and defend his power, that he practizeth in preaching, baptizing, and
remitting of sins, by the calling of Christ; who has all power in heaven and
in earth: for otherwise it follows not, because Christ has all power,
therefore man without calling, and authority received from Christ may execute
any part thereof. But in your application, where you say, that Christ
pardons and enioineth penance for man's sins, in the ministry of the
Church. I grant he pardons, where the power which he has given to the
Church, is duly executed. But for enioining penance, in that sense that
papists do speak it, which is a piece of satisfaction for men's sins, you
are never able to prove, that Christ either in his own person enjoined any,
or by mean, or ministry of any man, does enioine such penance: and
therefore the text you cire Acts the 5. is wretchedlie writhen from the true
meaning, and falselie translated, as I have showed before, by testimonies of
your own translaters, the English Rhemists, who read it thus, This Prince and
savior, God has exalted with his right hand, to give repentance to Israel,
and remission of sins. Where the text is so plain, of the (...) conversion of
the Jews unto Christ, that they were ashamed to turn the word poenitentia as
they do most commonly ( penance) by which they mean some works of
satisfaction, which are enioined to them that commit sin after baptism. As
likewise Acts. II. where it is said, God then to the Gentills has given
repentance unto life. Where by as good reason, and in like sense you might
say, that God has given penance to the gentiles, taking penance in your popsh
meaning, or else you have greatly abused the scripture to prove that Christ
enioineth penance by popish Priests, by that saying of the Apostles Acts. 5.
whereby they mean, that God has exalted Christ to convert the Israelites,
from Iudaisme to the Gospel, and to give them salvation in the free remission
of sins, which of it self excludes all other satisfaction, then such as
Christ himself has made, to answer the justice of God, whose obedience
having satisfied for our disobedience, upon our true and unfeigned repentance,
which will appear by the fruits thereof, we are received into favor, all our
sins being freely forgiven for Jesus Christ's sake.


ALLEN. And whosoever sees not how the power and jurisdiction of so excellent
actions passes from God the Father to his only Son, and from him again to
such as he has sent, and made the messengers of his blessed mind, and
disposers of mysteries, he has no feeling at al of the ways that he wrought
for man's redemption: he can not atteine to the intelligence of Christ's unction,
whereby he is made our head and priest: he, in the midst of the glorious
light of the Church can not behold In Epist. sua Canonica.
the practice of so he auenlie mysteries, and therefore such things as he
knows not, he blasphemeth, says S. Jude. But to work all in light and
order, I will build upon the forsaid, the intended conclusion, that the a
duersaries may see and behold the force of our faith, and the singular weakness
of their assertions, I thus join with them in arguments barelie and plainly
without covert. That power and commission which was given to Christ by his
heavenly Father, concerning remission or retaining of sins, was given to the
Apostles at his departure hence: But Christ him self did truclie,
effectually, and in proper form of speech, by his Fathers sending and and
commission remit sins: Ergo, The ministers of Christ may, and do truclie
and perfectly remit sins. Or thus more briefilie: As Christ was sent of his
Father, so are the Apostles sent by Christ: But Christ was sent to forgive
sins: Ergo, the Apostles be fent to forgive sins also. The second part of
the reasons, which is, that Christ had power of his Father to remit sins, and
was sent for the same purpose, is sussicienlie proved in the Chapter before.
The first part of the argument stands upon the sure ground of Christ's own
words, which be these. Like as my Father sent me, so I do send you. Which
words were so plain and so deeply noted for this intent, of Saint
Chrysostom, that with admiration of the dignity and excellent calling of
Priesthood, he thus trimly discourses upon them. I will report his saying in
Latin, as Germanus Brixius has translated it: all that speaks for De
sacerdot. lib. 3.
that purpose hereafter shall be recited, but now no more but this: Quid hoc
aliud esse dicas, nisi omnium rerum coelestium potestatem illis a Deo esse
concessam? Ait enim, Quorumcunque peccata retinueritis, retenta sunt. Quaenam
obsecro potestas hac vna mayor esse queat? Pater omnifariam filio potestatem
dedit: caeterum video ipsam eandem omnifariam potesiatem a Deo filio illis
traditam. Nam quasi iam in coelum translati, ac supra humanam naturam positi,
atque nostris ab affectibus exempti, sic illi ad principatum istum perducti
sunt. And in English thus it is: What e's can thou make of this, or what
less, then that the power and jurisdiction of all heavenly things is by God
granted unto them? for it is said: whose sins soever you do hold or
retain, they be retained. For Gods love, what power can be given in the world
so great? the Father bestowed all manner of power upon his Son, and I find
the very self same power of all things to be delivered to the Apostles by
God the Son. For now as though they were al ready translated out of this
life to heaven, and there promoted above man's nature, and discharged of all our
feeble affections, they are advanced to the Princely sovereignty, whereof we
now have said. Thus far Chrysostom. So does this worthy father help our
cause, and so does he think of the excellent authority given by the father to
his Son, and derived from him to the ministers of his holy will and testament
in earth. Whose jurisdiction so highly holden, so truly obtained, so nearly
joined unto Christ's honor, and so daily practiced no otherwise but in his
right and name, whosoever shall controlle or co^remne, they not only
irreuerently touch gods anointed, but they sacrilegiously lay hands on ipsum
Christum Domini, even on him that is anointed above all his fellows. Well, I
conclud up this matter with these few words of Saint Ambrose: Vult Dominus
plurimum posse Li 1. de poenitent. c. 7.
discipulos suos: Vult a seruis suis e a fieri in nominesuo, quaefaciebat ipse
positus in terris. Our lords pleasure is, that his disciples should have great
prerogative: he will have the same things wrought by his servants in his name
that himself did in his own person, when he was in earth.


FVLKE. He that sees not the difference of the ministry of man from the
power of God in those actions, wherein God works by man, gropeth in the
dark, and sees nothing as he ought to see. Therefore, let us come to the
light of your logic, and thereby consider, if we can, the distinction of the
one from the other. If the mayor or first proposition of your former
syllogism, be understood of a power or commission granted to the manhood of
Christ, such as might have been granted by God to any other mere man, then
your Minor is not true, that Christ by such a power and commission only,
setting his Godhead aside, though truly and effectually, yet not in proper
form ofspeach, by his fathers sending and commission remitted sins for then
could he not be the author of remission of sins, but only a minister
thereof: and therefore in proper form ofspeach, he could not be said to
forgive sins, which is proper only to god, but to preach the forgive nes of
sins, in Gods name, or to testify that God did forgive sins, as the
ministers of the Church do. Butif the Mayor be understood, of such power and
commission as was given to Christ, as the Mediator, in respect of his manhood,
but yet such, as he couldnot receive and exercise, but in respect of his
godhead, and such as could not be granted to any, but unto that person which
is God and man, such is the absolute and principal power of remission of
sins, then I deny that such power was given to the Apostles at his
departure. For when Christ himself did truly, effectually, and in proper
form of speech remit sins, he did it as God, having equal, and principal
authority with the father, and the holy ghost so to do. The conclusion of
your second syllogism, I grant, that the Apostles were sent to forgive
sins, but retaining the former distinction, of the authority of God, and the
ministry of man. For as Christ was sent of his father to preach the remission
of sins, so were the Apostles sent by Christ to preach remission of sins:
therefore such power as he had, by preaching only of remission of sins, to
forgive sins such power be granted to his Apostles, whom he ordained
preachers in his place: but the proper pow er of his deity he granted not, nor
any power which is proper to the person of the Mediator God and man. Theresore
these words of Christ, As the father sent me, so send I you, must not be
extended further then our savior Christ in that place means. For else
infinite absurdities might be concluded thereof, as that he sent his Apostles
to redeem the world, to die for the sins of the world, to be saviors of the
world, etc. or that he sends all ministers of the Church, to whom this
commission extends, to cleanse leapers to raise the dead, to give sight to the
blind, and to do all other miracles, that he was sent to do. According to this
distinction, that Rhetorical amplification of Chrysostom, is to be
understood: and doubtless wonderful great is the authority, that man does
exercise in the name of God, although that which is peculiar to God, be not
attributed to men. The similitude that Chrysostom uses in the same chapter,
Lib. 3. cap. 5. of a King granting power to one of his subjects, to imprison
men, and to release them, shows that he knew the difference of the Lord, from
the servant, who if he abuse the authority committed unto him, deserves
sharp punishment, and therefore has not absolute authority, to do all things
as his Lord, and can not transgress in doing. And in the next Chapter he
shows, that Priests do exercise this power of forgiving sins, by teaching,
admonition, and by prayer. Not only by teaching and admonishing, but also by
the help of prayers: and a manifest difference shows Saint Ambrose, when he
says, Christ would have his disciples to do in his name the same things which
he did on earth, partly in his fathers name, and partly in his own name.


The power of priesthood touching remission of sins proved by the solemn
action of Christ, in breathing upon his Apostles, and giving them thereby the
holy Ghost.

THE THIRD CHAP.
ALLEN. THe commission and power that our Master Christ received of his
everlasting father, being in most ample manner communicated with the Apostles,
made great proof and evidence for the right that they claim in remission of
sins: but the present power of Gods spirit breathed by Christ upon them, and
given unto them for the ministry and execution of that function, helps our
matter so much, that whosoever ever now denies this authority of the Apostles,
concerning the pardoning of our offenses, does not so much sin against the
son of man, which of it self is grievous enough, as he does control the
work of the spirit of Christ, which is the holy Ghost, in whom both he and
his Church does remit sins. The more plain and more exact our master Christ
was in the bestowing of that power to remit and retain sins, the more is our
contempt in the disobedience and denial thereof. He sends them (...) with
his own authority in this case: he gives them the very spirit of God, by
whose divine power they may execute the function to which he called them: he
gives them the express warrant of his own word, that sins they might
pardon and punish: and yet we make doubt of their usurpation. But how they
might forgive sins by Christ's sending, we have already said.

Now for the holy Ghostes power and prerogative in the same action, which was
breathed on the Apostles, we must further confer with such as call in
question matters so plain. And first I am in goodhope, that no man will deny,
but Christ gave them the holy ghost for no other purpose so much, as to remit
sins: Secondly, I doubt not of their faith and beliese in this point, but
they will confess the holy ghost to be of power by nature and propriety to
forgive sins: Thirdly, I claim of their sincerity thus much more, that
Christ being as well God as man, was well able, for the furniture of their
calling, to give them the holy ghost: all which being confessed of all men,
and denied of no Christian aline, how the conclusion, so beset with all proof
on every side, stands not, let the adversaries tell me. In the Apostles
there can be no lack touching that officie, for the execution whereof they
received both Christ's commission first, and the holy spirit of God
afterward: In Christ there can be no default, who was well able to give, and
in dead did give the holy ghost: In the holy ghost there can be no let nor
lack, whose power is infinie, and his very propriety to remit sins. All
things then standing on so safe and sure grounds, the giver, the gift, and
the receiver competent, and fully answereable each to other on every side,
let the discontented join in argument, let him allege, why the Priests so
authorized by Christ, and so assured of the holy Ghost, may not either pardon
or forgive penance. Never man avouched that he exercised the high action upon
his own authority: but, that he may not, as a minister and servant, practice
it upon the warrant of Christ, and present power of the holy Ghost, that no
faithful person can affirm, nor any reasonable man stand in.


FVLKE. The commission that our savior Christ received in his manhood to
preach remission of sins, was by him committed to his Apostles, but in such
ample manner, as Christ had power to remit sins, it is not proved, that
Christ did communicate the same with his Apostles. The visible sign of
breathing, by which our savior Christ testified, that he did give them the
holy Ghost, declares that they were enabled with spiritual gifts, to
exercise their function, the chief and principal end whereof, was to
pronounce in his name remission of sins to the believers of the Gospel, and
condemnation to the contemners. And this authority of the Apostles, concerning
the pardoning of our offenses, I know no man that denies. And therefore you
spend vainlie the one half of your booke'in proouing that which no man does
deny, namely, that the Apostles and their lawful succesiours had, and have
power, by Christ's grant, to remitte or to retain sins. The matters in
question are these. 1. Whither Popish Priests be the lawful successors of the
Apostles. 2. What manner of power is this which is granted. and thirdly, How
it is to be exercised, by Preaching the gospel, or by Popish absolution and
pardons. For we deny your shauelings, for the most part unlearned, to be the
Priests or elders of the Church of god, towhome this power is derived from the
Apostles: we deny an absolute power to be granted, but a ministry of
testification, and assurance of that which God only does properly and
principally. Thirdly we deny that by Popish shrift, absolution, and pardons,
this power is to be exercised, but by preaching of the Gospel, whereunto are
annexed the sacraments, as seals of the doctrine. These questions would have
been directly handled, without such a tedious discourse, to prove confuselie
the power that is granted by Christ to his Apostles, which is not denied: but
the kind of power about which you wander uncertainly, sometimes making it to be
a mere ministry and service under god, the only worker therein: sometime
more then obscurelie insinuating, that it is the very same authority, and
none other but the same, which Christ did exercise upon earth, and now has
committed it over, or communicated it to Priests, as though he were bound to
stand to their sentence, in remitting or retaining sins, or that they might
remit as well as he, and he must accept whatsoever they do in that case.

But seeing you will not go directly to work, we must follow you in your
crooked path, as well as we may. And for the first part of your conference,
where you are in good hope that no man will deny, but Christ gave them the holy
ghost for no other purpose so much as to remit sins, I must say unto you for
my part, that forasmuch as remission of sins is the principal scope of
preaching the Gospel, they were endued with gifts of the holy ghost,
especially to call men to repentance and forgiveness of sins, and to assure
the repentant and believers of the remission of sins, by that authority and
commission which they received of Christ. But if you mean, that Christ gave
them the holy ghost, for no other purpose so much, as that they should hear
men's shrift, and give them absolution in such form of words, as your Popish
Priests do use, without preaching the gospel to them, and setting forth the
grace of god in Jesus Christ, I deny that they received the holy ghost for any
such purpose. The other two parts I grant: but I know not what is your
conclusion. If you will conclude, that they have power to remit sins, I grant
it, neither do I know any man that denies it: But if you mean to conclude
thus; because the holy Ghost which was given to the Apostles, is of power by
nature, and propriety to forgive sins, therefore the Apostles did as properly
forgive sins as god himself, I deny your consequence. And it seems you
mean such a matter, when you say, In the holy Ghost, there can be no let nor
lack, whose power is infinite, and his very property to remit sins: which
is very true: but yet it follows not thereof, that whosoever is endued with
the holy Ghost, has infinite power, and may properly remit sins. For the
holy Ghost is given in measure to all men, not that his substance is
diuisible, that it may be apportionated, but that his gifts are distributed by
him self, in such measure, as the wisdom of God sees to be most convenient.
His essence is infinite and incomprehensible, but he is said in Scripture to be
present with them, or in them, on whom he bestows his graces and gifts.
Therefore I see not what consequence can be made of the holy ghostes infinite
power, and very property to remit sins, to conclude that the Apostles, which
received the holy Ghost, rereiued infinite power, or the very property to
remitre sins.

Where you will the discontented to join in argument, why the Priest so
authorized by Christ, and so assured of the holy Ghost may not either pardon,
or give penance, Thus I join with you: For remitting of sins I see
authority: but for giving of penance, none: therefore I grant the former, and
deny the latter. For if by penance true repentance be understood god only
can give repentance, who only can turn the heart of man to fear him. If you
mean popish penance, that is enioyning of satisfactorie works or punishment, I
deny that it is mentioned in the scriptures, neither can it be contained in
retaining of sin. Where you say, that never man aduouched that high action
upon his own authority, it is untrue: for Antichrist, that lifts himself
to be equal with God and Christ, avouches upon his own authority, although
to cloak his manifest impiety, and that he might deceive the simple, he
pretends the name and authority of God and Christ. But that the Apostles and
their true successors, by the warrant of Christ, and his power received by the
holy ghost, may as ministers and servants remit or retain sins, we do most
willingly consent and confess. But then they practice this power as servants,
when they beinterpreters and declarers of the Lords will and pleasure, and
require not that God should follow their sentence, or attend how they be
affected to forgive or retain, and so to subscribe unto their doing: for that
is an Antichristian usurpation, far from the meaning of that power. which
Christ did grant to his A postles.


ALLEN. Some holy writers upon this text of S. John, in which the order of
Christ's authorizing his Apostles for the remission of sins is described, do
dispute of the difference of giving the holy Ghost then to his Disciples, and
afterward on Whitsondaie: some note the eternal ceremony that our Master
used, when he gave them the holy spirit, which was by breathing on them, that
such outward actions might both be an evidence to them of that excellent gift,
which they inwardly then received, and should further be an everlasting
instruction to the Church, that Gods grace and gifts be often joined to
external elements for the solace of our nature, that delights to have our
outward man schooled, as well as the inward man nourished. These and many
things more be of profitable remembrance and consideration, but not so much to
our purpose. Therefore let us see, whether the judgment of the holy Fathers
do not wholly help our present cause, proving the Priests ministry, through
the holy Ghostes authority, that our declaration standing on the plain
words of scripture with their undoubted sense, may obtain invincible force
against the adversaries, and worthy credit of the true believers.


FVLKE. If you had expressed what the writers are, that thus dispute or
discourse upon this text, we might better have considred, how pertinent or
impertinent their opinions are to our matter in controversy. S. Chrysostom.
seems to allow the opinion of some, and Euthymius plainly affirms the
same, that the Apostles at this time did not presently receive the holy
ghost, but only were prepared, or made capable thereof, which if it were
true, is contrary to the title of your Chapter. I like better of Cyrillus
judgment. which thinks they presently received the holy Ghost in some
measure, but not so plentifully, nor with such diversity of gifts, as on the
day of Pentecost. That the grace of God is testified, assured, and sealed up
unto us, for the help of our infirmity, by outward signs, and external
elements joined thereto, we know and confess: but as for the solace of our
nature, or delight to have our outward man schooled, I know not what they
mean. It is great mercy of God to bear with our weakness, but it agrees not
with the discipline of the Gospel, that we should delight in outward things,
but rather to exercise our faith, in spiritual and heavenly meditations.


ALLEN. We will make our entrance first with Saint Cyrill, who debating with
himself upon the incomparable authority and power given to the Apostles for
remission of sins, stands first as in contention with him self, and with
Christ's words, how it may be, that they being but men, should forgive the
sins of our souls, being sure of this, that it is the property only of
the true and living god to assoile us of our sins, against whom only all
sins be properly committed. And therefore being not of stomach, as men be now a
days, to deny that, which Christ's words so plainly do import, he made
answer, that the Apostles were in deed deified, and made, as you would say,
partakers Cap. 50. l. 12. in Io^ interpre. Trapezun.
of Gods nature to work Gods own office in the world. Qua igitur ratione
(says he) diuinae naturae dignitatem ac potestatem discipulis suis saluator
largitus est? Quia certe absurdum non est peccata remitti posse ab illis, qui
Spiritum sanctum in seipsis habeant. Nam cum ipsi remmittunt aut detinent,
spiritus qui habitat in eis, remittit and detines. By what means did our
Savior give unto the Apostles the pre-eminence and power of Gods own nature?
Surely because it agrees very well, that they should rimit man's sins, that
have in themselves the holy Ghost. For when they assoile or retain sins, it
is the holy spirit that dwells in them, which by their ministry does remit
or retain sins. Thus he. I marvel not now why this same father terms the
Apostles sometimes protectores and curatores animarum and corporum, the
protectors and curers both of bodies and souls: it is not strange why S.
Ambrose should call the order of priestood, Ordinem (...): Neither that he
should term, Officium Sacerdotis, munus S. S. The Lib. 6. cont. Jul. De Sacerd.
Priests office, to be the function of the holy Ghost. No, I do not wonder at
some of our forefathers, that, in the admiration of Gods Maiestic, which they
same to be so present in the execution of so high in office, they did simply
and plainly term the principal Pastors of the Church half Gods, and not
mere men: not having respect to their persons, which be compassed with
infirmities as other the sinful sort of people in the world be, but casting
eye upward to the holy and excellent function, which they practiced by the
spirit of God, which dwells in them, and deifieth their persons, to make them
of ability to exercise the works of God.


FVLKE. Saint Cyrill is far from that blasphemy, to say that the Apostles
were in deed deified, and made partakers of Gods nature, to work Gods own
office in the world. For, ascribing to God that which is proper to him, and
incommunicable to any mere creature, he makes this objection: how our
savior did grant to his disciples the dignity and power of his divine
nature: and answers, that they were only made ministers and instruments In
Ioh. Ho. 25.
of the holy ghost, to express his power in remitting sins, by baptism, and
repentance: whereof S. Chrysostom also says upon the same text, that the
Priest gives only his tongue, and his hand, but the Father, the son, and
the holy Ghost does all things in this case. I will rehearse the whole saying
of Cyrillus, that his judgment may more fully appear upon this text. Et
certe solius very Dei est, etc. And suerlie it pertains to the only true
God, that he is able to loose men from their sins. For to what other person
is it lawful, to deliver the transgressors of the law from sin, but to the
author of the law himself? for so in men's affairs we see it to be done.
For no man without punishment does reprove the laws of Kings, but the Kings
themselves, in whom the crime of transgression has no place. For it is
wisely said, that he is implous, which shall say to a King, thou do
unjustly. By what means then did our Savior grant to his disciples the
dignity and power of the divine nature? because truly it is not absurd, that
sins may be remitted by them, which have the holy ghost in themselves. For
when they remit or retain, the spirit which dwells in them, remitteth or
retains by them. And that shall be by them, as I think, by two means: first
by baptism, and then by repeatence: for either they induce men that believe,
and are approved for holiness of life, unto baptism, and diligently expill
from them that are unworthy; or where the children of the Church do offend,
they rebuke them indeed, and pardon them that repent. As Paul did once commit
the fornicator among the Corinthians, unto the destruction of his flesh, that
his spirit might be saved, and received him again, lest he should be drowned
with greater sorrow. Therefore when the spirit of Christ, dwelling in men,
performs the work of the true God, how shall he not be God by nature, which
naturally possesses the power and dignity of the divine nature, when he has
so excellent authority upon the law of God. This last argument of Saint
Cyrill, by which he proves against the Macidonian heretics, that the holy
Ghost is very God, declares that he never meant to deifie Priests, with the
same authority that is proper to god, by which it should follow, that the holy
Ghost were not God, if men had that authority of remitting sin, that god has:
wherefore it follows, that men are only instruments by which the holy ghost
speaks and declares his own will of remission of sins, and not that the
holy Ghost is subject to the Censure of man, which were intolerable
blasphemy. And therefore if the same father did any where call the ministers
of the Church, protectours an^d curers both of bodies and souls, it cannot be
drawn to any such meaning, as though they were in deed deified, and made, as
you would say, partakers of Gods nature, to work Gods own office in the
world, but the ministers of God, appointed to serve for the eternal salvation
of the Elect, both in body and soul. Their order is divine, and they exercise
the office of the holy ghost, as S. Ambrose says, but yet so, that nothing is
communicated unto man, that is proper to God. Who they were that did simply
and plainly term the principal Pastors of the Church half gods, and not
mere men, you do not express: perhaps you mean the Author of that
blasphemous verse, written to the the Pope, and by him not refused, Nec Deus es,
nec homo, quasi neuter es inter vtrumque. Thou art neither god nor man, but a
neuter between both. I find in the scripture, that civil princes are called
not half Gods, but whole Gods, because they execute some part of Gods
authority among men. Yet he that shall say their persons^ are therebie
deified, might well be accounted a most blaspemous flatterer. We may now see,
out of what pudle, the toades of the family of Love are crept, that upon
pretense of the spirit of god dwelling in men, most blasphemouslie affirm,
that it deifieth their persons, to make them of ability to exercise the works
of God. whereas the power of remitting of sins, is granted even to wicked
Priests, in which the holy Ghost dwells not, although he has bestowed his
gifts upon them, to make them sufficient in knowledge and utterance to preach
the gospel.


ALLEN. But Saint Ambrose helps our matter with a long discourse. all I will
not now report: for the present purpose, thus he says, disputing against the
Nouarians, for the assertion of Priestly Cap. 2. l. 1. De poen.
dignity in assoyling our sins: Qui Spiritum sanctum accipit, sic enim
scriptum est: Accipite spiritum sanctum: quorum remiseritis peccata,
remittuntur eis, and quorum retinueritis, retenta sunt. Ergo qui soluere
peccatum non potest, non habet Spiritum sanctum. Munus spiritus sancti est
officium sacerdotis, ius autem spiritus sancti in soluendis ligandis que
criminib. est. He thatreceiueth the holy ghost (his meaning is in the taking of
orders) receives therewith the power to bind and loose. For so is it written,
Receive you the holy Ghost: whose sins you do forgive, they are forgiven
them, whose sins you do reseine, they are retained. Therefore they which
cannot forgive men's offenses, they have not the holy ghost (that is to say,
they have not the gift of the holy Ghost, which is given to the officers for
their execution of their function in Christ's behalf) for the gift of the
holy Ghost is the office of the priest: and proper right of remission of
sins stands in the holy Ghost. Thus wrote Saint Ambrose against the
heretics of his time, and both touches and over overcomes all the
falsehoode of our days, against the minesterie of man, which so joins Gods
spirit in all these divine functions, that it cannot, without blasphemy and
special contempt of God, be contemned.


FVLKE. S. Ambr. helps your matter neuera whit, if you be not content with a
mynistery, a seruise, a power subject to the will of God. But you will be half
gods, and more then men: you will have your persons deified, you will be able to
exercise the proper works of God. For S. Ambr. reasons against the Nouatians,
which would take upon them to bind them that were fallen, but would not loose
them, nor receue them again into the Church upon their repentance: signifying
that the power of the one is as well granted to the Church, as of the other,
and that it was as proper to God to retain sins, as it was to forgive them:
so that if they renounced the one, they must renounce the other also, by the
same reason: for it is the proper right of the holy ghost, to do the one as
well as the other. And the Nouatian heretics were found transgressors of Gods
commandment, who wills the repentant to be loosed, as well as the obstinate
offender to be bound. Ambrose therefore says nothing for the deifying of men's
persons, but for the executing of gods commandment of mercy, as well as of
justice.


ALLEN. But I remember Saint Augustine, the Churches great Captain against her
adversaries of those days, did ever in Contra pelagianes, Manicheos, and
Donatist. passim.
disputation against the Pelagians and other like enemies of faith, make the
greatest accoumpt of victory, and their overthrow, when they were driven to
deny that, which ever before had been not only acknowledged of all men for
truth, but also had been used as a granted truth, ground, and principle,
for the notable evidence thereof, to the impugning of other falsehoodes. For
there can be no doubt, but that which our holy Fathers did use without
controlling and contradiction even of their adversaries, to impugn their
adversaries withal, there is no doubt, but that it has in it self exceeding
much light and force of truth, as a thing having so little need of proof,
that it may be made and taken for a probation of other matters that be
doubtefull and uncertain. The matter which we have now in hand is of that
sort. For the authority and power practiced of priests in the virtue of the
holy Ghost, has ever been in it self both so plain and so firm, that the
holy fathers have used it, as a ground, to prove against heretics of
Eunomius, and Macedonius sectc, the Godhheade of the holy Ghost, the third
person in Trinity.


FVLKE. You remember Saint Augustine, but you can rehearse nothing that he
says touching this matter, to confirm the deifying of your poetical Popish
half gods, the Popish Faunes, and Satyrs, save only the general argument
of universal consent, and practice: which if it be denied you, you are at a
stale, til you can prove it. You said that priests as deified persons, half
Gods, not mere men, had ability to exercise the proper works of God. For
otherwise the lawful power, and practice of remitting sins, is so
sufficiently authorized by the words of the Gospel, that it need not be
vnderproped, with Saint Augustines general argument, wherein yet he never
placed so great force, as you affirm of him.


ALLEN. S. Bernard is too young, good man, to name amongst these old fathers
of our new Church, else, perdie, with the virtuous, his words sound full
sweetly. Thus says he to prove the equality Sermon. 1. Pentecost.
of the holy Ghost with the Father and the son: Sicut in nobis interpellas
pro nobis, ita a in patre: and delicta donatcum ipso Patre: and vt omnino
scias, quod remissionem peccatorum spiritus sanctus operatur, audi, quod
aliquando audierunt Apostoli: Accipite Spiritum sanctum: quorum remiserit is
peccata, remittuntur eis. In English thus: Like as in us he makes suit for us,
so in the father he pardons sins with the father: and that thou may
understand, that the holy Ghost works remission of sins, hear that which
she Apostles once heard: Receive you the holy Ghost: whose sins you do
forgive, they are forgiven. Thus he. And Saint Ambrose his ancient, to prove
the holy Ghost to be God, alleges, that he remitteth sins by the priests
ministry, which he could not in any wise do, if he were not in all points
equal and omnipotent God with the father and son: Let us see, (says he)
Whether the holy Ghost does pardon sins: and he answers himself thus:
Sedhinc dubitari non potest: cum ipse Dominus dixerit, Accipite spiritum
sanctum: quorum remiseritis Lib. 3. de Sp. S. Cap. 19.
peccata, remittuntur: ecce quia per spiritum sanctum peccata donantur, homines
autem in remissionem peccatoris ministerium suum exhibent, non ius alicuius
potestatis exercent. It is thus much to say: There can be no doubt thereof,
seeing our Lord said, Receive you the holy Ghost: whose sins you do
forgive, they shall be forgiven: lookeye, that by the holy Ghost sins be
forgiven: men do but exercise their service and ministry, and claim not the
right of power and principality therein. And Saine Basil upon this assured
ground Lib. 5.
frames in full form against Eunomius this argument: Dominus sanctis
Apostolis insufflans, inquit, Accipite spiritum sanctum: quorumcunque
dimittetis peccata, dimittentur eis: siergo nullius est peccata dimittere, nisi
solius Dei, dimittit autem spiritus sanctus per Apostolos: Deus ergo spiritus
sanctus. Our lord breathing on the Apostles, said, take ye the holy ghost: for
whose sins soever you shall pardon, they be pardoned: therefore if it be the
only propriety of God to forgive sins, and the holy Ghost so does by the
Apostles: Ergo, the holy Ghost is truly God.


FVLKE. Saint Bernarde is not to be despised for his youth, where he agrees
with the most ancient and eternal truth, revealed in the holy scriptures.
His purpose is to prove the equallity of the holy ghost with the father and
the son, and proves it by his effects, because he forgiueth sins, which
is proper to God. His saying, Hom. de Pentecost. 1. is mangled by you, I know
not for what purpose, except you follow some Jesuits dictates, more then your
own reading. But in truth, there is nothing which can prove the deification
of priests, but contrariwise, that it is the holy Ghost that properly
remitteth sins, of whose pleasure, according to the holy scriptures, the
priests are but interpreters and reporters.

As for the saying of Saint Ambrose, is flat against you, if you had not
falsified it in translation. For you traslate, Exhibent ministerium, non ius
alicuius potestatis exercent, They do but exercise their service and
ministry, and claim not the right of power and principallitie. Where you
should say; men do exhibit or yeald their ministry or seruise, they
exercise not the right of any power. And he adds a reason which you omit.
Neque enim in suo, sed in patris, and filii, and. SS. nomine peccata
dimittuntur. Isti rogant, diuinitas donat: humanum enim obsequium, sed
munificentia supernae est potestatis. For sins are not forgiven in their name,
but in the name of the father, and of the son, and of the holy Ghost. These
men do entreat, the godhead does grant: for the service is man's, but the
bowntiful gift is of the highest power. Saint Basil also, if his wholl saying
were recited, would appear more manifest against you, as he makes, upon your
own report, no show at all for you. His words are these against Eunomius.
Lib. 5. Cap. 3. (...), etc. It is proper to God to forgive sins, he himself
affirming the same: I am he which puts away thy sins: if your sins were
as purple, I will make them as white as snow, and if they were as scarlet, I
will make them as white as woll. Afterward when God, the son of God, Jesus
forgiueth sins to the man sick of the palsy, saying, son, thy sins are
forgiven thee, whereupon he was thought to blaspheme of the Jews, which knew
not that he was God, saying: that this man blasphemeth, for it pertains to
none to forgive sins, but to god alone. But our Lord breathing upon his holy
Apostles said, receive the holy ghost: whose sins you forgive they are
forgiven to them. If therefore it pertains to none to forgive sins (as it
does not) but only to God, and the holy ghost by the Apostles forgiueth, then
the holy ghost is God, and of the same efficacy and power with the father and
the son. In this saying of Saint Basil, you have not only omitted the
former part, which ascribes the power of forgiving of sins as proper to
God, but also have gelded out these words, in that part you allege, both in
your latin and English translation ((...)) as in deed it is not) of what
purpose, let the indifferent reader judge.


ALLEN. Thus you perceive that the ground of this our faith and assertion was
of old accounted so sure, that it was a singular aid and for tresse of faith
against the unfaithful attemptes of most wicked persons in diverse ages. The
only practice that priests use, by the Sacrament of penance to pardon sins,
was a full proof that the holy ghost was God, by whose authority and proper
power, they did always since Christ's word was spoken, remitte the same. The
which being true (as it cannot be false, that is so agreeable both to
scriptures and to all our fathers faith) the heresy of our time must needs
directly impugn the virtue and power of Gods own spirit. For as the proof of
man's ministry in this foresaid function induces the true and everlasting
Godhead of the holy ghost, by whom they practice that power, so the denial
thereof, and robbery of priesthood of this their most just claim, does
directly spoil God of his honor, and of the everlasting right that he has
in remission of sins. So whiles these goodmen seek to abase man unjustly,
they blaspheme God highly, and together with man's ministry, they bring unto
utter contempt Gods own authority.


FVLKE. Your deifying of popish priests, does altogether weaken the force of
that argument, which our fathers used against the ancient heretics, to prove
the divinity of the holy Ghost. For it were an easy matter for Eunomius,
Macedonius, or any other heretic, that was against his godhead, to reply,
that by ministry of God, the holy Ghost might as properly forgive sins,
as Priests do by the ministry of Christ, and of the holy ghost: yea so
far forth, as thereby they are made half Gods, yea deified, and made Gods in
deed. But you utter repugnancie, when you say, that, by Gods authority and
proper power, Priests do forgive sins. Where you make it not proper to God,
which is common to others with him. Therefore you should speak more properly
to say, that God the holy ghost by his own authority and power proper to the
deity, does forgive sins in their ministry, and men thereto authorized, do
no more, in proper speech and sense, but testify and declare what God does:
for which declaration, and testification, seeing they are the ambassadors and
messengers of God unto the world, to declare his pleasure of reconciliation or
condemnation, they are said to forgive sins, or to retain them which they do
not properly, but pronounce the sentence of God concerning the remission or
retention of men's sins. And that this was the meaning of the Ancient fathers
concerning the authority and power of Gods ministers, it is most manifest by
this argument, whereby they choke the enuier of the holy ghostes divinity:
from which you cut of all the sinnewes and force it has to prove it, when
you communicate to men, that which is proper to God, and advance men above the
nature of mere men, when you deifie their persons, by means of the gifts of
the holy Ghost given to them, and make them of ability to exercise the proper
works of God. As for the denial and robbery that you ascribe, I can not tell
to what heretics of this time, we detest as much as ye, not seeking to abase
man beneath the nature and condition of man, norseeking to extol him, by
robbing God of his glory, and proper effects, to magnify men, to deifie the
persoas of men, as you do in plain terms. Whereby it is manifest we are as
far from blaspheming god, or making man's ministry contemptible, which he
exercises in the name of God, as you are from sobriety thus to judge, if your
meaning be of us, or thus to reason, if you would defend the argument of the
ancient fathers against the ancient heretics.


ALLEN. But for the readersease, and more light of our cause, I join thus in
argument with them again, upon the second part of Christ's own words and
action had in the authorizing of his Apostles: Whatsoever the holy Ghost may
do in this case by the proper power of his Godhead, that may the Apostles and
Priestcs do by service and ministry through the power of the holy Ghost: But
the holy Ghost properly and rightly does remit sins: Therefore the
Apostles do rightly remit sins by their ministry in the said holy Ghost.
All parts of this conclusion stand upright, and fear no falsehood: they be
guarded on every side by Christ's action, by words of scripture, by the
Doctors plain warrant, and by all reason. With all which, whosoever is not
contented, but will needs extinguere spiritum, extinguish Gods spirit, and
violently take from the Church the greatest comfort of all man's life, 1. These.
(...)
that in this infirmity of our flesh, stands in most hope by his gift in
remission of sins, for which especial cause the said spirit was mercifully
breathed upon the Apostles peculiarly, before the mare common sending of the
same from heaven above. If all this reason and just demonstration of truth
will not serve them, I will charge them with this grave conclusion of S.
Augustine, uttered partly against the Nouatians, and especallie against the
desperate, that would not seek for Gods mercy by the Churches ministry in
the sacrament of penance. To be brief I will speak it in English. Whosoever
he be Cap. 83. Enchir.
that believes no: man's sins to be remitted in Gods Church, and therefore
despises the bountifulnes of God inso mighty a work, if he in that obstinate
mind continue til his lives end, he is guilty of sin against the holy
Ghost, in which holy ghost Christ remitteth sins.


FVLKE. I do greatly commend you, that you have such regard of the readers
ease, and it seems you have good confidence of your cause, that you fly not
the light of Logical judgment, by which the truth shall more plainly
appear to all sorts of men, then by any discourses at large, under which
many great errors may be often covered, under sophistical clouds and ambiguity
of words, which in a brief syllogism is soon and easily espied. To answer
your argument therefore, First I distinguish of your Mayor: for if you mean by
service and ministry, the expressing and declaring of the will and pleasure
of the holy ghost, whereunto they are authorized, I acknowledge your Mayor
proposition to be true: whatsoever the holy Ghost may do in this case, by
the proper power of his godhead, that may the Apostles and Priests do by
service and ministry through the power of the holy Ghost. But if you mean
by service and ministry, that the proper power of God is communicated to men,
I deny your Mayor, as false, and absurd. For the Apostles and Priests may
not by service and ministry, through the power of the holy Ghost, forgive
sins properly, which the holy ghost by proper power of his godhead may do:
for this is a proper power not com municable unto any creature, but a
declaration of the will of him that has such power, is the ministerial
authority, by which men forgive sins. Secondly I answer, that your
conclusion is deceitful. For your Minor, Extreme, or Assumption is not
perfectly joined with your Mayor or Proposition in the conclusion. For your
Minor is, that the holy ghost properly and rightly does remit sins. So your
conclusion should be, therefore the Apostles properly and rightly do, remit
sins by their ministry: in stead of which word properly, you craftelie
conueigh in the word truly: so your wholl syllogism, is a paralogisme, and
may lawfully be denied. Notwithstanding your conclusion, as it is, we do
grant, that the Apostles do rightly and truly remit sins, by their
ministry in the holy ghost: but as it should be inferred upon your premises,
we deny it, which cannot be gathered, but upon a false Mayor. Whatsoever the
holy ghost may do properly, in remitting sins, the Apostles may do by
ministry, as properly. As for the comfort of man's life, taken away, by
denying sins to be properly forgiven by Priests, is a fond cavil, and
mere slander. For we acknowledge it a singular comfort of man's life, that God
has appointed men, by their ministry, to assure us of his favor, and
reconciliation in the remission of oursins. And we believe with Saint Augustine
that sins are forgiven in Gods Church upon earth, acknowledgeing the
bountefullnes of God in so mighty a work, anathematizing and detesting the
Nouatians, and all other heretics, that obstinately and willfullie maintain
the contrary.


The power to remit sins is further proved to be given to the Apostles by
these words of Christ: Whose sins you do forgive, etc. by the Doctors
exposition of the same, and by conference of other words of scripture of the
like sense.

THE FOVRTH CHAP.
ALLEN. HOw the priests of Christ's Church have defended this right and
calling for remission of sins, as well by the commission that Christ first
received of his father, and afterward bestowed upon them, as by the assured
receiving of the spi rit of god from Christ's blessed breath to the same and
and purpose, I have hitherto declared at large. Now the third part of the place
before alleged out of S. John's gospel, concerns the words of Christ's promis
and warrant made unto his Apostles: out of which words distinctly uttered we
must see what force may be further added unto our Catholic assertion, for the
pristes autho rity to remit and retain sins. And surely if none of the
former words of commission, nor any other mean or mention had been made of
the holy ghostes assistaunce herein, these only words upon the credit that
faithful men owe to Christ, had bin sufficient to have assured the world of the
authority of priesthood, and of the wholl cause that now is called in
controversy. For what can be said either of god or man more properly or more
playnlie then this: whose sins you shall forgive, they be forgiven: whose
sins you shall retain, they be retained? I must needs heree complain of
these unfaithful and unhappy times, that in the continual loathsome bragges of
the scripture, and Gods word, in perpetual tossing and tumbling of the book
of the Bible, in endless contention and disputation of most high mysteries in
them contained, have wholly converted the cleerest and only undoubted meaning
of such places specially, as most touch the very life and salvation of all
mankind, and which be of all other things in terms of scripture most open
and evident, sull foolishlie and vnlearnedlie have both the simple sort handled
Gods word, as in such gross ignorance of al things they needs must, and
their new procured Masters also, in not much more knowledge and far passing
pride can not otherwise do, but whilst they play them selves in things of
smaler importance, they are to be laughed at, rather then lamented: but if the
devil drive them farther, as he lightly does, wherere he se quietly
possesses, and cause them to dally, and delude the places of scripture, that
principally concern the state and salvation of us al then we must with all
force resist, lest we leese the fruit and good of our Christianity. What can
be of higher importance in the world, or touch our souls and salvation so
near, as the holy sacraments of Christ Church, by which grace and mercy
through gods appointment be procured? and yet these blessed fountains
especially even these waters springing everlastingly to our life and comfort,
have these men most infected.


FVLKE. You fare as though we denied all power of remitting or retaining of
sins: whereas we do most gladly embrace all such power as Christ has given
us, which we must so take, as it be not dishonorable to the godhead, that man
should exercise that which is proper to God himself. The power therefore we
grant, but what manner of power this is, we must inquire, whether an absolute
power for priests at their pleasure (as you speak afterward in this Chapter)
Sect. 6.
to forgive sins properly, or a power to declare the same to be forgiven
according to the pleasure of God, to them that repent and believe the Gospel:
and also, whether this power is to be exercised by preaching the Ghospel, or by
auricular confession. You spend many words therefore in vain, to prove the
power and authority, whereof we stand in no controversy with you: but what
manner of power this is, and by what means it is to be exercised. As for the
loathsome bragges of the scripture, and Gods word in perpetual tossing and
tumbling of the books of the Bible, do argue, that you complain of, sauoreth
not of the spirit of Christ, which wills the scriptures to be searched, as
those which bear witness of him. To glory in the truth of Gods word contained
in his holy scriptures, is no vain bragging, but such as Christians ought
most of all to delight in. The rest of your railing I pass over, as unworthy
any answer, when, whatsoever you prate in general, shall be found false in
special, when you come to prove the particulers.


ALLEN. In the institution of Sacraments Christ's words were ever plain
without color or figure, as words that work with singular efficacy, grace
and virtue, and therewith give to the ministers just authority for the
execution of Christ's meaning: which could not be done in figurative speeches
and parables without infinite error. Did God speak parables when he instituted
the solemnity of so many sacrifices in the old law? when he signified unto
Moses and Aaron every several sort of beast or creature with their sex and
kind and all the ceremony thereunto belonging? Did he speak parables, when
the sacrament of the lamb was to be instituted? Did he speak by figure Exodus
12.
to Abraham, when he commanded him to circumcise the male of every of his
people? Did he speak by figure, when he instituted Genesis 17. Ex. 35.
the Sabbath? Did he, to be brief, ever in the old law speak one thing, and
mean another, when any external work by the charge of his word was to be
practiced for ever amongst the people? In common speech, in prophesying, in
preaching, in similitudes, in examples uttered for the declaration of many
things, and for grace and variety of talk, to stir up man's industry in
searching the secrets of the truth, there figures of all sorts be used: but
where, by external words and actions, force of inward grace must be procured,
or perpetual vsages in the Church are in outward signs and elements to be
instituted, or commission of great matters granted, or charge of singular
weight given to servants in absense of their Masters, in all such cases plain
speaking by Gods providence was ever used, and by all reason must be used, or
else man falling into error in the execution of his commission, is
sufficiently to be excused, because he could not attain to the meaning of his
Masters words. And yet the wicked of these days, have found such light in
scripture, that they have made our Master Christ to speak one thing and mean
the contrary, in the very instiution of Sacraments, and have found figures to
delude and deseat the world of the necessary fruit of them al.


FVLKE. Since you were a Papist, you never uttered a more fase proposition,
that in the institution of Sacraments Christ's words were ever plain and
without color or figure: nor yet a more foolish and vnlearnd assertion. For
you oppose figure to plainenes and colorablenes. As for your Metaphor of
color, I will not meddle with it: but if you mean thereby, as it is commonly
taken for dissimulation, I protest that Christ in no speech ever used any. As
for plainenes, he sought, when he used figures, or rhetorical colors.
Therefore as I grant, that in institution of Sacraments, Christ's words were
ever plain, so Ivtterlie deny, that in institution of sacraments Christ's
words were never figurative: and I hold him for a very either ignorant, or
impudent person, that dare affirm the contrary. That the words of Christ
could not work with singular efficacy grace and virtue, and therewith give to
the ministers just authority, for the execution of Christ's meaning, being
uttered in figurative speeches and parables, without infinite error, is a
brutish affirmation, as afterward I will show, by many particular examples. In
the mean time, that which comes near to this cause, what boie that learneth
Moselanes figures will deny, that these speeches, of binding, of loosing, of
the keys, of the kingdom of heaven, of Peter being a rock, or stone, on
which the Church is builded, are figurative speeches and parables, meaning not
proper binding, loosing, keys, Rock, or building, but parables, or things
like unto those? But against this you object, with interrogation, did God
speak parables, when he instituted the solemnity of so many sacrifices, etc?
Yea verily, then did he most of all speak parables. For then he signified,
that reconciliation was only by Christ's death, whereof all these sacrifices
were parables, similitudes and figures, as the Apostle declares, Heb. 9. verse
9. in plain words. And yet it follows not, that every word was figurative
or parabolicall, which he used in the institution of every sacrifice, and
therefore the several sort of the beast or creature, with the sex and kind,
and other parts of the ceremony thereto belonging, might be in proper
terms, without justifying of that monstrous paradox, that no figurative
speeches were used in the institution of sacraments, or that in the institution
of sacraments, Christ's words were ever without figure. But you urge us
farther, asking, whether he did speak parables, when the sacrament of the
Lamb was to be instituted? I hope you play not the lad, to trifle about the
distinction of parables and figures: but you mean that he used no figurative
speeches, as your first proposition was. I answer you, he did, and that do I
plainly prove when he said, the Lamb so taken, prepared, and eaten with
haste, is the Ex. 12. 11.
Lords passover, where indeed it was a sacrament, and sign thereof, and not
the Lords passover, in proper speech. Moses also reporting the Lords
institution, bids the people to slaie the passover, and the people are
willed to teach their young children, ignorant of Ex. 12. 21.
the end and use thereof, that it is the Lords passover, and so diverse times
both in the 12. and 13. Chapters Ex. 12. 27.
it is repeated, that the lamb so slain, is the passover of the Lord.
Therefore it is plain, that God did use figurative speech in the institution
of the Sacrament of the Lamb, even when he did teach the people the use and
end thereof: not to obscure the mystery, but by similitude of passing over
their houses, where the posts were sprinkled with the blood, more plainly to
express and set forth the same.

You ask the third time, whether God did speak by figure to Abraham, when he
commanded him to circumcise the male of every one of his people, Genesis 17? I
answer you, yea, he did speak by figure. For when he begane to speak of that
matter ver. 10. He said, this is my covenant between me and you, and between
thy seed after the, which ye shall keep: that every male among you be
circumcised. Which that you should not doubt to be a figure, in the next verse
following he expounds it saying: that circumcision shall be a sign of the
covenant that is between me and you, And verse 13. he says, so shall my
covenant be in your flesh, for a perpetual covenant. And in the 14. verse, the
soul of the uncircumcised male, shall be rooted out from his people, because
(says he) he has transgressed or made void my covenant. The like demand you
make of the institution of the Sabbath, which I know not whether you number
among the sacraments or no. In Genesis 2. where it is said, that God rested from
all his work, which he had made, there is a figure, because he ceased only
from creation, but not from government and preservation of those things which
he has made. And in the 35. of Exodus whereunto you send us, if you take the
words of the law, without any figure ( whosoever shall do any work on the
Sabbath day, shall die the death) you condemn a great many, whom our sauionr
Christ does excuse, not only from punishment of death, but even from breach
of the commandment, Luke 13. and 14. Mat. 12.

To your last question I answer, that he never dissembled in the old law, or
the new: but if you understand, by speaking on thing and meaning an other,
figurative speeches, I say he often used them, when any external work was
to be practiced for ever by charge of his word among the people, as is most
evident in the sacraments of circumcision and the passover: therefore your
distinction is falsc, and frivolous; for God has used figurative speeches
often times, in the institution of the sacraments, not to deceive the people,
that they should take one thing for an other, but the better to express the
virtue and effect of them, according to the capacity of the people. As in
calling the Lamb the pascal, they were more lively put in mind, both of the
temporal benifit, and passing over, and also of their spiritual deliverance.
When circumcision is called the covenant, whereof it was a sign, the people
were admonished, what was the spiritual meaning thereof, namely, that they
should cut of the old man with all concupiscences of the flesh, which God
requires of all them, that shall accept him for their Father and mercisull
redemer.


ALLEN. There were some of old that drove the mysteries of Christ's incarnation
and speeches that prove his equality with his Father in Godhead, to
figurative phrases, and sought for the defense of their folly the like phrases
in other of Christ's talks but never none were comparable in this kind to our
new deuisers. For by the face and crake of gods word they have brought to pass
amongst fools, that no one text of scripture which pertains to any of the
Sacraments can have his meaning, and such sense as the the very word bears,
and the world has ever taken and confirued of it. The blessed and most
sovereign The B. Sacr. of the altar.
sacrament of the altar, instituted in a solemn action, in most careful
manner, amongst his most secret servants, the last almost of all his works
in earth, in most evident terms, with sore charge given to the Apostles of
the continuance of his everlasting memory in the same, yet must Mat. 26.
mean nothing less, then that which our Master made it, and must by a
thousand figures be wrasted and writhen to what you list and like, so that is
be not to importe that, which our Master said it did, and the Church has ever
believed of the same. Words of the like solemnity were used for the ordering
of the holy use of Baptism, to be done, as the word does also import,
Baptism.
necessarily in the external element of water, with certain most holy
prescribed words, under pain and peril of everlasting perishing to the
neglecters thereof: yet in such plainnes figures are found out by these
pernicious conueiers, that neither water is counted so much necessary, nor the
words of such strength, but that one of these malapert fellows was bold to
Brentius contra Petrum a Solo
write, that it was much superstition to bind the Church to the same, as to
the prescribed words of art Magike, sorcerie, and witchcrafie. Of the
honorable act and sacrament of extreme unction, what can be said with more
evidence of words then is Extreme unction. Cap. 5.
spoken of the holy Apostle Saint James? If any man be sick amongst you, let
him call for the Priests of the Church, and let them annoint him with oil: and
yet so little matter these men make of the Apostles spirit, word, and writing,
that they have condemned the whole use thereof as superstitious, not helping
themselves by figures, but by openforce. Grace is Holle orders. 1. Tim. 4.
Matrimony
given to Timothy, as in a sacrament, when he took orders of Paull: the
Apostle says so much in express terms: yet this grace and the whole
sacrament of orders, these holy men reject. Matrimony to S. Paul is a great
sacrament, and of our ministers not misliked, so fair as concerns their
fleshly Ephesians. 5.
conjunction, which they only lust after: but grace they list not receive
thereby, lest it should be a sacrament, whereby the unity of Christ and his
spouse the Church, which in no sauce they can abide, might be fully
represented and signified.


FVLKE. It is one thing to draw violently al things expressed in the
scriptures unto alligories and other figurative speeches, an other thing not to
acknowledge any figures which yet be so usual in the institution of
sacraments. The face and crake of gods word, with the sequel thereof, that you
speak of, so long as it rests upon your own cracked credit, shall be little
regarded by any wise man. But to examine the examples you bring, to justify
your saying: first you begin with the Lords supper, where you say, it was
instituted in most evident terms. Wherebie you mean terms properly used,
and without figure, as though you had forgotten the words of our savior
Christ, perteining to the institution of the cup, This cup is the new
testament in my blood, Luke 22. 1. Cor. 11. Where I marvel whether you have
the face to say, the words are not figurative which he used, or whether you
will say, the Evangelist and Apostle did express the words of Christ in more
obscure terms then he spoke them, or whether there be not the same sense of
these figurative words, This cup is the new testament in my blood, and those
other reported by the other Evangelists, This is my blood. In saying we would
have the words of our Savior Christ mean nothing less then the sacrament
that he made it, you slander us without measure or cause. For we would have
the words of our Savior mean nothing more, nor less, but even altogether as
much as our savior Christ did mean to teach us by them. And the hyperbolic
all lie of a thousand figures, by which we should wrest them, may in respect of
greater number of figures you make in your gross and carnal exposition, be
justified of you, rather then of us, whose interpretation makes but one
figure, and one meaning, and that warranted by the words of diverse of the
most ancient and Catholic Doctors.

In the sacrament of baptism, who make the external element of water more
necessary to be used? they that re quire water for the use thereof, or else
require that the external elemet be forborne, rather then that it should be
changed into wine, milk, broth; or any othre more vile licour? of which kind
of questions and other mostrous cases your treatises of the sacramets are full.
What Brentius has written, I have not to do to answer: yet it seems that the
words of Brentius are wrested of you, to another meaning, rather then that he
would have them either altered, or the sense of them not retained. Wherein for
any thing that I can see, he varieth not from the judgment of your Master of
the sentences and al sententionaries, which allow baptism ministered in the
name of Christ, to be as good as in the name of the blessed trinity. lib. 4.
distinct. 3.

Of extreme unction, we find nothing in Saint James, but of a ceremony of
anointing with oil, joined with the gift of healing, used in the primitive
Church, but not to be drawn into example of them that confess, they are void
of that mirarulous gift. The use of which ceremony, without the gift whereunto
it was annexed, without any force or figure, we may be bold to condemn, as
superstitious. The grace that was given to Timothy, and the order of the
Ecclesiastical ministry, distinct from the common people, we acknowledge and
retain. But that any gift of prophecy, or of any other grace, is dispensed by
imposition of the hands of the presbytery in these days, as it was in the
Apostles time, we cannot acknowledge, before we see it. for he that was void
of all spiritual gifts, before his taking of orders, remains as very an
ass among you, as he was before. Seeing matrimony was instituted in paradise,
before the fall of man, we cannot accoumpt it a sacrament of the new testament,
by which we are assured of grace in the forgiveness of sins: and yet we do
(howsoever it pleases you to rail upon our ministers) acknowledge that great
and excellent mystery of the spiritual unity of Christ and his spouse the
Church, which you say in no sauce we can abide: as though wheresoever any
mystery is confessed to be, there must needs follow a Sacrament of the new
testament.


ALLEN. These fellows therefore that dare be so bold to disturb all the
orders and sacraments of Gods Church, and to maintain their fantasies, dare
brust the sacred bands of express scriptures in such points as do directly
touch the wholl policy of our Christian common wealth and ordered waics of our
salvation, even in those which Christ most carefully left to be practiced for
the use of his loving slocke, by the warrant of words most plain, what shall
we say to such bold and impudent faces, that thus dare do, and yet which I
more mernaile at, in this their vncurtesie, and most dishonest dealing, will not
stick to cry and call upon Gods word, as though they did that by scripture,
the contrary whereof they expresslie find in scripture. And truly where
they be not helped by the verte words, vain it shallbe for them to stand with
us, and with all our Fathers, and with the practice of all nations, and with
the very express judgment of the Church of God, it shall not boot them, I
say, in their dark ignorance and infinite pride to stand with us, having so
many helps for the true meaning, and the express text of the word for our
selves and side.


FVLKE. He must needs have an impudent face, and a wicked conscience, that so
shamefullie slaundereth us, to bereake the sacred bands of the express
scriptures, whereunto we seem to attribute al credit: as though we deny any
one word of express scripture, and do not affirm, whatsoever the scripture
does affirm in express words, or deny, whatsoever the holy scripture in
express words does deny, according to such sense and meaning, as the scripture
must have, as it is agreeable to it self in all places. The express words of
scripture touching the Lords supper are these: that it is the body and blood of
Christ: we confess and believe as much. The express words of scripture
concerning the Apostles authority, in pardoning or reteining sins, are, as
they have been often alleged. we believe they, and their successors (of
whom there is no express word) have power to remit or retain sins. The
express words of scripture concerning the Lords supper are also, The rock was
Christ: we believe that the rock was Christ. The cup is the new testament: we
believe that the cup is the new testament. Also by express words, to the
Apostles there is granted power to bind and to loose. We confess and believe
that they have power to bind and to loose. And yet I trust we may be bold to
say, without breaking the sacred bonds of express scriptures: The rock was
not Christ, in nature of his humanity and divinity, but a sacrament of
Christ. The cup is not the new covenant it self, but that which is in the cup
is an holy sign or seal thereof. The Apostles had no power given them, to
bind men with chains or coardes, nor to loose the chains and coards of them,
that be bound by other: but a spiritual authority, to bind and loose
spirituallie. In like manner we do not break the sacred bands of express
scripture, when we affirm that the Sacramental bread and wine are not by
transsbustantiation turned into the natural body and blood of Christ, or the
body and blood of Christ in the sacrament are not corporally received, but
spirituallie. For the contrary of these we find not expresselie in the
scripture. So when we say, the Apostles had not power to remit sins
properly, which is peculiar only to God, but to aslure men in Christ's name,
whose ambassadors they were, of the forgiveness of their sins by Christ, we
break no bands of express scriptures. For we confesle the words according
to their true meaning, agreeable with other places of scripture, that teach it
to be peculiar to God, to remit sins properly. An ambassador is said to
make peace or war, when he declares, according to his commission, his
Princes determination of peace or war. The Kings Liuetenant having such
commission, offers or graun teth pardon to rebels or other offenders, where
he does only declare the kings pleasure, in pardoning or releasing their
offenses. As for the Popish brag of all our fathers, with the practice of all
nations, and the very express judgment of the Church of God, to be for your
assertion, how vain it is, will easily appear, when you come to cite
fathers, show forth the practice of all nations, declare the judgment of Gods
Church, and when the contradictorie shall be manifestly proved and brough
forth against you.


ALLEN. Sometimes where it may appear that the words and outward face of
scripture serve not our assertions so plainly as the holy traditions of
Christ's Church do, there they call upon us with infinite clamours to abide
the judgment of the word, which they would be thought to esteem above all
man's meaning. But whether would they now run think you, where all our
sacraments stand upon evident words, and more then words, upon the very
express and notorious action of Christ him self? al instituted sincerely to
be practiced of the Church after his de parture hence: all commended in known
terms of greatest and most efficacy that could be, not by way of preaching,
in which he used sometimes figures, not at such time as he used other then
common known speech, but after his resurrection, when he now uttered no more
parables as he did before, that such as Mat. 13. Marc. 4.
faw, should not see, and such as were of understanding, might not understand,
but did open unto his dearest their senses, that they might understand
scriptures, and more carefully expressed his meaning for the instruction of
his holy Disciples, to the better bearing of that charge which he meant to
leave them in, after his departure: whither will these men (I say) where they
see all things so environed with truth, whither will they fly? The
scriptures be plainly ours, the Doctors they dare not claim, reason is
against them, there is then no way to bear it out, but with boldness and
exercised audacitie. Yet here we will assay, by the notorious evidence of this
one cause that we now have in hand, to break their stony hearts to the
obedience of Christ's Church and word, for whose faith, if they have seen great
light and force of argument already, and shall yet see much more, I trust they
will not still with stand the known truth.


FVLKE. We will run no further for the understanding of Christ's words,
concerning the institution and practice of his holy sacraments, although we
have the consent of the most ancient and approved doctors of the primitive
Church, as witnesses of the same. That the sacraments are commended in known
terms of greatest and most efficacy that could be, we confess: but thereof it
follows not, that they were not in some part commended by figurative
speeches, which are often and almost always, if they be rightly used, better
known, and of greater efficacy, then proper terms. That you say, the
sacraments were not commended by way of Preaching, it is a gross and impudent
absurdity, when they were instituted and commended to be seals of the
doctrine, that was preached, for confirmation of faith, which is builded upon
the hearing of Gods word preached. As also it is a brutish assertion, that
Christ used no figurative speeches after his resurrection. For what are these
but figurative speeches, feed my sheep, feed my lambs? And what was that
but a parable of Peter's bands girding himself, and being girded, walking
where he would, and led whither he would not, to signify by what death he
should glorify God? Neither did he affect obscurity by parables before his
resurrection. For his parables were uttered for better and more plain
understanding of his obedient disciples, although to the reprobate contemners
of his doctrine, they seemed hard and inexplicate, and were, as all things are
unto them, and as Christ himself was, a stumbling block, and stone of
offense, that they might fall and perish. That our savior Christ did open the
senses of his Apostles, that they might understand the scriptures, they were
the better able to understand figurative speeches, of which the scripture is
full. But that he did more carefully express his meaning, for the instruction
of his holy disciples, I do deny, for he had always before as great care to
express his meaning: and without care was always hable to utter his divine
pleasure, considering that he had appointed the doctrine, which he preached
before his resurrection, to be committed to writing, for the public and
perpetual instruction of his wholl Church. To the vain insultation and
boasting that follows, I answer, as in the end of the last section before.


ALLEN. All words then of institution of sacraments, being literallie to be
taken, and things of so great charge not otherwise to be understood, then are
both by act and word of Christ sincerely uttered, we need not doubt but the
form of Christ's sentence, in which he gives the Apostles power to remit
sins, is plainly to be taken in that common sense, as the same by words
imports, and therefore that by force thereof, they may remitte sins. And
yet to make more proof to satisfy all men, I will join to these words of
our savior that most properly concern the sacrament of penance, other his
words touching our principal couclusion not unlike, whereby in conference of
the like sayings together (which our adversaries do always, as they would
seem, well to allow) truth may try it self. Therefore as our master here
says: whose sins you shall forgive, they be forgiven, And whose sins you
retain they be also retained: even so said he twice before unto the Apostles,
expressing in other words almost the same meaning and sense: once to them
altogether in the 18. of Saint Matthew, and an other time before that, in the
16. of the same Gospel to S. Peter alone.

To them in general thus says Christ: If thy brother have committed any
offense toward thee, go to him and admonish him privately betwixt him and thy
self. If he take it well, thou have won thy brother: if he regard thee not,
take one or two with the, that in the mouths of two or three witnesses every
word may stand: if he regard not them neither, then make complaint of him to
the Church ( that is to say, as Saint Chrysostom expounds it, to the
governors of the Church) and if he will not obey the Church, then take him for
no better then a Heathen, and a Publicane. And straight Super hunc locum
upon these words, lest any man should set light by the Church, or rulers
thereof, Christ added (says Saint Augustine) a wonderful terror of her
severe authority, saying: De side and operib. c. 3.
Amen dico vobis, quaecunque alligaueritis super terram, erunt ligata and in
coelo: and quaecunque solueritis super terram, erunr soluta and in coelo:
Surely I say unto you, what things soever you bind in earth, it shall be
bound in heaven: And whatsoever you loose in earth, it shall be loosed in
heaven. This text is clear for the Churches claim in remission of sins,
though it properly pertain rather to the outward power iudiciarie and court
of external judgment for open crimes and notorious contemptes, then for the
sins of the people that be secret, and only subject to power practiced in
the sacrament of penance, which now lightly is close, and only uttered in
secret to him, that has charge of his soul. Nevertheless, if the Priests of
God have received power to loose and bind, which is, to pardon and punish open
notorious crimes and contemptes, which touching the guiltines of the fault,
does no less pertain to the power of God, then the absoluing of secres sins
does: then, without question they may pardon orretaine man's sins of al
sorts, as well in the sacrament of penance, all that be confessed: as in
public judgment, whatsoever is by witness proved. And as in this, they may
at their pleasure, where justice requires, correct the open offender by most
grave censures of Gods Church: so may the Priests give due penance in the
sacrament, for the chastisment of such sins as be to them confessed, and for
the satisfying of Gods justice by sin violated.


FVLKE. If al words of institution of sacramets must be taken literallie, then
must these words be taken literallie, This cup is the new testament in my
blood. The lamb is the Lords passover, Circumcision is the covenant, and
such like. But as for your conclusion, though inferred upon a false principle,
I confess to be true, that the Apostles by force of the words of commission
granted to them, may remit sins: but not properly, for that the words do
not enforce. Both the places that you will join to this, of Math. 18. and
Math. 16. are parables and figurative speeches of binding and loosing, of the
keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and of a stone, and buildilng of che Church
thereupon: nevertheless the text Math 18. I do acknowledge to be clear, for
the Churches claim in remitting offenses, and that it pertains more
properly to the discipline of the Church, then to the preaching of repentance,
and remission of sins, whereunto the text of John 21. most properly
belongs. That you say, penance is now lightly close, and the sins
uttered only in secret, to him that has charge of his soul: you do closely
confess, that otherwise lightly you will not openly acknowledge, that your
practice is contrary to the use of the most ancient, and primitive Church.
But that the ministers of the Church have authority to remit sins as well
openly, as secretly, I am content it be without question: only this is the
question, whether any thing pertaining to the proper power of God, be made
common to men. For we hold, that they do in such sort remit sins, as they
exercise nothing that pertains to the proper power of God, touching the
release of the guiltiness of sins, although in executing of discipline, they
may pardon the exercise of repentance, that is appointed for trial of the
parties true penitencie, or some part thereof, which as it is enjoined, by the
judgment and discretion of men, so they may by the same release it, as upon
good cause, they think convenient.

Where you say, that Priests may pardon or retain man's sins, of al sorts,
as well in the sarcrament of penance, all that be confessed, as in public
judgment, You thrust in diverse matters, whereof there is neither mention in
the text, nor any necessary collection to be made of them, out of it: as the
sacrament of penance, whereof there is no outward element or sign instituted:
then your kind of penance which includes some piece of satisfaction for
sins and last of all your auricular and particular confession: as though
genetall confession and acknowledging of men's sins before God, might not
obtain remission of sins in his sight: And as though, if any sin be not
remembered in shrift, the priests remission extends not unto it, or if it
were remembered, and be hypocriticallie concealed, yet the remission were good
and available for all other sins that are confessed. Again, it is an
insolent power you give them in open Judgment, that they may at their
pleasure, where Justice requires correct the open offender. For though you
seem to qualify their pleasure by justice: yet to ascribe that to their
pleasure, which is laid upon them of necessity, what warrant have you for it?
For if they may at their pleasure, they need not, except it please them.
Finally, your argument holds not, that as in exercising of discipline, they
may chastise the offender, by the censures of the Church: so they may give due
punishment, for sins (...) in shrift. Neither are those two ends you
allege, true. For the chastisement of sins pertains not to them, but to
God, and the civil Magistrate: and the justice of God violated by sin, is
satisfied by the obedience and suffering of our savior Christ. Wherebie also
it should follow, that the power of remitting of sins were made void and
frustrate, if men must endure due punishment, which you call penance, for the
satisfying of Gods justice, by sin violated.


AILEN. The other text of holy scripture, containing Christ's words to Saint
Peter severally, by certain notable circumstances of the letter, and by
words of great grant spoken singularly to him, gives the chief of all his
Apostles in more ample terms and beneficial clauses this power and perogatiue
also. To him it was only said, thou art Peter ( which is as much to say as a
rock: for our Master gave him that name new at his first calling, in
signification of further intent and purpose which he here uttered) and upon
this rock will Ioh. 1.
I set my Church: and hell gates shall not prevail against it. That so said,
he thus spoke in plain terms: Et tibi dabo claues regni caelorum. Et
quodcunque ligaueris super terram, erit ligatum and in caelis, and quodcunque
solueris super terram, erit solutum and in caelis: And to thee will I give the
Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind in earth, it
shall be bound in the heavens, And what thou loosest in earth, it shall be
loosed in the heavens. This promis made unto Peter and performed no doubt after
his resurrection, when he committed to him the feeding and government of all
his dear flock both Ibid. 21.
young and old, does exceedingly import a wonderful incomparable sovereignty
and-iurisdiction over men's souls. For a mortal man to receive the keys of
Christ's Kingdom, and by them to bind and loose, to lock out and let in,
before our Master Christ who had the full jurisdiction therein, it was never
heard of. And when the holy Prophets do mean to set out the great and passing
power given by God the father to his only son in earth, they use to
express the same often by the terms, of keys, as when the Prophet Esaie
says: I will lay the keys of the house of David upon his shoulder: he shall
shut, and there can none be hable to open, and he shall open so, that none can
shut agiane. And Christ himself Cap. 21. Apoc. 1. and 3.
speaking to his beloved John in the Apocalips says: I am the first and the
last. I am alive, and was dead before, and I have the keys of death and hell.
The keys therefore, ever signifying power andgouernment of the household, was
given to Christ, as to whom, being the principal and most excellent rectour of
his own Church that he bought so dearly, they most duly belong. But he
communicated unto Peter, as to his special steward, the use of the same, for
the government of our souls, with exceeding much pre-eminence both in binding
and loosing. Yet I do not remember that any of the old writers do put any
great difference betwixt the authorities of Peter and the rest of the Apostles,
concerning the remitting of sins, which is a thing perteining indifferently
to the wholl order of priesthood, and therefore no more proper to the Pope or
Peter, then to Priests and Apostles: though Origin noted well, that the
jurisdiction of Peter seemed by these words to be enlarged above the residue,
by that our savior said to him, that, whatsoever he bound or loosed in earth,
it should be loosed or bound in the heavens: where to the rest he spoke of
heaven only in the singular number. I speak only of this latter clause of
binding and loosing with the keys thereunto belonging. For there is no doubt,
but great pre-eminence of rule and jurisdiction is promised before in the
sametext now recited, and else where actuallie given unto him, more then to the
rest of his breethren. Nevertheless even this power of binding and loosing,
common to all the holy order, was in him first severally planted, for the
commendation of unity and order, as Saint Cyprian sath, and so the same
authority given De simplicitate Praelatorum.
to other, might yet after a sort be derived from his fullnes of power and
perogatiue, as from a fountain.


FVLKE. The other text of scripture, containing the words of our savior
Christ to Peter severally, gives to him (as you say) this power and
prerogative also. As for the not able circumstances of the letter, the words
of great grant spoken singularly to him, the more ample terms, and
beneficial clauses, let us examine, what they are, and whether they be of
force to make him chief of all his Apostles. First, to him it was only said,
thou art Peter, which is as much to say as a rock: what then? ergo he was
chief of all the Apostles? who is so madd to gtaunt the consequence? To the
sons of Zebede only it was said, that they were Bonarges, that is, the
Children of thunder, ergo they had greater authority then the rest of the
Apostles. But of all the Apostles it was said, that they are the twelve rocks,
or stones, the foundation of the walls of the new Jerusalem. Apoc. 21. 14. and
the Church is builded upon the foundation of all the Apostles. Ephesians. 2. 20.
Secondly you say, the promis made to him, Joan. 1. and Math. 16. was
performed no doubt after his resurrection, when he committed to him, the
feeding of all his sheep young and old. Ioh. 21. 2. We grant as much, but
that it does exceedingly import a wonderful incomparable sovereignty, and
jurisdiction over men's souls, greater or other then was equally granted to
the rest of the Apostles, we see not how it can be inferred of any scripture.
Every one of the Apostles being sent into all the world, to teach all nations,
and to preach the Gospel to every Math. 28. Marc. 16.
creature, has as general authority to feed the sheep of Christ, both old
and young, as Peter. Thirdly you say, for a mortal man to receive the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, and by them to bind and loose, to lock out and let
in, before our Master Christ, who had full jurisdiction therein, it was never
heard of. But we read that the samekeies were committed to the scribes and
Pharisees, and teachers of the law, which they did shamefullie abuse, and
therefore are threatened by our savior Christ: woe be to you teachers of the
law: for you have taken away the key of knowledge, and neither you your selves
do enter, and you forbid them that would. Woe be unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, ye hypocrites, for you shut up the kingdom of heaven before men:
For neither you your selves do enter, nor suffer those to enter that would
enter. Luke 11. Mat. 23. here you note inthese places the key of knowledge, by
which the kingdom of heaven should have been opened, taken away, and the
kingdom of heaven shut up from them that gladly would enter, if they knew
which way? The keys in deed do signify power and authority: but that only
Peter has those keys, and not the Church and every true Pastor of the same,
or that Peter by them had greater power and authority, then the rest of the
Apostles, which had them also, you shall never be hable to make demonstration.
Your remembrance serves you well, that all the old writers do make no
difference, between the authority of Peter and the rest of the Apostles,
concerning the remitting of sins. But you do forget, that the power of bynding
and loosing, was by our savior Christ granted equally to all the Apostles,
and to their successors, though it were once singularly uttered to one. The
subtlety of Origin, to make a difference between binding and loosing in all
the heavens, and in one heaven only, beside that it is vain in it self, yet
is it not brought of Origin to dignifie Peter above all the Apostles, whom
both upon the place of Mat. 16. and this also, he confesses to have received
equal power with Peter: but to prefer Peter and such as Peter was, before them
that have thrice reprehended offenders, and being not heard have bound the
sinner upon earth, iudgeing him as an heathen or publicane: whereof he
infers. Quanto melior fuerit, qui ligat. etc, how much better he is that
binds, by so much he that is bound is bound more then in one heaven, and how
much better he is that loses, by so much he shall be more happy that is
loosed: for he is loosed in all the heavens. The greater pre-eminence of rule
and jurisdiction, and the fullnes of power and prerogative derived from Peter,
as from a fountain, be matters of bold assertion, but void of all manner of
proof or demonstration.


ALLEN. But we will not stand hereon now, nor yet to put difference betwixt
these words and terms, loosing or remitting, binding or retaining, nor to
dispute whether these two textes more properly signify the authority and
jurisdiction given to the spiritual Magistrates, for punishing by temporal pain
enjoined, and releasing by mercy, as they see occasion, the same appointed
penance again, or else it properly concerns the very release of sin it
self, or retaining the sin, which they upon just causes will not forgive.
These things would grow to over tedious a tale, and ouercurious for the
simple, whom I would most help in these matters: and I shall briefllie touch
so much hereof, as is necessary, hereafter when I shall dispute of pardons.
For in deed these two textes of binding and loosing, as well spoken to Peter,
as to the residue afterward, shall be the ground of our wholl discourse there,
and therefore till then, we must touch these textes no further, but as in
common pertains to remitting or retaining sins. For they are brought
indifferently of the holy fathers with the foresaid words of Saint John, in
which, as I have declared, the very institution of penance and Priests
judgment of our souls and sins, be most properly grounded. Theresore that
by all these words, so often uttered by our savior, you may well perceive
the very literal and vudoubted meaning to be, that Priests have authority
by Christ's warrant to remit and retain sins, I will recite one or two
places of most ancient fathers, that they joining with such plain words of
sundry places of scripture, may make all most sure, to such as can by any
reason be satisfied. First Ialledge the saying of S. Maximus, Homil. In natali
Petri and Pau.
an old author, and a blessed saint. He does by conference couple together
these textes whereon we now stand: thus hespeaketh very pithely, therefore you
shall hear his own words: Ne qua vos, fiatres, de creditis Petro clauibus
regni, more nostrarum clauium cogitatio terrena promoueat, Clauis caeli lingua
est Petri, quam singulorum meritae censendo Aposiolus vnicuique regnum coelorum
aut claudit, aut aperit: Non est ergo clauis ista mortalis artificis aptata
manu, sed data a Christo potestas est iudicandi. Denique ait eis: quorum
remiseritis peccata, remissa erunt, and quorum detinueritis, detenta erunt.
Thus he says in our tongue: Least any earthly cogitation move you to think
of any such material keys as we occupy in earth, when you hear of
committing the keys of the kingdom to Peter, you must thus understand, that
the key of heaven is Peter's word or tongue, because the Apostle weighing well
every of our deserts, opens or shuts to every man the kingdom of Christ.
This key therefore is not made by mortal man's hand, but it is the power of
judgment given by Christ. To be brief, he says to them al: whose sins you
shall forgive, they shall be forgiven, etc. Thus says Maximus, joining together
fitly two textes for one purpose, and out of both makes a most forcible
argument, that the judgment of our souls, which is a passing authority, and
the very letting in, and keeping out of heaven, is addicted by the keys to
Peter's, and the Apostles ministry. For which cause also S. Gregory calls
all Christ's Apostles, and the just occupiers of their rooms, the doors by
which we must enter into heaven, or everlastingly bide out: which is a fearful
saying to al such as contemn their authority. His Ca. 16. l. 28. in Job.
words be these: Quid cuncti Apostoli, nisi sanctae Ecclesiae ostia, existunt?
cum eis dicitur, Accipite spiritum sanctum, quorum remiseritis peccata, etc. ac
si illis aperte diceretur: per vos ingrediuntur ad me hi quibus vos ipsi
panditis, and repellentur quibus obseratis. What are all the Apostles else, but
the doors of holy Church? Seeing it is said of them, take you the holy Ghost.
whose sins you do forgive, they be forgiven: even as though in plainer
terms it had been spoken thus: by you all must enter that will come unto me,
those, I say, to whom you open the door by loosing of their sins, and those
that be put back, that you lock out. Hitherto Saint Gregory. This wonderful
authority caused Saint Hilarie thus to make exclamatio^: De Trin. l. 6.
O holy and most happy men! for the desert of your faith you have obtained
the keys of heaven, and now the whole right both of binding and loosing in
heaven and earth is assuredly in you. But that you may fully behold their
right herein, consider his notable words upon the alleged place of S. Matthew:
Ad terrorore^ metus maximi, quo in praesens omnes continerentur, Super Math.
18. Some read Confessione for concessione
immobile seueritatis Apostolicum iudicium praemisit, vt quos in terrae
ligauerint. i. peccatorum nodis innexos reliquerint, and quos soluerint,
concessione scilicet veniae, receperint in salutem, in Apostolicae condition
sententiae, in caelis quoque aut soulti sint, aut ligati. That is to say: To
she terror and fear of all men, and necessary keeping of them in awe and
disctplne, Christ promised the immooueable judgment of the Apostles severity,
that whomesoeuer they hound in earth, that is to say, left fast tied in the
bands of sins, and whom they loosed, that is to wit, by mercy received
to the benefit of pardon, that the same persons so bound or so released, in the
same case that the Apostles left them, should be in the heavens, either loose
or fast. Thus far S. Hilarie: by whom we evidently may learn, in what
careful case all men be that pass this life not loosed by them, whose
sentence in earth is so surely ratified in heaven above, and no leesse how the
words of Christ uttered sometimes in terms of binding and loosing, other
times in remitting and retaining, do literallie signify.


FVLKE. If these two textes of binding and loosing, shall be the ground of your
whole discourse, when you come to the popes pardons, we may see before hand
upon how feeble a ground you build. For they being brought as you confess
indifferently of the holy Fathers, with the other words uttered by Saint
John, in which you say, the very (...) (...) of penance, and Priests
judgment of our souls and sins be most properly grounded, do prove that
all Priests have equal power in giving of pardons, as they have in remitting
of sins: When you conclude, that by all these words, so often uttered by our
sa uiour, we may perceive the very litterall and undoubted meaning to be,
that Priests have authority by Christ's warrant, effectually to remit and
(...) sins, you join together things that are of no necessary consequence,
and in this case are to be disioyned. For we acknowledge that it is the
undoubted meaning of Christ, that his ministers should have authority,
effectually to remit or retain sins. But the very literal meaning (so you
call the grammatical sense) is otherwise then you take it. For in those two
textes, binding and loosing are plain Metaphors, as all men will confess, that
can put a difference between proper and figurative speeches. And in the third,
of remitting or retaining, either we must acknowledge a Metonymie, or else the
Proper office and authority of God is made common to men. The places of the
ancient fathers that you cite, make nothing at al to clear the controversy
on your side, namely whether Priests forgive sins as properly as God him
self. First the saying of Maximus, or whosoever was author of that Homely,
interpreting the keie, of the kingdom of heaven, to be Peter's word or tongue,
does signify, that by preaching he exreciseth that power of judgment, by
which he opens or shuts the kingdom of heave, according as every one
receives, or refuses his Doctrine. Again, comparing this power of iudgeing,
with the text of S. John, he declares that Peter's keie is common to him, with
all the Apostles, and their successors. S. Gregory also comparing them to
doors, means not to take any thing from our savior Christ, the only door.
Also in the same place he shows in plain words, that they are doors, to let
in and keep out by preaching. Et quia Doctores sancti praedicatione quidem
sequentibus (...) sunt, authoritate autem suaresistentibus clausi, non immerito
ostia vocantur: id est, aperta conuersationi humilium, and clausa terroribus,
superborum. Non immerito ostia vocantur: quia and ingressum fidelibus aperiunt,
and rursum sese perfidis ne ingrediantur opponunt. Pensemus quale Ecclesie
ostium extitit Petrus, qui inuestigantem fidem Cornelium recepit, pertio
quaerentem miracula Simonem reppulit, illi dicens: In veritate comperi, quoniam
non est personarum acceptor Deus, secreta regni benign aperuit: huic inquiens,
Pecunia tua tecum sit in perditionem, per districtae damnationis sententiam,
celestis aulae aditum claudit. And because holy teachers by preaching truly,
are open to them that follow them, and by their authority shut to them that
resist, they are not unworthily called doors: that is, open to the
conversation of the humble, and shut to the terrors of the proud. They are
not unworthily called doors, because they do both open an entry unto the
faithsull, and again oppose them. selves against the unfaithful, that they
should not enter. Let us consider what manner a door of the Church Peter was:
which received Cornelius searching out the faith, and kept out Simon seeking
miracles for money: saying to the one: Of a truth I preceiue that God is not
an acceptor of persons, he gently opened the secrets of the kingdom: saying
to the other Thy monit with thee be unto destruction, by sentence of straight
damnation he shut up the entry of the heavenly court. Then follow
immediately the words by you cited. Quid cuncti Apostolie, etc. whereby it is
evident that Saint Gregory's judgment is, that by preaching they remit or
retain sins, as by the same they are doors of the Church. The former place
of Saint Hilarie, is vnfaithfullie translated by you. In neither is their any
admiration, or exclamationi in his words, in respect of their authority,
neither says he, that the whole right of binding and loosing is assuredly in
you. I will recite his words, whereby all men may see, how bold you are to
sttetch forth the Doctors meaning, when you will be so impudent with their
words. The Apostles said, In hoc credimus, quia a Deo existi. Quae rogo haec
verbi huius admiratio est, quod se exisse a Deo professus sit? Tanta and tam
deo propria vos, O Sancti and beati viri, ob fidei vestrae meritum claues regni
caelorum sortitt, and ligandi atque soluendi in caelo and in terraius adepti,
gestacsse per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum Dei filium (...), and ad id quod a
Deo exisse dixit, nunc primum vos very intelligentiam assecutos protestamini?
In this we believe that thou art come out from God. What admiration I pray you
is this of this word, that he professes that he came out from God? so great
things and so proper to God, O ye holy and blessed men, which had obtained
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, for the worthiness of your faith, and
have obtained right of binding and loosing in heaven and earth, had you seen
done by our Lord Jesus Christ the son of God: And do you now first protest,
that you have obtained the understanding of the truth, as concerning that he
said he came forth from God? In these words it is apparent, that all the
Apostles have the keys, as well as Peter, and right or authority of binding
and loosing, but that the whole right thereof is in them, as though God had
resigned his right to them, or given them equal right with himself, S.
Hilarie never said nor thought. The latter sentence touches not the
co^trouersy between us. For we grant the power of binding and loosing,
forgiving and retaining, to be ratified in heaven, but that the words of
Christ be of an absolute power properly to do that, which is the office of
God alone, we cannot learn by this, or any other saying of Saint Hilarie.


ALLEN. But I will add S. Chrysostomes testimony thereunto, the rather
because our adversaries do abuse his words sometimes against confession,
which necessarily hangs on the authority of Priesthood in remission and
retaining sins, as anon I shall declare. That I be not over tediuose, I will
report his saying in English only: Those (says he) that dwells in earth
and are conversant amongst men, have received power and commission Lib. 3 de
Sacer.
to dispose and dispense such things as be in heaven: yea these men have
receieud power, such as neither God either gave to Angels, for, it was never
said to them, whatsoever you bind in earth it shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever you loose in earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. Earthly Princes
in deed have power to bind, but that pertains to the bodies of their
subjects only: but that which I now talk of, that is proper to the Priests,
touching the very soul it self, and is so ample, that it reaches to the
heavens above: yea and that so largely, that whatsoever the Priests do
beneath, the very self same God will allow and ratify in heaven above, and so
the Lord will confirm the judgment and sentence of the servants. Thus far
speaks Chrysostom. His words be so plain that to stand long on them, for
farther proof of my matter, then the verrie face of the sentence does importe,
it were vain. For man may here rather marvel to see such strange power upon
Christ's words given to the holy order, and yet that to be so little esteemed
of wicked men and so little regarded even of the honester sort of simple folks,
that few either seek after their judgment in cause of their souls, or duly
honor that power in them which passes all other prelacie, that ever either
man or Angel received in this great contempt (I say) of most holy things,
wickedness is rather to be wondered at, and lamented, then by long reasoning to
be confuted. The sequel of true things is so plain in it self, the diverse
places of scripture so answer justly each to other, the fathers so
consonantlie confirm the known meaning of the same and the very terms of
so many scriptures written at diverse times by sundry of the Evangelists, so
fall upon one undoubted sense, that we may rightly conclude the power to be in
all cases given to the Apostles of remission of sin.


FVLKE. The words of Chrysostom are large enough of themselves, although you
had not augmented them, with your additions and explications, beside that you
have altered the number, in the text of Mat 16. where in lies a mysteric. For
Chrysostom by these words spoken in the singular number to Peter, proves
the authority that is common to all Priests. What soever, thou shall bind,
and whatsoever thou shall loose. The sum is, that the power and dignity of
Priests is exceeding great, which makes a mortal man, to come near to the
blessed, and incorrupted nature of God, as he says before. But if an absolute
and proper power of remitting sins were granted to them, they come not one ly
near, but are translated in deed, into the divine na ture, which is
intolerable blasphemy. That the Lord ratifieth in heaven and confirms the
sentence of his servants given upon earth, it is to be understood, that God
approoueth the sentence which he before has appointed them to pronounce. As if
the Queen in England should protest that she is content to ratify and
confirm whatsoever her ambassador does in France, acding to his commission,
and the instructions received from her, thee neither resigneth her authority
to her ambassador, neither gives him equal power with her self, but only
makes him the interpreter, and declarer of her will and pleasure, which she
is content to ratify, and not otherwise.


ALLEN. And upon such known terms I make this argument against the
adversaries. They truly and properly do remit sins, upon whose sentence
in earth the pardon of God immediately ensues in heaven: but Gods pardon
undoubtedly follows the priests pardon in remission in earth (Claue non
errante) Ergo they assuredly remit sins. The Mayor is manifest, the Minor
hangs upon plain scripture thrice told: which first appointed man to loose
in earth, and then that God shall in the same instant forgive in heaven: God
shall confirm the sentence of his servants, says S. Chrysostom. Man's
judgment (says Hilarie) shall be as a sentence prejudicial to God in heaven.
And thus far for the words of Christ at this present, and farther strength
shall more and more be gathered unto them, by diverse parts of all the process
following.


FVLKE. You make such arguments for your friends, and not against your
adversaries. For what adversary would you choose unto your self so simple,
that could not epsy these gross faults of your syllogism. For first your
Mayor is false, which you say is manifest. But you have not yet proved that
they do properly remit sins, upon whose sentence in earth, the pardon of
God immediately ensues in heaven, that is, whose sentence on earth, is
ratified and confirmed in heaven. That they do truly forgive sins, it is
granted: but not that they do properly forgive sins, being but Gods
servants appointed to declare his forgiveness. Secondly your Minor brings in a
fourth term, Claue non errante: beside that it is ambiguous, that you say,
Gods pardon follows the priests pardon: for if by following, you mean
succeading later in time, or depending upon the priests pardon, your Minor is
false, wtih Claue non errante: if you mean, as I have explicated in your
Mayor, the word ensues, it is true. Last of all your conclusion joins not
your two extremes together as it ought to do, but leaves out the word which
is of most importance and question among us, namely this term Properly. For
you should couclude, that Priests do truly and properly remit sins,
which in respect of the word properly, is false. But as you set it down with
the word assuredly, it is granted. For we acknowledge, that the lawful
minister, elder, or priest of the Church, does truly and assuredly remit
sins, but yet not properly. So you miss the cushion, and make a show in
your Mayor, as though you would reason directly: but in your Minor you give
back, with Claue non errante, in your conclusion you fly quite from the
question. Where you interpret your Minor, so that God in the same instant
forgiueth in heaven, you rid us of one doubt of the posterity in time. But
where you say out of Saint Hilarie, that man's sentence shall be as a sentence
prejudicial to God in heaven, you give us to understand that Gods sentence
depends upon man's sentence, which is horrible blasphemy: neither do I
believe that you are able to show any such saying of Saint Hilarie: for out of
the places before alleged, there is no such thing to be seen or gathered.


That the same power of remitting and reteining sins, which was given to the
Apostles, was nor bestowed on them in respect of their private persons, but as
they were public officers. and that therefore the like authority is committed
by Christ's grant to all Priests of Christ's Church, who in this matter are
the Apostles successors.

THE FIFTH CHAP.
IF I had here to do only with the learned, it were enough that is already
proved for the power and pre-eminence given to the Apostles in remission of
sins, thereupon to ground most assuredly the like right in the same cause to
perteine to all Bishops and priests of Christ's Church. But we study to
help such as cannot by this so far consider, that the power given to his
Apostles or to any of them is one eternal power, not ceasing in their persons,
but during in their succession to the worlds end. For I have my self met with
many such, as could be content, as they said, to acknowledge upon so plain
scripture the singular privilege given to the Apostles, and thereupon if they
might have had an Apostle, they would not have sticked to have made there
confession and suit to him for the remission of their sins: but because I had
not the like words of Christ spoken to all priests particularly, they thought
it was no reason that any such challenge should be made for them: nor any such
charge to be given to others to confess their sins unto them. This
simplicity of the common sort, or rather this rude frowardnes rising upon
contempt and disobedience to Gods Church, is maintained even of the more
learned sort, who have charged themselves in all behavior to be so populare
and so plausible, that even against known order of things they will draw
back from the light of the truth, with the common, rude, and unlearned
reasons of the people. For John Calvin, a man borne to sedition and the
Churches calamity, Calvin.
mainteineth the madness of the multitude by this reason: The Apostles (says
he) had the holy ghost, whereof our priests have no warrant. But enquire of
them, whether they have the holy ghost: if they say yea, demand of them
further, whether the holy Ghost may err: if they confess, that the holy
ghost can not err, then they prove themselves not to have the holy Ghost,
because it is well seen that they may err, and do err, both in loosing and
binding many, otherwise then Gods sentence will allow. But briefly to satisfy
all sides in this case, I shall declare the like power to be left by Christ's
meaning to al Bispopes and priests, no less then to the Apostles themselves,
to whom Christ then presently spoke: that both the peoples lack of
understanding may be corrected, and the false and crafty conueiance of their
captain may be, to his shame and the devils, plainly disclosed.

FVLKE. It seems, that those which you met with, which would not acknowledge
the same power to be in the ministers of the Church, that was in the Apostles,
concerning remitting of sins, were some of your own chickens, whom
ignorance, the mother of Popish devotion, had blooded up in such fantastical
and soolish errors. But least you should seem to fight only with the simple
sort, you say, the same opinion is upon popularitie and plausibilitie
maintained even of the more learned sort, yea of John Calvin himself: but
you dare not set down where or in which of his writings, lest your impudency
should be manifestly convinced. In deed Instit. lib. 3. Cap. 4. Sect. 20. he
denies that ignorant Popish confessors, or shrift priests, have the power of
the keys, which are void of the spirit of God, that is, of the gifts of the
holy ghost, that they may know who me to bind, and whom to loose: but he
acknowledges, the power of remitting sins to be perpetual in the true
preachers, and faithful ministers of the Gospel. And therefore you take
needelesse pains, to prove this matter against him, unless you will take upon
you, to defend the ignorance of your priesthood, and answer the arguments
that he brings against it.


ALLEN. First this is plain, that whatsoever Christ after his resurrection or
before did institute for the commodity of the people and weal of the wholl
Church, that did not decaie in the persons of them to whom Christ presently
spoke the words: for else all sacraments had been ended, and all government
ceased at the death of them to whom in person that charge was first given by
Christ. For example: Christ in his institution of the holy Sacrament of the
altar spoke only to his twelve, and to those present persons he only said
presently, hoc facite, do 1. Cor. 11.
this: yet in their persons, the Church was so instructed, and all priests so
authorized, that the same sovereign work has upon that warrant been truly
practiced of the Church, and by vain imitation followed by their adversaries,
even till this day. And in deed, the very words of the instruction did
importe no less: for it is said Mortem Domini annunciabitis, donec (...). You
shall set forth Christ's death till his coming: which could not be, if the
ministry had decayed with their persons, to whom Christ spoke. So the charge
both of preaching and babtizing was given to a few chosen men then present:
but that all the world might preceiue, that of his wisdom and careful
providence the charge and authority pertained to the governors of the Church
for ever, no less then to them, whom he then called to that function, he
added: I will be with you to the end of the world, meaning, that they should
exercise that office in his name and assistance Math. vlt.
to the day of judgment Which in their own persons was not true, but in their
successors. For this cause, it is no doubt, but what authority soever Peter
had alone above the residewe of his fellows, that the same is by all reason to
be diriued from him to all his successors: and that caused Chrysostom to
say, that Christ shed his (...) to win the sheep, which he committed to
Peter and his successors to feed: where Christ in person presently spoke but
to Peter alone: and yet because he knew the like government was both necessary
after Peter's death, as well as in his time, and no less by Christ's
appointement to be continued in the Church after, as before, the Doctors
doubted not to enlarge Christ's word uttered to Peter alone, to al them that
sis cceeded in the same room. Upon these most strong grounds every man
plainly may argue, the like power yet to be in the Church of God in every
case, even as Christ did institute at the beginning, when he gave the charge to
the Apostles first. For look what form of government and order of the Church
was thought unto his wisdom to be best then, the same must needs be best now
(I speak for the substance of things: for by diversities of time and person
some alteration may rise in the circumstances) Therefore if it were good at
that time that one should be the general Vicar of Christ, and pastor of all
the sheep, for which he shed his blessed blood, it is good yet also: if some
had authority then to consecrate Christ's body, some have the same power till
this time: if some then must needs baptize and preach, other some must now
also do the same: finally if certain then had commission by Christ, and the
holy ghost given them to remit sins, and therewith power by his word both to
pardon and punish, to bind and to loose, it must by force of the foresaid
argument necessarily be induced, that some at this date must have the like
office. For else Christ could not continue the same power and office in the
Church which he for the Churches sake did first institute: and which he counted
of his heavenly wisdom most necessary for the Chucrhes government. But I
think no man has yet so shaken of shame and fear of God, that he dare hold
that Christ was not hable to maintain all power, rule, and iurisaiction, with
all kind of functions which he instituted for the benefit of the people till
the worlds end, both himself and the holy ghost promised to be present for
that purpose till the general judgment. And that those functions were
necessary for his everlasting common wealth, his solemn institution and
careful provision of them do declare: that he means no less to establish
the same which he then instituted, not only the foresaid reasons, but that
saying of Saint Paull does prove: He gave unto the Church some to be Apostles,
some to be Prophets, some to be Evangelists, some to be Pastors and Ephesians. 4.
Doctors: and all this to the work and maintenance of the ministry for the
persiting of the Saints, and upholding of Christ's body, till the time of the
acknowledgeing of Gods son. Thus does Christ provide for his dear Church in
all manner of service and office even til the last day. Wherebie it is most
clear, that the power of remission of sins being once given to the Church
can never cease, whiles man of his continual frailty cease not to sin.
That which was then counted a necessary refuge and remedy for sins
committed, can not now perish in the world, where sin is a great deal more
rife, and the remedy more needful.


FVLKE. There was a certain power committed to the Apostles, to have a
general charge to preach over all the world, which ceased by their death, as
that which was proper to the office of the Apostleship. But such power as they
had for the building up of particular Churches, by preaching, administering the
sacraments, and exercising of discipline, is perpetual, and died not with the
Apostles. And this authority is derived unto them, immediately from Christ,
and not from Peter. And therefore you abuse the name of Chrysostom, to make him
witness of your deriuation: for he acknowledges Christ him self, in the words
by you alleged, to have (...) feeding of his sheep to Peter's successors, that
is, to all preistes, which be successors of the Aposties, as Saint Hierome
says, no les, then unto Peter him self: for they are not Peter's commissaries,
but Christ's ambassadors, ministers, and dispensers. That one should be
general vicar of Christ, and pastor of all the sheep, for which he shed his
blood, it was neither good, not possible, and therefore he instituted many, and
no one with such singular authority as is pretended. The body of Christ is of
perfect holiness, and therefore needs no consecration of men: but there
remains authority with the ministers of the Church, to consecrate bread and
wine, to be the body and blood of Chist, that is, the sacrament, sign, or
figure thereof. Likewise to preach and baptize, to excommunicate, and to
receive again. And that for which you bring in the rest, to remit and retain
sins, according to the pleasure of God, revealed in his holy Gospel,
whereof the true dispensours are appointed to be true and faithful
interpreters and declarers.


ALLEN. But to convince them plainly that think contrary let them tell me
whether Thomas being not then present, as the Evangelist says, and therefore
the words not uttered to him in person, let them show me whether he had not
afterward, by force of that institution, power also to remit sins. If he
had, as by reason I am sure they cannot deny, as full pre-eminence and power
to do all things, that then Christ charged his ten Disciples, which were
present, to do in his name, then the power of remission of sins was not so
streightlie limited, as the words might seem to be uttered, by which no doubt
a sacramen: was instituted to take force in the Church both then and afterward
to the worlds end: not that any man may of his own head, upon force only of
Christ's commission given at that time to his Apostles, take that high function
upon him: but that he which ordinarily shall be called by receiving of grace
and the holy Ghost in external sacrament by laying on of hands of
Priesthood, may likewise upon his own flock and cure exercise that office,
no less then those holy men might after Christ's calling thereunto, occupy
the same work of binding and loosing of such sheep of Christ's fold, as to
them were committed. And so did Saint Thomas, who then was not there: so did
Saint Matthew who then was no Apostle: so did Barnabas, so did Timothy and
Titus who were ordained by Saint Paul, and so did Paul him self, of whom
Saint Ambrose says Lib. 1 (...) Poenit. Cap. 16.
that he did remit sins without all derogation.

The good studiousereader must mark well then, that al these holy functions or
passing preheminencies, are not given to the private persons, in respect of
themselves, neither of Peter, nor of Paul, nor any other, but they are bestowed
upon them for the use of the Church which dies in their persons, and therefore
must be honored with the same offices by other, after they be dead, by
perpetual succession they shall never cease. And that caused Saint Augustine,
and other holy fathers to say, the keys were given to the Church and
authority to remit sins, De doct. Christ. lib. 1. c. 18.
to baptize and to enjoin penance: not because the wholl Church, by gathering
all her children together, must give sentence upon every sinner, or else the
priests judgment to be nothing, as some foolish seditious heads have now to
the distrurbance of the world devised: but because it is our common wealth and
house of faith, which is so beutified in her ministers, with all kind of
sacraments and good orders for the government of her children, and because all
men may see, it was the earnest love and careful providence for this his
spouse, and not the persons of the Apostles in respect of them selves, which
moved his wisdom to the institution of such perpetual offices in the
Church.


FVLKE. Your conclusion is true, that the power extended to all the Apostles
successors; but it is not strongly proved, by the example of Thomas, Matthew,
Paull, and Bernabas, who were Apostles themselves, in the highest degree: and
therefore I like better the solution of Cyrillus, which understands the
intention of Christ, to have been of the wholl order of the Apostles, and
their successors, although more then Thomas had been absent, at such time as
he gave that power, alleging the examples of Eldad, and Meldad, which being of
the number, that were chosen to be governors, to assist Moses, although they
were not present with the rest before the tabernacle, yet they were endued with
the spirit of prophecy, because they were of the number appointed. Where you
say, that no doubt a Sacrament was instituted by these words of Christ, and
often have so said, you only say it, and bring no proof thereof. neither
do you declare what is the visible sign of the invisible grace, nor what
(...) the element to which the word comes, that we might acknowledge a
sacrament with you. That the keys are given to the Church, although it prove
(...) that every member of the Church should execute them, yet it proves,
that Peter had no sovereign nor singular authority of the keys above the
rest of the Apostles, but that the Pastor of every Church has the same, not
of the gift, grant commission, or permission of Peter; but of the grant and
immediate commission from Jesus Christ himself. Whether the power of
excommunication perteine to all the Church, or to certain chosen governors
thereof, it is a question not incident to this to be handled.


ALLEN. Hereupon therefore, and in consideration that the keys of opening and
shutting heaven, by binding and loosing man's sins, shall ever remain for the
use and honor of the Church, the said holy Saint Augustine has these
words: Claues dedit Ecclesiae suae, vt quae solucrit in terra, soluta essent
and in coelo: quae ligauerit in terra, ligata essent and in (...) Lib. 1. c.
18. De doct. Christ.
Christ deliured the keys to the Church, that whoesoeuer she loosed in earth,
should be loosed in heaven: and whatsoever she bound in earth, should be bound
likewise in heaven. And Optatus his equal striving with the Donatistes for all
holy gifts which Christ bestowed upon his Church, challenges Lib. 1. and 2.
cont. Donatist.
all other sacraments, and namely the keys for the Catholic and universal
Church, from the part of Donatus the heretic, as in the right of Peter. He
says exceeding pithely: Claues darae sunt Petro, and non haereticis: And
afterwade: Cathedram Petri, quae nostra est, per ipsam and caeteras dotes apud
nos esse probamus. etiam sacerdotium. The keys are given to Peter, and not to
heretics: by the chaier of Peter which is ours: we prove all other gifts of
the Church to be ours yea even priesthood. Thus he has in sense in diverse
places. By which we see, the inrisdiction and power given to the principal
Apostle, yet to remain, and by it all other the Churches notable
preheminences, which he calls Ecclesiae dotes, The douries of the Church,
through his wholl discourse against the Donatists. So does Epiphanius attribute
the power of penance and pardon to the Church likewise, not only in baptism,
which he calls the most perfect penance, but also afterward upon the
parties relapse, in which case the heretics called Cathari, affirmed that the
Church had no authority to pardon them any more. Against which pernicious
Cathari.
sect he says, If any man fall after his baptism, the Church will not be
unmerciful to him: Dat enim reuersionem, and Lib. 2. To. here is. 59.
post poenitentiam. For she gives him leave to return, and has penance
after penance. By which he notes, that the Church has two sacraments for
remission of sin, the one is baptism, which he terms perfect penance, with
Saint Paul to the Hebrews: And Saint Augustine does call it in his En.
chiridion, Magnam indulgentiam, a graund pardon. And Gap. 6.
afterward, The Church has an other kind of remission, which Epiphanius
calls poenitentiam post poenitentiam: But of these two more shall be said anon.

After this (...) does Lactantius (...) to the true Church, confession,
penance, and profitable healing of our wounds, and such sores as be found in
our souls. By all which, every man Lib. 4. de Sap. cap. 30.
may conceive easelie, that this honor and commission of priesthood, for the
remission of our sins, did not decaie with the Aposties appointed by Christ,
nor shall cease till Christ's coming to (...) the world.


FVLKE. These testimonies needed not to be heaped up in vain, but that you
would bear the ignorant in hand most iniurioslie, that Calvin and the better
learned of the protestants do hold, that the power of binding and loosing ated
with the Apostles, and continues not in the Church. Saint Augustines words
are as you cite them, but there follows immediately an explication, which you
have omitted. Scilicet vt quis quis in Ecclesia eius dmitti sibi peccata non
crederet, non eidimitterentur, quisquis autem crederet, seque ab his correctus
auerteret, in eiusdem Ecclesiae gremio constitutus, eadem fide atque
correctione sanareiur. Quisquis enim non cred it dimitti sibi posse peccata,
fit deterior disperando, quasi nihil illi melius quam malum esse remanear, vbi
de fructu suae conuersionis infidus est. Christ delivered the keys to the
Church (says S. Augustine) that whatsoever she loosed in earth should be
loosed in heaven, and what soever she bound in earth should be, etc. that is to
say, that whosoever would not believe, that sins should be forgiven him in
his Church, they should not beforgiuen unto him: but whosoever did believe, and
being corrected, did turn himself away from them, being placed in the
bosom of the same Church, should be healed by the same faith and correction.
For whosoever does not believe that his sins may be forgiven unto him, is
made worsse by dispairing, as though nothing remained better for him then to
believe, when he is unfaithful and unbelieving of the fruit of his conversion.
These words of Saint Augustine do show, that sins are forgiven to the
penitent, and faithful, that believe the doctrine of repentance and forgiveness
of sins, which is preached in the Church. The place of Optatus urging the
unity of Peter's chair against the schismatikes that were divided from the
communion of the Catholic Church, ascribes no greater authority to Peter's
chair in exercising the keys, or any other power of the Priesthood, then to
all other chaires. That Epiphanius allowethrepentance after baptisine against
the Catharistes, it proves no more an other sacrament of penance, then that
we do, even as he, grant that there is place of repentance before god, and
reconciliation unto the Church, for such as do daily fall after baptism. But
contrary wise it appears, that Epiphanius allows but one sacrament of
repentance, which is baptism. Andyet (says he) we take not away the mercy
of God knowing the preaching of the truth, and the mercy of the Lord, etc,
the pardonable nature, the unsteadfastness of the soul, the weakness of the
flesh, the deepenes of the sense of many men, because no man is void of sin,
and pure from filthiness, though his life be but one day upon the earth. And
perfect repentance in deed is in the lauer of baptism but if a man fall, the
holy Church of god does not loose him, for it gran teth him a return, and
after that repentance an other repentance. The Greek word is (...), signifying
a sorowfullnes for that which is committed, by which the party may be brought
to (...), the perfect repentance that he spoke of before, that is, recover the
grace of forgiveness of sins, confirmed unto him in baptism, which is the
only sacrament of repentance, the fruit whereof endures unto our lives end,
to make us partakers of the fruit of regeneration, that is, life everlasting.
The examples that he brings of repentanee offered to Cain, and granted to
Peter, do Prove that he speaks not of any sacrament of rePentance, but
shows that God receaueth them that fall after baptism, unto repentance,
according to the preaching of truth, and of the mercy of God. I muse what you
mean, when you say, that Epiphanius terms baptism perfect repentance, with
Saint Paul to the Hebr. cap. 6. For the Apostle to the Hebrews has no such
term, either in that chapter, or in any other place of that epistle: except
you dreamed of such a matter, because he professes to leave the first
principles of religion, as repentance from dead works, etc. which pertains
to the doctrine of baptism, and Imposition of hands, and to grow to
perfection. In the Catholic Church, as Lactantius says, there is confession,
because there is faith: there is also repentance, which wholsomlie heals the
sins and wound to which the weakness of the fleshis subject: by which it is
proved that there is remission of sins in the Church, continuing until the
coming of Christ to judgment.


ALLEN. But he that lists to see in what office, and by whom he holds this
singular honor of remission of sins, he shall find, not only the
Apostles, who were called by Christ, but all other Bishops also, that succeed
them in the Church, to be her ministers herein. Whereof let him read the 26.
Homely of Saint Gregory, pertaining almost wholly to that purpose. I will
repeat a few words only out of it, committing the rest to the diligence of
the reader. Libet intueri (says he) illi discipuli ad tanta onera humilitatis
vocati, ad quantum culmen gloriae sint oeruecti. Ecce non solum de semetipsis
securi fiunt, sed etiam alienae obligationis, and relaxationis potestatem
accipiunt: principatumque superniiudicij sortiuntur, vt vice Dei quibusdam
peccata retineant, quibusdam relaxent. Ecce, qui districtum iudicium Dei
metuunt, animarum iudices fiunt and alios damnant, velliberant, qui semetipsos
damnare metuebant. Horum profecto nunc in Ecclesia Dei, Episcopi locum tenent,
ligandi atque soluendi authoritatem sumunt: grandis honor, sed grave pondus est
istud honoris. It is my meaning now, to behold to what marvelous honor the
Disciples of Christ be exalted, which before were called in their base state to
great burden and troubles. For now, they be not only in assurance of their
own state, but they have obtained power of binding and releasing other, and
the very sovereignty of heavenly judgment, that in Gods own stead, they
may some man's sins release, and other offencesreteine, Lo, those that once
feared the straight sentence of Gods own judgment are made the judges of
other men's souls, to condemn or deliver where they list, that before doubted
of themselves. And now truly in these men's rooms are the Bishops of Gods
Church, and receive the authority of binding and loosing, and their own state
ofregiment. High surclie is their Chair, but greater is their charge. S.
Gregory said so far.

But Saint Augustine shall make up this matter, with words of such weight, that
I trust every man shall see the truth, and almost feel the grossness of
falsehood thereby. He writes thus upon this verse of the Psalm Eructauit,
which is the 44. in number with him: Pro patribus tuis nati sunt tibi filij,
constitueseos Principes super omnem terram: In place of thy parents thou have
Children borne thee, them thou may make the Princes of the wholl earth. The
Apostles did beget thee, they were sent themselves, they preached in their
own persons, and finally they were thy fathers.

But could they always corporally abide here? And though one of them said, I
would gladly be dissolved and be withChrist, Phil. 1.
yet for your sake I counted it more necessary to tarry in flesh. Thus he
said: but how long could his life last? he might not remain til this day,
much less for the time to come. What then? is the Church desoiate after the
departure of her parents? God forbid. In stead of thy parents thou have
sons, says the text: what is that to say? Marie the Apostles sent by Christ
are as fathers, and for them God has raised up children or sons, which be
the holy Bishops of the world. For at this day the Bishops that be throughout
all Christendom, how rose they to that room? The Church calls them fathers,
and yet she did beget them, and she placed them in that room of their
fathers: Non ergo reputes desertam, quia non vides Petrum, quod non vides
Paulum, quod non vides illos per quos nataes: de prole tua tibi creuit
paternitas: pra patribus tuis natisunt tibi filij, constitues eos principes
super omnem terram. Do not therefore think thy self desolate, because thou
have not Paull, because thou have them not now present, by whom thou wast
borne: of thy own issue, fatherhood is grown to thee: and for thy fathers
thou have brought forth sons, them shall thou make the rulers over all the
earth. Thus much out of Saint Augustine. By whom you may perceive the great
providence of God that everlastingly vpholdeth the ordinance of his son
Christ Jesus, as well now by the children borne from time to time in the
Churches lap, as before in the spring of our faith by the Apostles sent and
appointed in person by Christ himself.


FVLKE. I suppose the title of your book, will admonish you not to restrain
this office only to Bishops, which so often you have made common to all
priests. For Gregory also in the same homyly names often times all pastors
of the Church, to whom the power of binding and loosing does appertain, which
are many other beside Bishops. Moreover, inueighing against the ignorance, and
unworthiness of them that occupied such places, which take upon them to loose,
where God does bind, and bind where God does loose, he concludes, that then
the absolution of the governors of the Chuch is true, when it follows the
will of the eternal Judge. By which saying, and more to the like effect in
that place, he declares his judgment, of the kind of power or authority
which the Church has, that it is not absolute, but subject vuto the will of
God, and is an expressing of Gods forgiveness, or retaining, not a proper
forgiving or retaining. The saying of Saint Augustine proves in deed, a
continuance of the ministry of the Apostles in the office of Bishops, but
hereof it follows not, that only Bishops, as they are distinct from
priests, have this power: for not only Bishops be the children of the
Church, but all faithful men to whom the inheritance of the world is like
wise appointed.


ALLEN. And here you must know, that not only Bishops who succeed the
Apostles in all kind of power and regiment, but also all other inferior
Priests to be compted with them, as successors in ministering diverse
sacraments, as baptism, penance, the reverend Sacrament of the Altar, and
such like: but look what power either Apostle or Bishop has in remission of
sins, in consecrating Christ's body, in baptizing, the same has the wholl
order of holy Priesthood by the right of their order, and may practice the
same upon such as be subject unto them in all causes not exempted for
reasonable causes, by such as have further jurisdiction over the people. Whereof
I will not now talk particularly, the learned of that order know the limits
of their charge and commission, better then I can instruct them, and the
simpler sort must seek for knowledge of their duty, by the holy Canons of
Councels and decrees of Bishops made for that purpose. I can not now stand
thereon: meaning at this present only to defend the holy order, and
challenge for it such right, as the scripture and Chistes own word gives,
which in this contempt of virtue and religion is most necessary for all men
to consider.


FVLKE. There is no power or authority granted by our savior Christ to
preach the word of God, or to minister any sacrament, but the same is common
to every one of the Pastoures of the Church, and not only lawful, but also
necessary for them, to exercise in their several charges. Wherefore that
ministering of some sacraments is permitted to them, and of other denied them,
it is beside the word of god. Again the word of god, that gives them general
power, whose sins soever, whatsoever you shall bind or loose, is directly
against al exempted cases, which savor of nothing, but of Antichristian
tyranny. As for the cannons of Counceles, and decrees of Bishops, whether
you send the simple, to learn the limits of their charge, can not restrain
that Christ has enlarged, and therefore if your meaning were, as your words
profess, to defend the holy order, and challenge for it such right as the
scripture and Christ's own word gives, you would enueigh against the pride,
and ambition of the Pope, and other prelates that exempt any cases from the
Priests power and authority, which the holy scripture, and the express
wordsof our savior Christ does in such ample manner grant unto them.


ALLEN. Therefore upon our large discourses for this last point, I now deduct
the particulars to this sum, which may stand for a certain mark, as well
for the good to discern the truth, as for the adversaries to shoot at whiles
they live. Alpower and every jurisdiction or right of Christ's Church, remains
as amply, and in as full force and strength at this day, and shall till the
worlds end so continue, as they were, by Christ granted first in the persons
of the Apostles or other, instituted. But the power of remission of sins, was
given properly and in express terms to the Apostles: Ergo the same remains
still in Gods Church. Whereupon it is so clear, that the Priests at this day
have as full power to forgive sins, as the Apostles had. And this argument of
the continuance of all offices and right of the Church, is the most plainest
and readiest way, not only to help our cause now taken in hand, but
utterly to improoue all false doctrines and detestable practices of heretics.
For they must here be examined diligently what common wealth that is, what
Church that is, in which Christ does prescrue the government given to the
Apostles? where it is that the power not only os making, but also of
practizing al sacraments has continued still? what company of Christian
people that is, wherein the Apostles, Doctors, preachers, ministers, through
the perpetual assistance of Gods spirit, be continued, for the building up of
Christ's body, which is the number of faithful people? What Church that is,
which brings forth from time to time sons to occupy the romes of their
fathers before them. It is not (good reader) the pelting pack of Protestants?
It is not, I say, and they know it is not their petie congregations, that
has till this day continued the succession of Blshoppes, by whom the world,
as Saint Augustine says, is ruled, as by the Apostles, and first Fathers of
Religion. Surely our mother the Church has hene long baren, if for her Fathers
the Apostles, who died so long since, she never brought forth children til now
to occupy their rooms, and great lack ofrulers, if she have made her only
contemners to be her own governors. No, these sellowes hold not by her, but
they hold against her: these sit in no seat Apostolic, but they by all force
dishonor the seat Apostolic: these are not they, qui pro patribus nati sunt
tibi filij: but these are the sons, quos enutriuisti and genuisti, ipsi
spreueruntte. If you ask of these men how they hold? they seek no Fathers
after whom they may rightly rule: they seek no large rue of predecessors in
whose places they may sit: they ask no counsel of Gods Church, by whose
calling they should govern: but they make a long discourse of statutes and
temporal laws, to cover their ambitious usurpation, that in great lack of
Christ's calling, their unjust honor may be approved by man's favor. Thereby
let them hold their temporal dignities, their lands, their liuelihoodes,
their wives also, if there can obtain so much at the common wealths hands:
but their spiritual functions, their ministering of Sacraments, their
governance of our souls, and what else soever they usurp without the warrant
of Gods Church, the longer they exercise them, the farther they be from
salvation, and the nearer to eternal woe and misery. But to come to our
purpose: it is our Church Catholic, in which all holy functions have been
practiced after Christ's institution ever since his ascension up to heaven. And
therefore this principal power of remitting and retaining sins, must needs
be contained in the Church by her ministers and priests as it was begone in
the Apostles before.


FVLKE. I like well your pretense after a large discourse to knit up your whole
intent, in a Syllogism: which you set as a matke for us to shoot at, while we
live. verily your argument, if one word were away, I would willingly grant:
but the word properly, you are never able to prove while you live, nor all
the papists in the world after you are dead: therefore in respect of that word,
I deny your Minor. And yet I grant, that you infer upon it your conclusion
in such terms as you have set it down: that lawful Priests, Elders, or
ministers of Gods Church, at this day, have as fullpower to forgive sins in
their several charges, as the Apostles had in their gener all commission. But
here you will needs examine us, what Church that is, in which Christ does
preserve the government given to the Apostles? The Catholic Church forsooth.
2. Where the power of ministering the sacraments (if you mean that, by your
terms of making and practizing) has continued still? in the Catholic Church.
3. What company of Christ an people that is, wherein the Apostles, Doctors,
preachers ministers through the perpetual assistance of Gods spirit, be
continued, for the building up of Christ's body, which is the number of the
faithful? Still I answer, the company of the Catholic Church. 4. What
Church that is, which brings forth from time to time, sons to occupy the
romes of their Fathers before them. Here I answer, many heretical and
malignant Churches: but only the Catholic Church has continued from the
beginning in such propagation. You answer your self and say, it is not, it
is not the pelting-packe, and petrie congregation of the Protestants, to your
double negatio^, a single affirmation may serve. It is the Church of them you
call Potestantes in Europe, which is a part of the Catholic Church dispersed
over all the earth: which Church of the Protestants I see not, why you should
so pelt at it, with your pettierhetorike. It is (God be thanked) as great, and
as glorious at this time, in the eyes of the world, as the Romish rabble, except
that the ministers thereof be not so proud, nor so gorgeous. That whore of
Babylon your dame, whom you would have to be accepted for the Catholic Church
of Christ, which boasted her self that she was no widow, is now of many
forsaken, and of her spiritual for nication begetteih but feew bastardes, in
comparison of that she was wont to do. Therefore it is not, no, no, that will
be able to pull us out of the Apostolic chaires, in which we teach nothing but
the Doctrine of the Apostles, consonant unto the Doctrine of the Prophets.
These Fathers we seek to hold of, and all other that hold of the same line,
we hold with them: as for large view of predecessors, we know it must
necessarily ensue the doctrine of the Prophets, and Apostles, because of the
perpetual continuance of the Church. And therefore we take not up old,
mouldie, and mothen parchementes to seek our progenitors names, but by
consanguinitie of Doctrine with the Apostles, as Tertullian calls it, know
we are Apostolic, and set in Apostolic places. As for the long discourse of
statutes and temporal laws that you talk of, we claim no spiritual
inheritance thereby: although we accept the confirmation of temporal laws,
for the better execution of our offices. What I pray you Sir? had not you
Papists in Queen Mary's time, as large a discourse of statutes and temporal
laws, as we have, for the maintenance of your popish superstition, and all
things thereto belonging? and yet you would procure envy to us, of statutes
and temporal laws, as though we held only by them. As for temporal
dignites, lands lieuely hodes, I know not how they should be maintained, but
by temporal laws. Out wives we hold by the law of God, against which there
is no temporal law of the land, by infinite better right, then you do hold
your stews, and other remedies of your incontinencie: and as for spiritual
functions, we hold them by the same right, that they were first given to the
Church and have therein continued even to this day.


An answer to such as deny this power to pass from the Apostles to al other
Priests, because many of them being evil men, may be thought not to have the
holy Ghost, whereby they should effectually remit sins.

THE SIXTH CHAP.
ANd to Calvin or other of his sect, that require the like virtue and force of
the holy Ghostes assistance in all men that take upon them to remit sins, as
it was given to the Apostles, who first received that power, I answer: that the
same gift of the holy Ghost is yet in the ministers of the same Sacrament, no
less then in the Apostles. For though they had more plentiful sanctification
whereby they were in all their life more holy, and more virtuous, then
lightly any other, either Priests or lay men, were after them, yet the
gifts of the holy Ghost, touching the ministry and service of Gods Church,
which were not so much given them for their own sakes, as for the use of the
common wealth, and for the right of practizing certain holy functions
requisite for the peoples sanctification, as they were also given to diverse
that were neither good nor virtuous, and therefore lacked that, which properly
is that grace of the holy Ghost that is called of our school men, gratia
gratum faciens, such a grace as makes a man acceptable to God. Therefore, the
holy Ghost breathed upon the Apostles then by Christ, and given yet to Priests
in their ordering by Bishopes; is a gift of God, and a grace of the holy ghost,
not whereby man is made rertuous, or cunning, or happy before God, but it is a
gift only of God, whereby man is called above his own nature and dignity,
to have power and authority, to do and exercise any function in Gods Church
to the spiritual benefit of the people, which is not only not always joined
to virtue and holy knowledge, but it full often, by calling, due to them which
are most wicked persons, without any impair of their authority. And these
kind of gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, be called gratiae gratis datae,
certain gifts given to men for no deserts of their persons, but freely, for
the use of other men, to whom they be beneficial, even there, where they be
hurtful to the bestowers. In which sense Saint Paul numbreth a great sort,
in the fourth to the Ephesians, and the first Epistle to the Ephesians. 4. Cap. 12.
Corinshians: and he calls them, not only the graces of the spirit, but
also the divisions of functions, and ministrations: as, the gift of working of
miracles, the gift of tongues, the gift of prophesying, the gift of preaching,
and so forth: all which being the gifts and graces of the spirit for the
Churches edifying, and of Saint Peter being called the holy Ghost, in the
Acts, yet they were given to evil men often, Cap. 2.
as well as to good, without all imparing of Gods honor: yea with the great
increase of God glory, that even by the wicked is able to work his will and
holy purpose for the benefit of his Elect. And in this sense, the spirit of
God breathed upon the Apostles, was a gift of the holy Ghost, whereby man
should remit by lawful power the sins of the people. In 20. cap Joan
Whereupon Theophilact says, that, Potestatem quandam and donum spirituale
dedit Apostolis, us remittant peccata, ostendens quod genus spiritualium
donorum eis dederit, inquit: quorum remiser it is peccata, remittuntur eis:
that is to say: Christ gave to his Apostles a certain power and spiritual
gift, whereby they might remit sins: for he showed what power of the spirit it
was that breathed on them, when he said: whose sins you do for give, they be
forgiven.

Whosoever shall undoubtedly remit sins, and absolve sinners, must have the
same gift of the holy Ghost, which the Apostles had, whereby he cannot err.
And this gift no man denies, but it may be in a wicked and ungodly man. For
even such an one may preach the doctrine of Christ, of remission of sins,
publikelie, and priuatlie, if he have the calling, that is required to that
office. Neither does Calvin, or any other that are of his judgment, otherwise
require the like force of the holy ghostes assistance, in all men that take
upon them to remit sins. For there is not only a power, but a knowledge
required in him that shall assuredly and undoubtedly forgive sins. And
therefore the papists do unreasonably make a divorce, of the keie of power,
from the keie of knowledge: which power, if it be no guided by knowledge, does
nothing, but insteade of opening and shutting with the keys committed to the
Church, throw forth the keys, as the blind man casts his staff, which
cannot happen so right in to the lock that they should open it, to the
penitent sinners. For it is not the Priests authority that can open the door
of comfort to a sinners conscience, except he can declare unto him, out of the
word of God, how and by what means, he may be reconciled unto God. That the
holy Ghost is given by Bishopes to Priests in their ordering, it is more
boldly affirmed, then ever it can be proved: for Christ only has
authority to give the holy Ghost, and therefore to declare, that it comes
from him alone among men, he breathed upon his Apostles: which though the
Bishops do, until their longues ache, yet can they not furnish their parties
by them ordered, with gifts meet for their calling, as Christ did his
Apostles. They must make choice therefore, according to the Doctrine of the
Apostle, of those that have those gracious and necessary gifts of God before,
and to them they must commit the power and authority to exercise the same, to
the public benefice of the Church. But if they will give authority to them,
that have no wisdom to exercise the same, they make the most foolish judges of
all the world, and such are worthelie contemned. Therefore howsoever you
distinguish grace, you must not seek to win credit to them, which have
nothing but pretense of authority, when they be void of all understanding,
how to use it, as many hundreds, yea thousands of your hedge Priests are, if
their calling were never so good, as it is most corrupt and unlawful.

ALLEN. If our adversaries be ignorant of these things, which be so common in
schools of divinity, yet we think they should remember, that Saint Paul did
not dissalow the authority nor power of preaching, in such as were evil men,
and taught Philip. 1.
for emulation and not of sincere zeal of the Gospel, and that Christ
himself stopped not such as cast out deuilles in his Mat. 7.
name, and therefore were not without the gift of workeing miracles, though he
professed, that many of them at the date of judgment, challenging some right
of heaven vpou that act, should not be received to glory: and how the gift of
prophecy was common in the old (...), not only to the wicked, but to such as
willingly would deceive the people: And Caiphas Joan. 11.
he prophesied by the spirit of God, as by force of his office, being yet in
purpose to work wickedness against Christ himself, for whose truth he then,
by force of the spirit, prophesied. But of the Sacraments of Gods Church
every one, that they may beministred beneficiallie, to the receiving in much
wickedness of the giver, there is no man can be ignorant. For it is a rule and a
principle most certain, that God works his will in them by the ministry
of men, be they never so evil. For elle they were man's sacraments, and not
Gods. and we could not be certain neither of our baptism, neither of right
receiving of Christ's body in the holy sacrament of his eultar, nor of any
other spiritual benefit that we now by man's ministry receive in the Church.
Much co^sort it were for all Christian people, to hauesuch (...) (...) then
souls, and such disposers of Gods mysteries, as would and could in all
sincerity and faithfulness work Gods (...), and that would always use the
high power given them, to (...), and never to destroy: and that they would so
do, both S. Peter and S. Paul do often exhort 1. Pet. 4.
them. But neither the misery of man's sinsull nature can suffer that, nor our
wickedness can desirue so much. S. Peter Gal. 2.
himself was reprehensible in his government: therefore let us not marvel,
that other which be not of so full spirit, as he was, either may commit
things worthy of reprehension amongst the good, or subject to the malicious
slander of the evil.

These things are not such high points of learning that your adversaries need
not to be ignorant in the^. Your distinction as common as it is in the
schools, yea and has a good ente^dement, yet it is uttered in such terms, as
be coincident. For gratia gratum faciens, is also gratis data. Although every
grace or gift of God, does not make a man acceptable, or beloved of God, yet is
every grace or gift of God freely given, and not in respect of merits or
deserts, and least of all that grace, by which we are made acceptable., and
beloved of God. And touching your other point, we do not hold, that the
sacraments, or any other part of the administration of the Gospel depends
upon the virtue or vices of men, that exercise the same. And yet the first
reason you use to strengthen that point, is very feeble. For you say, S. Paul
did not disalowe the authority nor power of preaching in such as were evil
men, and taught for emulation, and not of sincere zeal, of the Gospel. Phil.
1. Whereas it does no way appear, that he did allow the authority of those
men, who perhaps were not lawfully called, and so it is most like, but
reioysed, that Christ was preached, by what means soever, because God both
can, and does convert the vnlawfulintentes and acts of wicked men, to serve to
his glory. Some other arguments you use, that are not very strong: but
forasmuch as I agree with you in the sum of the matter, I will spend no time
about them.


ALLEN. And suerlie for our matter, being of such importance, Priests had need
most carefully to study, how to practice so high a function, which is proper
to Gods own judgment and heavenly court. For though by Christ they have
undoubtedly received commission and power in the virtue of the holy ghost, when
they took holy orders, to forgive and remit sins, yet cursed be they by Gods
own mouth, if they do it either negligently, because it is the work of our
Lord, or with affection of pride and Pharisaical dominion, as though they were
Lords of the sacraments and Christian Religion, and not ministers or seruitours
of Christ in his Church. Whereof it seemed that Ieorm. in 16. Mat.
S. Jerome in his days, had some cause to complain, nothing reproouing their
authority, but correcting the abuse of their authority. Penance in those
days was so hardly obtained, that it seemed to S. Icreme, that their
austeritie grew to some spice of Pharisaicall regiment, that would lay
importable burdens on other men's necks, and not touch any at all them selves.
Whereupon he takes occasion to advertise Mat. 23.
them, that eucrie power of remission, and the office of absolution was
properly Gods, and theirs but by ministry. And therefore that their mercy
and judgment ought to be tried and measured by his sentence, and not his by
theirs. These things were to be admonished and reprehended then: but now the
disease lies on the other side, and they offend rather in over much lenity.
For as both be contemned of the wicked, so there is almost amongst the good
none left, but loosing now a days, when men had rather be bound in sin, then
bound in penance for sin. Therefore the office os binding and loosing
requires truly good knowledge, much discretion, zeal and stowtnes in Gods
quarrel. For as it is most high, so surely it is most hard and burdenous. It
pitieth my heart to see it so little esteemed, but much more, that it should be
less esteemed through their ignorance or evil life, to whom the keys of
remission be committed. The keie of remission and retaining sins, they had of
God in their orders, but discretion, knowledge, virtue with other qualities,
meet for the exercise of that office, they must by prayer and industry
obtain, lest whilst they profit other men to salvation, they become reprobate
them selves, as Saint Paul said of him self in case of preaching.

But in deed, it is not so comendable for us, as the case stands now, nor so
needful to pry into the Priests bosoms, or to vewe their lackes in
ministering of this sacrament of penance which, if any be, do lightly redound
to their own harms and not so mech to mine, or to any other which use their
office to our salvation. For though for counsel and comfort, and such other
respects, a descrete and learned man were rather to be wished for then a
worsse, yet being assured that the party is called by Gods Church to the
function, and has jurisdiction ordinary, or granted extraordinarily by the
appointintment of lawful superiors, and if by schism and excommunication or
otherwise he be not suspended from the practice of the said functions, I need
nothing to doubt for his other lackes, but much more for mine own sufficience,
or lack of contrition, or some other like want in my self, why the fruit of
the Priests absolution cannot be derived unto me, as else, if it were not my
own default, it should by force of the sacrament undoubtedly be.


FVLKE. Except you have no regard of the property of speech, I marvel you
can say, this function is so proper to gods own judgment and heavenly court,
and yet allow the judgment of Saint Jerome that all power of remission and
absolution is properly Gods, and man's but by ministry: In which sentence, if
you would continue, we should have small controversy with you, touching the
argument of this first book of your treatise. The words of Jerome upon the
16. of Saint Mathewe are these: Et dabo tibi claues regni caelorum. Istum locum
Episcopi and presbyteri non intelligentes, aliquid sibi de Pharisaeorum
assumuns supercilio, vt vel damnens innocents, vel soluere se noxios
arbitrentur: cum apud Deum non sententia sacerdotum, sed reorum vita quaeratur.
Legimusin Leuitico de leprosis, vbi iubentur vt ostendant se sacerdotibus, and
si lepram habuerint tunc a sacerdote immundifierent: non quod sacerdotes
leprosos faciunt, and immundos, sed quod habeant notitiam leprosi and non
leprosi, and possint discernere qui mundus, quiue immundus sit. Quomodo ergo
ibi le prosum sacerdos mundum vel immundum facit, sic and hic alligat vel
soluit Episcopus and pres biter: non eos qui insontes sunt vel noxij, sed pro
officio suo cum peccatorum audierit varietates, rietates, scit qui ligandus
sit, quiue soluendus. And to the I will give the keys of the kingedome of
heaven. This place Bishopes and priests not understanding, do take upon them
somewhat of the pride of the Pharisees, that either they condemn innocents, or
think that they due loose guilty persons, whereas before God, not the sentence
of priests, but the life of the parties accused in judgment is enquired of. We
read in Leuit. of the Lepers, where they are commanded to show themselves
unto the priests, and if they have the Leprosy, then they are made unclean by
the priest. Not that the priests do make men Lepers and unclean, but for
that they have knowledge of a Leper, and of him that is no Leper, and can
discern who is clean, and who is unclean, Therefore look how priest does
there make a Leper clean, or unclean, so here does a Bishop or priest bind
or loose, not them that are vnguiltie or guilty, but according to his office,
when he has heard the variety of sinners, he knows who is to be bound, or
who is to be loosed. In this saying of S. Jerome diverse things are to be
considered: First that the gift of the keys and the power of binding and
loosing granted to Peter, by his judgment and al men's in his time, peiteineth
to every Bishop, elder, or priest of Gods Church. Secondly that God only
does properly and absolutely forgive sins: and thirdly that the priests
sentence upon earth is but declaratorie, upon his knowledge of the offenders
of Gods sentence, as the priests authority to make a Leper clean or unclean,
was only upon certain knowledge to pronounce that which God had wrought upon
him to his punishment or deliverance, and according thereunto, either to
separate him, or to receive him into the congregation. That penance in those
days was given greater then the fault required, you find not in Saint Jerome,
either in the one place, or in the other, that you quote. Only in the later
upon the text of Mat. 23. which you cite of importable burdens, he says. Hoc
generaliter aduersus omnes magistros, qui grauiaiubent, and minora non faciunt.
This is spoken generally against all such Masters, as command burthenous
things, and themselves do not lesser things. So that you would seem to
avoid Saint Ieromes judgment upon a false surmise. For Saint lerome finds
as much fault with the prelates of his time, for loosing them that are guilty,
as for binding them that are innocent. The contempt of your priests which you
lament, is both for there ignorance, and unlawful calling. Whereas you assure
them of the keie of remission and reteining of sins to be given them by God,
in their orders, and then you send them to obtain discretion, knowledge,
virtue, with other qualities meet to exercise that office by prayer and
industry, you take a wrong course, and contrary to that which the Apostle
prescribes: for he will have men first, to be tried and then to minister. They
must first by prayer and other ordinary means, seek to be fit for their
office, and afterward lawfully be admitted thereto. But where this order is
perverted, they may have calling and admission by men, but I see not how, they
can have power and approbation of God. And therefore Saint Ieromes sentence
standing, your conclusion of the fruit of an ignorant priests absolution is
nothing worth, though there were no doubt of his calling.


ALLEN. For this I dare be bold to say, that the lack of the appointed
fruit of any sacrament, arises a thousand times oftener, by the unworthiness of
the subject, and him that receives the sacrament, then upon any lack of the
giver and minister thereof, and namely in this sacrament of the Churches
discipline it chances more often. For as Saint Basil says: Potestas
remittendi peccata non est absolute data, sed in recipientis obedientia, and in
consensu cum eo qui animae ipsius curam Quaest 15. Regula contract.
gerit, sita est. The power of remitting sins is not absolutely, without
condition, given: but it stands in the obedience of the penitent, and in his
agreement with him that has the charge of his soul. Therefore, for Christ's
love, let us cast peril oftener of our own case, then upon other men's states:
for we are not so assured of the holy spirit, or his grace to qualify us for
the worthy receiving, as they are out of doubt for the right power of
ministry.

And to conclude against Calvin, and all other, that think the power of
priests either to be less for lack of good life, or want of much learning, I
allege Saint Cyprian thus: Remissio peccatorum per baptismum, sieve per alia
sacramenta donetur, proprie spiritus sancti est, and ipsi soli huius
efficientiae priuilegium manet. Thus in English: Remission of sins, whether
it be by baptism or by other sacraments given, it properly pertains to the
holy ghost, and the pre-eminence of the foreceable effect is only his: the
solemnity of words, the invocation of Gods name, and the external signs
prescribed to the priests ministeries, by the Apostles to make up the visible
sacrament: but the thing it self, and effect of the sacrament, the holy ghost
works: and the author of all goodness puts his hand invisible, to the
external and visible consecration of Sermon. de baptis. Chr sti.
the priests. So says Saint Cyprian, and makes a far long discourse how the
diversity of the ministers deserts do nothing Vidi August. 1. 5. contra
Donatistas Cap. 20. Act. 1.
alter the sacraments or the effect thereof, but being a like to all receivers
of fit capacity and condition, by whomesoeuer they be served and dispensed
with justice, authority, and calling thereunto. The Baptisine of Judas
Iscarioth, was no worsse then Simon Peter's. For S. Peter says, Connumeratus
erat in nobis, and sortitus est sortem ministerij huius: He was counted as one
of our number, and had the lotte of the ministry. Nor the ministry of
Nicolas of less acceptance in it self, then the function of Stephen, being
men of one office, but of unlike deseruings. The prophecy of Esate no more
true then the prophecy of Caiphas: nor the prophecy of Balaam less true,
then the prophecy of Baruc. If we were either absolved, or baptized in the
name of Peter and Paull, or Judas, or Apollo, then we might brag, who were
best baptized, or sureliest loosed from sin, and every one might so either
crake, or be ashamed of his minister, whereof Saint Paull earnestly checked the
Corinthians. But now every one being both baptized, and loosed, and houseled,
and anointed, and honored in all other spiritual acts, in no other name, but
in the name of Jesus, his father everlasting, and the holy ghost proceeding
from them both, all must needs receive the like benefit that be like
qualified thereunto, of whom soever the office is exercised, if he be
lawfully called, that is to say, have by the hands of priesthood, received
the gift and grace of the holy ghost for his lawful authorizing in that case,
the which gift of the holy Ghost, being the self same that the Apostles
received of Christ for the like functions, continues with them still, though
their life and deserts be never so evil, and their ignorance never so much:
yea though they be by inst occasion, as for heresy, schism, or notorious
life, through the Censures of the Church imbaryed from the use and exercise of
that office of remitting sins, and such other the like spiritual functions.


FVLKE. That the lack of the fruit of any sacrament is most commmonlie in the
receiver, rather then in the insufficiency of the minister, it proves that
the minister does not properly give the effect of the sacraments, but the
outward seals thereof, as Saint John Baptist does most wisely distinguish
them, saying, I baptize with water, but he that comes after me, shall baptize
with the holy ghost and with fire, Saint Basil in the place by you quoted,
saying that the power of remitting of sins is not given absolutely, but in
the obedience of him that repents, etc. declares what manner of power this
is, contrary to that you have hitherto for the most part maintained. As also
that he says within few words after, that the new testament does promise
remission of all sins to them that worthily repent, he concludes plainly
against your long discourse, wherein you would have it seem, as though the
priest had absolute power of remitting, and not an authority of declaring the
sentence of God concerning such. And Saint Cyprian, or whoesoeuer is author of
that work, De cardinalibus Christi operibus, confirms that which I said,
that the minister does not properly give the effects of the sacrament, but
only the outward seals thereof, as John Baptist does testify. His whole
sentence I will repeat, because you have not so fully set it down, not so
truly translated it. Veniebat Christus ad Baptismum, non egens lauacro, in
quo peccatum non erat, sed vt sacramento perennis daretur autoritas, and tanti
virtutem operis, nulla personarum acceptio commendaret: quoniam remissio
peccaterum sieve per Baptismum sieve per alia sacramenta donetur, proprie
spiritus sancti est, vt ipsi soli huius efficientiae priuilegium mancat.
Verborum solennitas, and sacri inuocatio nominis and signa institutionibus
Apostolicis sacerdotum ministerits attributa, visibile celebrant sacramentum:
rem vero ipsam spiritus sanctus format, and efficit, and consecrationibus
visibilibus inuisibiliter manum totius bonitatis author apponit, and
plenitudinem gratiae vnctionis diuinae pinguedo sanctificationibus officialibus
infundit, and remsacramenti consummat and persicit. Christ came to Baptism
not wanting that (...), as he that was free from sin, but that perpetual
authority might be given to the sacrament, and that no respect of persous
might commend the virtue of so great a work: because remission of sins,
whether it be given by Baptism, or by other sacraments, is properly the holy
ghostes, and to him alone the privilege of this essectuall workeing remains.
The solemnity of words and the invocation of the holy name, and the signs
appointed for the ministry of the Priests by the Apostles doctrine and
instruction, do celebrate the visible sacrament: but the thing it self, the
holy ghost forms and works, and the author of all goodness does invisibly
put his hand to the visible consecrations: and the fatnes of the divine
unction does power the fullnes of grace into the ministerial sanctifications:
and does make consummate or make perfect the matter of the sacrament. That the
ministers deserts does nothing alter the sacraments or the effect of them, it
is no controversy between us, howsoever you would make the ignorant believe
that Calvin is of another opinion, wherein his writings are most manifest to
the contrary. Where you approved him that is lawfully called, to have
received the gift and grace of the holy Ghost, which is the self same that
the Apostles received of Christ for the like functions, you take too much upon
you: for the ordinary and external calling, to exercise an outward
ministry, where of Cyprian discourses, may be without receiving of the holy
Ghost. Again no man has authority to give the holy Ghost, in ordaining,
more then in Baptism or any other part of the ministry of the Gospel.
Thirdly, where you require lawful calling and ordaining in the minister of
the sacrament, that the receiver being rightly qualified, may obtain like
benefit of whomsoever the office is exercised, you exclude lay men and women
from ministering of the sacrament of Baptism, which your doctrine does admit.
Finally, where you assure the minister of the continuance of his authority,
by that gift of the holy Ghost, be his life and deserts never so evil, you
say very much. For what if he be an Idolater, a persecutor of Christians, or
degenerated into Mahometisme, will you say his gift and authority does still
continue? nay, you say it continues, though he be never so ignorant. Then if
he be a natural fool, or a mad man, or one void of all Christian knowledge,
either when he was ordained, or fallen since into such extremity of ignorance,
yet by your rule, he retains his gift. Nay, if he be for heresy, schism, or
notorious evil life lawfully embarred from the use and exercise of remitting
sins, and other like spiritual functions, yet his gift of the holy Ghost
continues still with him. This is in deed an indeleble character, that is
imprinted so deep, that nothing can scrape it away, except perhaps a glass
or knife in degradation: For as I take it, you mean of him that is only
suspended from his office, as though the practice only, and not the
authority for a time might be taken from him.

But to make an end of this matter, I turn Caluins reason against him self.
He and his flock be of that fond and blind judgment, that the whole text of
the twentieth of S. John, wherein Christ gives authority to the Apstoles to
remit sins, is meant only of preaching the Gospel, for which function
Christ gave them the holy Ghost: Now sir, upon this I urge him with his own
reason: I ask him first, whether the ministers that by him cresent to preach
the word of the holy ghost, as for example Beza that he sent into France
first, or Richerus, whom he sent to Coligninia, or Hermam that came by the
holy Ghostes sending unto Flaunders and Brabant, had these the holy ghost, or
no? If they say yea, as I think they will (they be so bold in an other man's
house) then demand of them further, whether the said spirit may err? If they
say no, as possibly they will, then conclude against them thus: The holy
Ghost can not err, ergo you have not the holy Ghost, and consequently you
have then no better right in preaching, then poor Priests have in remitting
or absoluing. Therefore I leave Calvin wrestling with his own shadow, and
will follow on my purpose and course of matter, which I have in hand.


FVLKE. Now we shall hear how cunningly you can turn Caluins reason against
him self. First you say, he and his flock be of that fond and blind
judgment that the wholl text, wherein Christ gives authority to his Apostles
to remit sins, is meant only of Preaching the Gospel, for which function
Christ gave them the holy Ghost. But Caluinsaith notso, but that authority to
remit sins, is granted to be exercised by preaching. both privately and
publikelie: that is, to assure men, that God does remit their sins, and that
the gifts of the holy Ghost were granted to the Apostles, that they might be
enabled to exercise that high office and function: which gifts no man has
power to give, but only God, neither does any man at this day receive them
in such plentiful measure, but that he may err, of whomesoeuer he be
ordained, or sent to preach. Neither does Calvin require that power of not
erring, but only in them that arrogate unto themselves an absolute power to
remit sins, as properly as the holy Ghost does forgive them, who we know
cannot err, in binding him, that is to be loosed, or loosinge him that is to
be bound, as popish pristes do, which yet presumptucusly, and blasphe
mouslie arrogate unto themselves such power and authority.


That it stands well with Gods houour that mortal men should ren it sins,
and that Nouatus the heretic was of old condemned for denying the same, and
that he was the father of this heresy which denies the Priests authority.

THE SEVENTH CHAP.
ALLEN. Now by all our former discourse, the right of remission of sins
sufficiently proved to pertain to priesthood, some will perhaps count it vain
labor, to make more declaration of that which is so plain, or further to
establish that by reason, which stands so fast on scriptures. But if any so
think, they see net the wide ways of heresy, nor the manifold shifies that
she attempteth even there, where she may seem to be fully beaten. The
simple and the sinfullstand most in her danger, that can not in their lack of
intelligence, compare reason to reason, nor gather one truth of an other, and
therefore to their mouths we must chew all meats very small, else there could
be no great need of their further information, how this claim of remission of
sins or the vsisall practice thereof, could stand with Gods glory. For being
answerable to his ordinance, it can not but be agreeable with his honor. But
because in desperate cases our adversaries have taught their fellows there to
wrangle vncurteouslie where they can not mantaine reason pithelie, I will not
only serve my cause, but sometimes pursue their folly, though I doubt not
but the wisdom of God shall more and more appear, touch ing his meaning in our
matter, not alonelie by our defense but a great deal the rather by their
discontentation,

Now therefore intending to declare, that this pre-eminence of priesthood, does
nothing abase, or derogate to Gods aignitie, I think it not amiss to match our
new doctors, of whom I hear often this complaint, with other their
forefathers, that at once both truth may fully be served, and a yoke of
adversaries jointly drawing against the Church and our salvation, may be
almost with one breath refuted. Our young masters may be glad, to grow so high
in gods Church, as to be reproved with them who were condemned thirteen
hundredth years since: and though they be so modest, that lightly they list
not crack of their ancestors, yet we will not defraud them of that glory,
nor healpe our cause by dissimulation of their great antiquity. It is their
pusillanimitie, I know, that they will not often in distress of their
doctrine, call for aid of their forefathers, who were doubtless very
ancient, and many of them within the first six hundred years. In other
causes Vigilantius might healpe: in some Iouinian would attend upon them: Manes
might do them often high pleasure. Iulianus the apostata, a prince for their
purpose, Simon Magus, one of the Apostles age, would stand by them: surely if
our adversaries had (...), they would well near win of us by antiquity. And
truly I can not dissemble with them in this cause, that now is in hand: they
have one patron against us, of years very ancient, and of reason much much
like unto themselves, Nouatus is his name, of whom the followers were called
of the Church Nouatians, but themselves liked to be called Cathari, that is to
say, clean and undefiled persons. Their opinion was, that such as did fall
into any mortal sin after Baptism, could not by any man or means be
assoiled thereof: and for that they dissalowed the Churches wholl practice of
mercy and remission of sins in the sacrament of penance, nothing
dissagreeing from Calvin, that condemns the saying of Saint Jerome, as
sacrilegious, where he writes that penance is as a second beord of refuge,
whereby after shipwreck a man may be saved. Neither did Nouatus deny, but
himself might have mercy, and give pardon after mansfall, but the Church
could not therein meadle, as he thought, without singular injury to Christ,
and his only prerogative. And that he joins in this matter fully with our
men, that they may take more comfort on him, you shall perceive by Socrates
one of the writers of the Tripartit history, who says thus: Nouatus scribebat
Ecclesus ne eos qui Daemonibus immolauerant, ad sacramenta susciperent, sed
inuitarent quidem ad poenitentiam, remissionem vero Dei relinquerent potestati,
cuius solius est peccata remittere. Nouatus wrote his letters to diverse
Churches, that they should not admit any man to the Sacraments, that had
sacrificed to Diuelles, but that they should only move them to do Penance,
and commit to God the remission of their sin, who only can forgive man's
offenses. And therefore though in some other point Nouatus did ouerpricke his
children, yet herein they fully meet in one. Epiphanius writes, that he
denied salvation to those that did fall to grievous crimes after their
Christendom, and therewith did hold, that there was but one penance, which
was done in baptism, and after that the Church to have none. How hansomelie he
defended this error, and unmerciful heresy, ye shall see anon by Saint
Ambrose, who learnedlie followed and chased him or his followers in an wholl
work written for that purpose. In the mean time it were good for the more
credit of the man and his cause, to note with the ancient Doctors of his
days, his conditions, his coming up, his proceeding, and practizes. S.
Cyprian, who was most molested with him, and knew him best, gives him this
praise: Nouatus was a man that delighted much in novelties and news, of
insatiable avarice, a furious rauin, with pride and intolerable arrogancy
almost puffed past him self, known and taken of all Bishops for a naughty
pack, condemned by the common judgment of all good Priests for a faithless
heretic, curious and inquisitiue them to betraie, for to deceive, always
ready to flatter, in love never faithful nor trusty, a match ever fired to
kindle sedition, a whirle wind and storm to procure the shipwrake of faith,
and to be short, an adversary to tranquillity, and an enemy of peace. These
were his conditions then.


FVLKE. In the latter end of the Chapter next before, you said in your
bravery, that you would leave Calvin wrestling with his own shadow, and
follow on your purpose, and course of matter, a great part whereof is, as it
appears, to wrestle with your own shadow. For no man there is in these
days, especially of them whom you count your adversaries in this cause, but
does acknowledge, that it stands well with gods honor, that mortal men
should remit sins, according to that commission which they have reccaued of
him, who only has power absolutely and properly to remitte sins. The heresy
of Nouatus is also generally condemned of all men, neither hold we any error
common with him, in denying the priests authority, much less any heresy. To
omit therefore your impertinent declaration, who be most in danger of
heresy, I acknowledge your argument to be good and found. Nothing that is
answerable to Gods ordinance, can be disagreeable to his honor: the authority
of the Church is agreeable to Gods ordinance: therefore not contrary to his
honor? But if your Priests will claim further authority, then is answerable
to Gods ordinance, as you do in their name, that is to say, that they have
power properly to forgive sins, then they claim that which is not agreeable
to Gods honor. For it is God alone that properly takes away sins. And
Gods ordinance is, that they should be declarers, interpreters and expressers
of his holy will and pleasure concerning remission of sins, not properly
pardoners, forgiuers, or remitters of sins, as though the sentence in heaven
depended upon the sentence in earth, and not rather the sentence of man, should
be framed, and depend upon the sentence of God. Your skornefull trifling in
matching us with ancient heretics, and granting us some pre-eminence of
antiquity, as though we were not hable to prove our do ctrine in all points
of controversy, more ancient then yours, I pass over, as needing no answer,
except it were to such, with whom no answer will prevail.

The heresy of Nouatus, of diverse writers is diversely reported: some affirm
that he utterly denied allrepentance to them that had fallen after Baptism:
other that he denied only the absolution and admission into the Church upon any
repentance or submission of them, that for falling into idolatry for fear of
persecution, were excommunicated or excluded from the Church. As for the popish
Sacrament of penance, was not instituted in his days: but the power, that the
Church has in loosing them that werebound in such cases, or of assuring the
penitent osfenders of remission of sins, he utterly denied. But, you say,
he was nothing disagreeing from Calvin, that condemns the saying of Hierome
as sacrilegious, where he writes that penance is a second board of refuge,
whereby, after shipwreck, a man may be saved. In which affirmation you utter
many untruths at once. For Calvin denies not with Nouatus, the benefit of
repentance, absolution, loosing, or forgiveness of sins after Baptism, as you
shamefullie slander him, but reprooueth the sophistical papists, which to
the derogation of Baptism, and the perpetual fruit thereof, call their
pretended sacrament a second board aftershipwrack, as though the benefit of
Baptism being lost, they should have remission of sins by this counterfeit
sacrament of popish penance and absolution. Secondly, Calvin simpliecon
demneth not the saying of Jerome as sacrilegious, but says, that whose saying
soever it is, it can not be excused, but it is plainly impious, if it be
expounded according to their meaning. As though (says he) Inst. lib. 4. c. 19.
Sect. 17.
by sin Baptism were clean put out, and not rather that it is to be called
into remembrance to the sinner, so often as he thinks of remission of sins,
that thereof he may gather himself together be comforted, and confirm his
faith, that he shall obtain remission of sins, which was promised to him in
Baptism. Now that which Hierome spoke hardly and improperly, that by
repentance Baptism is repaired (from whence they fall, which deserve to be
excommunicated from the Church) these good interpreters draw to their impiety.
Therefore you may say most aptly, if you call Baptism the sacrament of
repentance, seeing it is given for a confirmation of grace and faith in them
that think upon repentance. These words of Calvin declare that he thought not
so vnreuenthe of Saint Hierome as you would have it seem, but that he
reproved their impudency, which to maintain their sacrilegious opinion of
their new found sacrament do draw his words, though in them selves somewhat
hard, and improper, yet far beyond his meaning. And certainly whosoever
shall read the place it self where Hierome has these words, in Esaie, cap.
3. shall plainly perceive that he speaks neither of Baptism, nor of any other
sacrament of penance or repentance, nor of any exercise of repentance in the
Church of Christ, but rather of them that were never baptized, thelews which
impudently cried, Crucifyhim, we have no King but Caesar, or those elder Jews,
against whom Esaie prophesied. For upon these words of the Prophet, They have
declared their sin as Sodoma, etc. Et quomodo Sodomitae in omni liberate
peccantes, and nec pudorem quidem vllum habentes in scelere, dixerunt ad Loath,
Educforas viros, vt concubamus cum eis, sic and isti public proclamantes, suum
praedicauerunt peccatum, nec vllam in blasphemando habuere vereeundiam: secunda
enim (...) naufragium tabula poenitentia est, and consolatio miseriarum
impietatem suam abscondere. And as the Sodomites sinning with all
licentiousnes, and having not so much as any shame in their wickedness, said
unto Lot, bring forth those men that we may lie with them, even so these men
have declared their own sin, openlle proclaiming it, and in blaspheming had
no shamefastnes. For the second board after shipwreck is repentance, and a
comfort of miseries to hide their own ungodliness. The sense is manifest, that
they which are not ashamed of their sins, are far from repentance and in a
desperate state. For they that have made shipwreck of honesty and Godliness,
have no recovery but by repentance. So that Hieromes saying, except it be
violently wrested to those things, of which he never meant, sounds nothing
to the maintenance of any patch of Popery,

That Nouatus reserved to him self any power of giving pardon after man's
fall, which he denied to the Church, I know not where you find it. But
Socrates must testify, that he joined fully with us: yea though in some other
point, he did ouerprick his children, yet herein they fully meet in one. Why
sir? do we refuse to admit any man to the sacraments, which have sacrificed
to Deuilles? yea though they have been excommunicated from the Church fot
their wickedness, do not we upon repentance grant them absolution, and assure
them of remission of their sins? This is too intolerable impudency to
charge us with Nouatus heresy, especially in that point, in which we are as
directly repugnant unto him, as contradictoric sayings and contrary doings
may be. What Epiphanius writes of his heresy, and Saint Ambrose confuted the
same, is showed before, as also how truly Calvin is charged to iumpe with
Nouatus in denying repentance after Baptism, because he calls baptism the
sacrament of repentance, as before him, the ancient writers used
accustomablie, whereof you may read in his institution, the place before
mentioned.


ALLEN. Mary long before that his fall to heresy, S. Cornelius writein, that
he was possessed in his youth with an evil spirit, for Epist. ad Pabianu^ exen.
which he had to do great while with coniurers, and that he lacked all the
holy solemnity of Baptism and confirmation, and consequently the Spirit of
God, which by them he should have received, and therefore took orders against
the law upon sinister favor, and afterward by unlawful arts attempted to get
abishopricke, with great oaths protesting that he would not be a Bishop if he
might. But when indeed he could not attain to that holy dignity, which he
so inwardly and intollerablie gaped for, he fell in despite of Gods Church to
heresy, that he might get that without order, whch he could not obtain, in
the right manner of the Churches making. And for that purpose, he procured
three base Bishops out of a strange and remote part of Italy, who neither
knew the case, the man, nor his manners, and them through ignorance he
beguiled, and by force caused them to consecrate him Bishop, by the color
whereof (for true imposition of hands was it none) sodenlie he appears as a
new creature and a Bishop of a strange stamp, apparuit Episcopus, velut nouum
Plasma, says Cornelius: And for this attempt one of the poor Bishops did
great penance, the other two were deposed. In the mean time this mock Bishop
vendicabat sibi euangelium: challenged the word of the Lord for himself,
denied himself to be a Priest, because he would not give to the people (as
Theodoritus Lib. 3. hereticatum Fabularnm, ca Nouat
says) in their extremity, the remedy for their sins, which is nothing
else, but to give them absolution, which work he could never abide. To be
short, he was so incensed against his lawful Paslour and superior the holy
Bishop of Room, that in the delivery of the blessed sacrament to the people,
he would force them to take an oath by the blessed body which they had in their
hands ready to receive, that they should stick to him, and for sake the
Bishop of Rome Cornelius.

All these things in sense has Eusebius of Nouatus, the first patron of the
Protestants doctrine concerning the impugning, Lib. 6. c. 33. Vide Aug. de
here is. haer. 38.
of the Churches title in remission of sins, of which her right he would have
robbed her in pretense of maintenance of Gods honor. Whereby he also abrogated
the wholl Sacrament of penance. This falsehood, though it were straight with he
author condemned in a great Council holden at Rome, and afterward in diverse
Provincial Synodes, and by the holy council of Nice it self repressed also,
Yet it spread very sort, and cintinued long, and was not only by S. Cyprian,
but also by Dyonisius Alexandrinus, Saint Amb ose, and Saint Chrysostom
refused in sundry works written against the Nouatians. By whom and other,
though the course of that false assertion was often broken in gods Church, yet
in some parts they did knit again, sometimes by certain heretics, of
Nouatus days called Tessarescedecatitae, qui auersabantur poenitentiam, says
Theodoritus, who did abhor penance: and sometimes, by a sort called
Iacobitae, (...) whiles by wrcliffe and his, else, by the Waldenses, now and
than, by the Anabaptists, and latly by the Lutherans, and most of the
protestants, and by the Caluinistes, eueryone.

All which black band, though they agree not at every pinch of Nouatus heresit
(for it is not possible, that such should ever fully consent) yet all these
knit tails together in this, that there is no sacrament of penance after
Baptism, in which the priest may forgive sins, and that it stands not with
gods honor, so to remit the peoples offenses. Of other the like heresies which
he lent our men, as of forbidding holy Chrisme, and anointing of such as were
by him baptized, in so much that the holy fathers were glad, to make up the
lack thereof, in all such as came from their heresy to the unity of Christ's
Church, I will not here speak: purposing only, because, that only
concerns our matter, to refute that old heresy raised so long since against
the prerogative of Gods priests, and only help of our sins, that at once
both the author, and the offspring may be fully over thrown.


FVLKE. Nouatus, as he is described by Cyprian, but that he came too soon
before the open revelation of Antichrist, had been a man much more fit to make
a Pope of the Church of Rome, whereof he was mockbishop, then a poor minister
of the Church of England. And whatsoever you gatherout of Eusebius. Theodoret, or
any other writer against him, declares that he was an execrable man, but
makes no resemblance of his heresy with our doctrine, concerning the power of
remitting of sins. You say that he lacked all the solemnity of baptism and
confirmation, and consequently the spirit of God, which by them he should have
received Eusebius indeed out of the Epistle of Cornelius writes, that after he
was helped by exorcistes, he fell into dangerous sickness, and being at the
point of death, and not considering, he received baptism in his bed, if it may
be said that such a one received. For after he escaped his sickness he obtained
not therest, whereof he should have bin partaker according to the canon of the
Church, that is, to be sealed or confirmed of the Bishope, and having not
obtained this, how obtained he the holy Ghost? By which words Cornelius
meant, that he which was baptized in extreamitie, when he knew not what was
done unto him, and afterward when he was whole, had no care to approve his
baptism by the Bishops judgment, upon his own confession and acknowledging
of Christian Religion, could not be taken for a right Christian, much less,
according to the discipline of those days, might be admitted unto the
ministry. But being admitted by a singular, and if you will, a sinister
dispensation, in time of persecution, he was so fearful, that he denied
himself to be a Priest, when he was desired to come unto them, and only by
words to confirm them that were stricken with the terror of the tyrant, as
Therdoret writes. The oathe that he exacted of such as received the Sacrament
of the Lords supper at his hands, was more like the oath that the pope
exacteth of all Bishopes at their consecration, then any ministered in the
Queens Majesty's visitation. That Wickliffe, the Waldenses, Luther or Calvin,
do deny repentance, or reconciliation of them, that are fallen after Baptism,
it is a mere slander, although they deny the Popish sacrament of penance,
whereof there was no mention in the Chuch, many hundred years after Nouatus.
That the Nouatians did not anoint those that were by them Baptized, it seems
they take it of their Master Nouatus, who because he had contemned: he
ceremony, used in that time of the Church, himself taught his scholars to
do the same, left it should hawe been reputed a want in him. Although not the
omission of the ceremony, but the contempt of the usage of the Church, being
not impious, in it self, was chiefelie condemned in him. For at such times as
he was ordained Elder or Priest of the Church of (...), it was thought by the
Bishope a matter that might be remitted in him, that for other respects seemed
meet for the office, neither was it thought necessary, that he should receive
that cerimonie so by him omitted, but not yet, as it was thought, in despite
of the Church refused. The Fathers oflater time (as Theodoret writes) decreed,
that such as came from his heresy, and would be incorporated into the Church,
should by receiving that cerimonie, which in time of their heresy they
despised, declare that they were truly converted from it, and willinghe.
submitted themselves to the Catholic Church and her Doctrine. But of late
days when that ceremony of anointing has been accounted a Sacrament, yea
and a greater Sacrament then Baptism, and thought necessary to eternal
salvation, whereas yet it has no institution of Christ set forth in the holy
Scriptures: the reformed Churches have justly abrogated that custom,
according to that liberty, which the Church has in all ceremonies, not
commanded by God, and according to the example of the Church in former ages,
which has abrogated many ceremonies used of ancient times, as well as that of
anointing with oil them that are Baptized.


ALLEN. And first, because generally all the foresaid join together against
the truth in this argument, that it is dishonor to god and great presumption
in a mortal man, to claim the power so proper to God: let the studious reader
well consider, that no function, power, ne dignity, be it never so peculiar to
God himself by naturaii excellency, but the same may be occupied of man
secondarilie, as by the way of service, ministry, or participation, so that
man challenge nor usurp it not as of him self, or when it is not lawfuliie
received, nor orderly given. All the works that extraordinarily and
miraculouslie were wrought, either by Christ in his humanity, or by the
Prophets, or Apostles words, or by their garments, or by what other instrument
so ever they were done, were the works of god no less then to remit sins: yet
al these things and other the like brought to pass by man, through the power
of god that works by man's ministry the same, nothing derogateth to gods
glory, but infinitely augmenteth his honor: even so the power of pardoning
man's sins, being employed by God the father upon Christ his son, and by
Christ upon his Church and ministers, and practiced by them, not of their own
might and heads, but in the (...) of the holy ghost, which by the son of
god was (...) upon them, this authority (I say) is no derogation, but an
evident sign of his mighty power of salvation, left for the faithfulls sake
in the Church.

When the person that was lame from his birth begged of Peter and John somewhat
for his relief at the Temole door, as his manner was, Peter answered him, that
gold and silver he had none to give, but that which he had, he would
willingly bestow, which was power to heal him of his incurable malady: for
proof whereof, he bad him arise, and walk, and so he did at his word, in the
sight of all that there Act. 3.
were gathered: which being done, and the people wondering thereat, the Apostle
thus instructed them: Brethren ( faith he) why wonder you at us, as though we
had brought this strange work to pass by our own strength and power: it is
the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that has glorified his son Jesus whom
you refused, and betrayed to Pontius Pilatus to be crucified: in his name and
faith this poor man is recovered. Marcke well, that the same thing which peter
said, him self had to give quod habeo, tibi do, the same yet he professes
that he holds not as of his own right, or might, but as of Christ Jesus, in
whose name he willed the lame to walk: even so the the power of pardoning
sinner is truly and properly in the Priests, as the power of working miracles
is properly in Peter's hands, neither the one noryet the other holden as of
their own might and power, but both practiced for the glory of God in the name
of Jesus of Nazareth, by their appointed ministry. And as truly as Peter might
say to the feeble in body, that which I have, I give thee: rise and walk, in
the name of iesos of Nazareth, so surely may the Priest say to the sick in
souie, that which I have, I give thee, in the name of Jesus thy Ennes (my
son) be forgiven thee. No less is the one the peculiar work of God, then
the other: no more does one dishonor god then the other.


FVLKE. Nothing that is proper or peculiar to God, can be communicated to man,
but it cease to be proper to God. For it is against the nature of properties,
to be made common to any other subject, then to that whereof they are proper
adjuncts. And yet I deny not but that which is proper to God, he does exercise
often times, by the service or ministry of men, in which they are but
instrumental causes, and he him self is the principal efficient: otherwise man
may not occupy, or execute secondly, or thirdly, or last of all, by way of
participation, that which is proper or peculiar to God. So that it remaneth
still an undoubted truth, that God only does forgive sins properly, and
man does not forgive sins properly, but is the instrument of God to utter,
and declare the good pleasure of God in forgiving sins to all and every one
that repent, and believe the Gospe ll. Your general negative, that there is no
function, power, nor dignity be it never so peculiar to God, by natural
excellency, but it may be occupied of man secondly, as by the way of
service, ministry, or participation, if it were urged against you, would breed
horrible absurdities. To omit all other, the power of creating things of
nothing, by what means may man be partaker thereof, occupy it, or exercise
it? But let us consider your induction, All Miraculous works worught by Christ
in his humanity, the Prophets, or Apostles, were no less proper to God, then
the power to remit sins. Yes verily: for many miraculous works, that God
did by Moses, the inchaunters of Egypt did the like, by the power of the
devil: whereby it appears, that although ail power be derived from God, as
from the first cause thereof, even that power which the devil has, yet it is
otherwise communicated to creatures, then the power of remission of sins is.
For that remains only in the hand of God, and is not properly executed by
any other man, but only by our savior Christ, the mediarour of god and man.
In which power he has ordained man, but as a servant, to do nothing after his
own will, but only to declare and pronounce the will of God thereof. In
working of miracles it is otherwise, in which man so exercises that power,
either received of god, or of the devil, that often times he causes effects
according to his own will, and contrary to the will of God revealed in his
word, though nothing can be contrary to his absolute will. But the power of
remitting sins no man can execute, contrary to the revealed will of God: For
Peter could not forgive the sins of Iudes Iscariot, Smon Magus, Alexander the
copper smith, or any other that sinned against the holy Ghost, or that was not
truly penitent for his sins, or that believed not the promise of God. Neither
could Peter, or can any man retain the sins of him that repents, and takes
hold of Gods mercy by faith, but he shall have remission of sins, though
all the men in the world would say the contrary: so that man has no power in
reteining or remitting of sins, but by declaring the will of God, whereof he
has no warrant but out of his word. For I ask this question of you, if two
priests having heard one man's confession at the same time be in contrary
opinions, so that the one does forgive sins, the other does retain them,
Whether of these sentences shall take place? No doubt but you will say, that
which is agreeable to the will of God. Then does it follow of necessity, that
man does only declare Gods will, and has no absolute or proper power, to
exercise this authority according to his own will. But as Peter said to the
lame man, that which I have, I give to thee, and yet he had it not of his own
right of might, but from God: even so say you, The power of pardoning sins,
is truly and properly in the priests, as the power of working mitacles is
properly in Peter's hands. Idenie your consequence. For although the pow er of
working miracles were properly in Peter's hands, yet it follows not, that the
power of pardoning sins was properly in him. For, as I have showed, there is
great diversity between the one power, and the other. The power of miracles
is granted to Peter, to be exercised according to the direction of Gods holy
spirit, agreeablie unto the secret and absolute will of God: But the power of
pardoning sins is not granted to Peter, or any man, but as to a messenger,
and declarer of Gods will as it is revealed in his word; beside which, if any
presume to remit. he does but spend his breath in vain. But a wicked man
having the power of miracles, may sometimes abuse it, contrary to Gods law,
as to maintain false doctrine, and Idolatry, to hurt or to murder innocents
thereby: and yet we may say in some respect, that the power of working
miracles is not properly in Peter's hands, both because it is not in him, to
heal whom and when he will, but after as he has a secret instinct of him
that is the author of his gift, and also because he is but an instrument of
God, who only does great maruells properly, Psalm. 136. as he confessed in
the healing of AEneas, Acts 9. saying, Christ Ie sus heal thee. So Acts. 3:
His name has made him strong, and the faith which is by him has given him his
perfect health. Where you conclude that the priests may say likewise to the
sick soull, That which I have, I give thee, In the name of Jesus Thy sins,
my son, be forgiven thee. Although the sorme of speech be somewhat insolent
and strange, yet you confess that the priest has nothing to give him, but a
declaration of Gods will, when he says, thy sins are forgiven thee in the
name of Jesus. Yea if he shall say, in the name of lesus I forgive thee thy
sins, the sense were no more, but this, Jesus does assure thee by me, his
servant and messenger, that he has, satisfied for thy sins, and therefore
they shall no more be imputed unto thee, for God has forgiven them.


ALLEN. And this work of remitting sins is much more certain then the
miraculous healing of the body, being joined by Gods promise to a sacrament
that shall never cease in the Church, where miracles for most part ceased long
since: yea the name and majesty of God is a thousand parts more honored, not
only that God, in his own person, but in the frailty of hu ministers, is
able to accomplish such mighty miracles, both in the cure of body and soull.
But the fondnes of this heresy is so great, that it makes those things to
tend to Gods disgracing, which he has appointed properly and only in a
manner, for the purpose, to set forth the name of his son Jesus. For if both
sins of man's soull, and sores of his body could not visiblie by external
means be healed in the glorious invocation of Gods name, it would surely be
forgotten in the Church of Christ, that such power is given by God the father
to his only son, and man's mind would not reach to that inwardly, whereof
he had no proof nor assurance outwardelie. I beseech you, Sir, the working of
strange miracles given to some, as well of the Prophets, as of the Apostles of
Christ, were they any whit prejudicial to Gods honor, or were they giuento man
above his natural power, for the setting forth of God, honor, that the
Prophets should see long before things that afterward did fall, which is the
propriety of God alone, and theirs only by gift and grant of him, to who me
only it does belong, do they dishonor God, or else was it not always
granted to some men, for the glory of God? That Eliseus could see the heart
and inward thoughts of Giezi his servant, which is Gods only property, did
it dishonor God, or rather wonderfully 4. Reg. c. 5.
augment his glory? The passing pre-eminence that Peter and the rest received,
when they were hable by laying on of hands to give the holy ghost, can it not
be practiced without Act. 3.
the dishonor of God, or else was it not principallse given to them to set
forth the glory of God? This was so great power, that it was much more astonished
at of the beholders, then either working of miracles, or remitting sins: in
so much that Simon the forcerer, who was so glorious before, that he called
him self the power of God, would have given the Apostles money largely, that
upon whom soever he had practiced the like laying on of hands, he might
receive the holy ghost also. Then if the power of giving the holy ghost, or
power of giving grace, which 2. Tim. 4.
both Peter and Paull practiced in a visible sacrament, by a solemn ceremony,
in the sight of all the world, by laying on of their hands, if this passing
work, and most proper to God, I dare say, of all other acts that be
exercised in Christ's name in the Church, does not only no whit abase Gods
excellency, but was purposelie instituted to honor the majesty of God in the
face of all people, and to set out the glory of his house, how dare any man
for fear of Gods high indignation, controlle the work of Christ in remitting
man's sins, by such a visible sacrament, as to the honor of God is most
convenient, and to our salvation most necessary? If they will not let pristes
remit sins for fear of offending God, and dishonouring his name, then let
them not baptize, not preach, not teach, not do miracles, not give the holy
ghost, not correct faults, not give orders, nor do any other functions. For
these every one be no less proper to God, then remission of sins.


FVLKE. You ground your argument upon a sacrament, before you have proved any.
The power of remitting sins is granted to be perpetual in the Church, and
nothing derogatorie to the honor of God. But that there is any other
sacrament, whereby men are assured of the forgiveness of their sins, by any
external ceremony, except the sacraments of Baptism, and of the Lords
supper, which is the chief matter in controversy, you go not once about to
prove If Christ's Church were like your Popish Church, wherein all things are
taught by Images, and dumme ceremonies, and the word of God neuerpreached, it
might come to pass as you say, that it would be forgotten, that such power is
given by God to Christ. But in the Church of God many things are remembered by
means of preaching the Gospel, and word of God, whereof there is no visible
sacrament or ceremony, although to help our weakness, the mercy of God has by
his sacraments sealed up the most necessary and generail points of doctrine
of our regeneration, to be the Children of God, and of our spiritual feeding
or norishment, to continue us perpetually in the same. But whereas you say,
that if both sins of man's soull, and sores of his body, could not visiblie
by external means he healed in the glorious inuoration of Gods name, it would
surclie be forgottenin the Church of Christ that such power is given by God the
father to his only son, etc. I pray you what external means have you
visiblie to heal the sores of man's body by invocation of Gods name, lest it
should be forgotten in the Church that the father has given such power to his
son? Will you now send us to the mock miracles, and lying signs regestred
in your Legendes? wrought at your pilgramages, Idols, or in an other world by
the Iapponical Jesuits? These because they are not seen, move nothing the
inward man, whose mind, you say, full learnedlie, will not reach to that
inwardelie, whereof he has no proof nor assurance outwardelie. As though
faith were not a substance of things that are hoped for, and an evidence of
things that are Heb. 11.
not seen. Where of the mind of man has no assurance outwardelie. For the
sacramental seals, but by faith, make no assurance outwardelie. Can I gather
an assurance, but by faith of Gods promise that my body being washed
outwardelie, my soull is cleansed inwardelie? Is it the receiving of the outward
elements in the Lords supper, that assures me of my spiritual nourishment to
eternal life, or faith granted upon the word, which coming to the elements,
makes them the seals of assurance of gods promises? The question you ask, of
the Prophets foreseeing of things so long before things that afterward did
fall, whether it was granted with dishonor of God, or to his glory? I
answer that the property of God alone, to whom all things are present, was
not, ne could not be communicated to men. But God to his glory, by the
instrument of their mouth did foreshew those things, which he had revealed unto
the^ by his spirit, in prophetical vision, or dream. Neither could Elizeus see
the heart and inward thoughts, of Gihezei his servant, which is gods only
property, but God did reveal, and declare unto him, what hypocrisy was hid
in the heart of Gihezei: so that Elizeus knew no more properly what was in the
heart of Gihezei then any other man, to whom Gihezei himself might open his
thoughts, saving that Elizeus knew more certenlie, and by 2 more wonderful
mean. For to man Gihezei might ly, but god who only searches the heart and
the reins, revealed the truth to Elizeus. Neither was Peter and the rest hable
by laying on of hands to give the holy ghost, that is the visible gists of the
holv ghost, but according to gods good pleasure and will. For Acts. 8. Peter
and John sent by the Apostles into Samaria, prayed for them that were baptized,
that they might receive the holy Ghost, and after laid their hands upon them,
and they received from god the sensible graces of the holy ghost, as speaking
with tongues, interpretation of tongues, healing of sickness, casting out of
devils, and such like. Therefore in such wonderful effects as followed laying
on of hands, nothing that is most proper to god passed to men. But it pleased
God, who is the only author of such graces and gifts, to bestow the same by
his faithful stewards, at their prayer, whereunto they were moved, and
assisted by him, and with that visible sacrament or ceremony. But such
ceremonies we have not for remission of sins, or reteining of them by Gods
institution. Therefore no sacrament, but a doctrine of remitting or reteining
of sins.


ALLEN. O heresy most shameful, that then goes about to dishonor God most,
when she most pretends gods honor, whereof she is so tender and so
careful, that she has barred his own spouse, of his blessed body, of
remission of sins, of the spirit of God, of all sacraments, of all holy
ceremonies, of memories, of miracles, of all holy functions, and to be short,
of all gifts, and graces: and all this for Gods honor, so honorable a thing
it is for Christ to be the king of so beggarly a common wealth, as they make
of the Church: such glory it is for Christ to have his only spouse robbed of
the treasures of his gifts and graces: so comely it is for Christ, to have
such sacraments, as neither contain himself, nor his grace: so worthy a
thing it is, for Christ to have ministers, that upon his own warrant can
neither pardon nor punish man's misdeedes. Gloriosa dicta sunt de te Ciuitas
Dei. Glorious things Pial. 8c.
have been reported of thee, thou City of God, and how art thou now so
barrenne and so contemptible, that thy honor must needs redound to the
dishonor of him, by whom all thy honor only stands?

But I cease to pursue the Churchces enemies now in mine own words, I will
rather join with the holy fathers, for their overthrow, whose, not only
reason and sufficient answer to this their vain reply founded on the
pretense of Gods honor, but also, their only name and authority shall
sufficiently beat down these men's boldness. Saint Ambrose in this case is
most plain, and stands with the Nouatians, Ambros. de poen. l. 1. c. 2.
as I do now with the Zuinglians, even in the very same argument, in these
words: Sed aiunt, se Domino defer reuerentiam, cui soli remittend orum
oriminum potestatem reseruent: imo nulli maiorem iniuriam faciunt, quam qui
eius volunt mandata res indere, commissum munus refindere: nam cum ipse in
Euangelis suo dixerit Dominus Jesus, accipite Spiritum sanctum, quorum
remiseritis peccata, etc. quis est ergo qui magis honorat? Vtrum qui mandat is
attemperat, an qui resistit? Ecclesia in vtroque seruat obedientiam, vt
peccatism and alliget, and laxat. That is to say: These Nouatians say that
they deny penance or power to remit sins in earth, in respect of the
maintenance of such honor as is due to God, to whom only they will reserve
the pardoning of man's sins. But in deed none do so much injury to Gods
glory, as those which break his commandments, and make a division of that
charge and commission, which he gives. For seeing our Lord Jesus by his own
mouth spoke these words: Receive ye the holy ghost, whose sins you do
forgive, they be forgiven, and whose sins you hold, they beholden, who in
this case more honors God? He that obeieth his commandment, or he that
resists the same? The Church obeieth in both, as well in binding as in
loosing. Thus there. And a little after: Look to whom this charge was given,
and that person may lawfully and with Gods good leave use the same. Au l
therefore the Church may lawfully both bind and loose: heresy and her
attendants can rightly do neither. This right is only committed to priests,
and therefore the Church rightly challenges that authority because she has
lawful priests: and so heresy cannot do, because she has not the priests
of God in her cursed congregation. Thus said Saint. Ambrose for the answer of
the Nouatians in his days, and so say I now in the Churches behalf against
the like affected enemies of Christ's honor, which whiles they in face of
scripture and Gods word would seem to defend, they are become sworn
adversaries of his honor, and open contemners of his commandments and holy
ordinance. Saint Ambrose here takes it for a ground, that it is Gods
ordinance, that Priests should remit sins, he is bold to call the contrary
doctrine, heresy, he makes a principle of this, that it never dishonors
God, that man should do that which God gives him either commandment or
commission to do in his behalf, he takes it for a known truth, that, as
the Church of God has true and lawful priests, so she may by them, upon
Christ's warrant, bath loose and bind: and contrariwise, that heresy may well
enough give over that right of remission of sins, because she has lightly
no lawful priests, by whom she may practice the same.


FVLKE. First, you make a vain exclamation or outcrie, as though heresy has
spoiled the Church of her treasures under pretense of Gods glory: but such
rhetorical vamties all wise men will deride. The Church is not spoiled of her
treasures, when neither Christ, nor his grace is contained in the sacraments:
but when Christ, her only treasure, is spoiled of his glory, of sole
redemption and fatisfaction for our sins, or of any other part of the office
that belongs to the mediator. Therefore it is her greatest honor that Christ
may have his true honor, in whom and with whom she has al things, not to
the glory of flesh and blood, but to the glory of God, to whom all glory of
right belongs: what Saint Ambrose did write against the Nouatians, pertains
not to us, who deny neither the power of remitting nor of reteining of sins,
but grant both. But that Saint Ambrose did not mean of such a power as the
Papists do claim, I have showed before out of his own words in the same
place, where he says, that our Lord has chosen such Disciples, as should be
interpreters of their Lords will. This power is granted to all true ministers
of the Church, that they are the Legates or ambassadors of god, to declare his
will and pleasure unto men, as well for remitting, as for reteining of sins. And
therefore Nouatus, or Nouatianus, did very absurdlie by Saint Ambrose his
judgment, that did arrogate unto himself power to retain sins, while he
pronounced that they which fell into Idolatry after Baptism, might not be
received into the Church upon any trial of their repentance: and would not
yeald that the ministers of the Church by the same authority might pronounce,
that they which were truly penitent of their former wicked behavior, were
forgiven in the judgment of God, which was to remit their sins upon earth,
with faith in Gods promise, that they shall be forgiven in heaven. Thus the
answer of Saint Ambrose unto the Nouatians, does nothing in the world make
against us, which deny no power that Christ has granted to his Church, under
color of maintenance of Gods honor.


ALLEN. And surely, it is a maruclous force of truth, or rather the might of
Gods providence, that drives Heretics to disdain, destroy, and dissanull
the graces and manifold gifts of Christ's Church, that impugning them, where
the very right of such holy acts do lie, they may plainlte confess, and to
their shame acknowledge, that they have none such themselves, nor cannot by
Gods warrant challenge any such gifts, which with all their might they would
wholly if they could, together with Gods spirit and Church, extinguish.

Alas into what misery has this forfaken flock willfullie cast them selves
and their adherentes, which can forsake Gods house, vbi mandauit Dominus
benedictionem, upon which God has bestowed his blessing, and abide there,
where, by their own confession, there is no Priesthood, no penance, no host,
no sacrifice, no remission (where they can let) of sins, no grace in
sacraments, nor no gift of the holy Ghost. All other herisies lightly by
force of the Fathers Doctrine and judgment, lost either their Priesthood,
because they had no way out of the Church to make Priests, as Saint Hierome
writes of Hilarie the Deacon, or else the use and function of Aduersus
Luciferianos.
Priesthood, by reason, the works of God cannot be orderly nor benefi iallie
used out of the house of God: and yet, they ever claimed to themselves, not
only the order, but for most part all other functions that by Christ and his
Church were annexed to that order: but ours (wherein they pass all their
forefathers) in a manner willingly give over the wholl profession freely and
without compulsion, deny them selves, with Nouatus, to be priests, deny to
sacrifice, deny to enjoin penance, deny to give the holy ghost, either by
imposition of hands, or by Chrisme, or by any other solemn right of Gods
Church. To be short, take nothing from these fellows that belongs to
Christianity, for they will give all over them selves.

But briefllie to conclude up the answer to their reason founded upon Nouatus
his principle touching Gods honor, thus I say: That never derogateth to Gods
honor, which is agreeable to gods ordinance: but that priests should remit
sins is the ordinance of God, as is declared: therefore the use thereof does
not derogate any whit to gods honor. Again: as great works and as proper to
god, as remission of sins, was practiced by the Apostles, and yet is used by
the Bishops of holy Church without all dishonor of god, giving the holy
ghost, and gods grace, by laying on of (...): Ergo remission of sins may be
also practiced of priests, without all injury to God and the only right
therein.


FVLKE. Whethersoeuer the force of truth, or providence of God drive
heretics, we have no purpose to follow them. The gifts which god bestows on
his Church, and the ministers thereof, with all humility and thankefulnes, we
acknowledge, receive, and exercise to his glory, and the benefit of his
Church: although we arrogate nothing unto our selves, either in them, or in any
other thing that is proper to God. And therefore it is both a vain and a false
complaint, that the Church adorned with Gods blessings is forsaken, and a
congregation barren of all Gods gifts, embraced. All offices of ministry in
the Church, that God has ordained, we admit and practice, neither will we give
over any thing for all your childish prating, whereof we have warrant to
enioie it, out of the word of God. To your syllogismes I answer, thus to the
first, That to exercise the Power of remission of sins, in such sort, as it
is ordained of God, is no dishonor to God, but a great honor. To the second,
I deny that any thing proper to God, as remission of sins, giving the holy
Ghost and Gods grace, as it is proper to God, was or could be practiced by the
Apostles, or any mortal man, properly: otherwise I confess, that remission of
sins, as Christ has commanded it, may be practiced without all injury to
God and his only right therein.


For further proof of the forsaid matter, it is declared, that neither Christ,
nor his everlasting Father, nor the holy Ghost, do give over unto man, or
resign the power of remission, or any other holy function of the Church, but
do themselves continually work all those graces by man's mynisterie and
service.

THE EIGHT CHAP.
ALLEN. FVrthermore, we must here consider, that what work soever God
appoints man to exercise in his Church, either in remission of sins, or
giving grace of Gods spirit, or what other holy action soever may in his name
be done, for the benefit of the people, by the ministry and service of man,
either by the means and mediation of any other isntrumental cause, we must
learn, that in these works so wrought either by man, or through other
creatures, God does not resign his right to the ways and workers thereof, and
give over the wholl title that is due to himself in the said divine acts. For
then in deed man's practice should derogate from Gods power, and he should as
it were succeed God in the right of his proper power, and everlasting
inheritance: which only to surmise, as heretics do, were mere folly.

Christ is by everlasting right made the head of the Church, and he resigneth
not this office to any mortal man. For if he did, then the party that should
by his grant occupy for a season the same dignity, were his fuccessour, and
should hold in like right the same office as he did before. But that
notwithstanding, he has made his substitute and vicegerent, by whom in his
corporal absence he rules now the Church, as he did before in his own
person, not giving over his pre-eminence and supreme power therein, but now
practizing that by another, which before he exercised him self in his own
person. It had been a great derogation to Christ that Peter should have bin
Christ's heir and successor: for then Christ had lost the perpeiuitie, an
other man governing after him in like right and pre-eminence as he had before.
But, for Peter to rule the Church under him, in his stead, and as by his
everlasting right, with commission from him that holds that sovereignty for
ever, by whomesoeuer the Church shall be ruled till the worlds end in earth,
this (I say) is no derogation to God, nor his son Christ at all, but it much
proves that Christ according to his manhood is the head of the Church for
ever, because by man in earth he rules the same til his coming again, the
whichman, Psalm. 44.
though he be his vicar and vicegerent, yet he is not his successor.

Saint Augustine did trimly allude to the use of the old law, comparing the
ministers of Gods Church to the younger brethren who were charged to marry the
elder brothers wife, when he died without issue, in whose name they did
practice the work of marriage, and therefore could not call their children by
their own names, but by the name of their elder breethren. For as they raised
seed to their brother, and for their brothers honor, so the Priests that have
taken upon them (as it were in marriage) to govern Christ's Church, and to
bring forth children, not in their own names, but in the name of their elder
brother, and her departed Husband. As when they bring forth children in
Baptism, as through the womb of the Church, they bring them not forth as for
themselves, and in their own names, but in the name of Jesus Christ, being
their elder brother: even so it is in remission of sins also, in which case
Christ resigneth not his authority, as though he lacked that power himself,
but practzeth that mighty work by the ministry of man, which before he
exercised in his own person. And as the baptzing not in the name of Peter, nor
Paull, nor Apolle, but in the name of Christ the first husband of the Church,
after whom the Children be called Christianes, not Petrianes, nor Paulianes,
does much set forth the honor of the eldest spouse: so it proves and
augmenteth Christ's everlasting honor and most just title in remission of
sins, that till this day, no less now in absence by the service of his
Priests, then before when he was present, by his own word and will, sins
be, in his name and faith, fully remitted: yea, even the very function of
Preaching the Gospel, which they say is meant by remitting of sins
(although they say most foolishlie therein, and against the common sense of all
the fathers) yet even that function is Christ's still, though it be used of man
in earth.


FVLKE. You are as plentiful in proof of that which is confessed, as you are
naked and barren in proouing that which is denied. The title of your Chapter we
will grant you without proof, and according thereunto, we are content to
decide this controversy. But you will no longer abide by it, then until you
have made a show of truth, and then straight give it over, challenging a
proper power, and properly to remit sins, even the power that is proper to
God, and the same to exercise as properly as God does, with deification of
your Priests persons, and such other arrogant assumptions. Where you say,
that God does not resign his right to the ways and works of any divine
function, and give over the wholl title that is due to himself in the said
divine acts, I add that he does neither resign his right nor his practice or
exercise there of, he does not give over his wholl title, or any part or
portion thereof. When you go about to demonstrate your proposition, you say
that Christ resigned his room, but not his right. A pretty collusion of words,
but a matter full of her eticall meaning. For Christ resigned neither his room
nor his right, when he ascended into heaven, but set himself down in the
throne of magnificence, that he might fulfill all things, with his glorious an
gracious presence, by which he continues with his Church unto the end of the
world. Neither has he need of any substitute or vicegerent, to exercise any
point of that office, which is proper to the universal head of the universal
Church: neither can any mortal creature exercise the office of the head of the
whole Churh, because it is a mere divine power, by everlasting right, as you
confess, proper to our savior Christ, that from him, as from the head, life and
all powers of life should flow into his wholl Church, and every true Ephesians. 4.
member thereof. And therefore whatsoever from the beginning he has exercised
in his own person, he does not now practice by any other, but still by
himself and in his own person. But the office of teaching which in his
humanity he exercised and before his incarnation was exercised, by the Prophets
and Priests, he has committed to his Apostles, Evangelists, Prophets,
Pastors, and Teachers, unto the end of the world: but that one man should rule
his whole Church, either by doctrine, or discipline, whereunto it is not
possible for him to have an eye, and ouerseeing, Christ has never appointed:
but as he has appointed several teachers, so also has he ordained several
governors. And no more possible it is, that one man should rule and govern all the Church, then it is possible that one man should teach all the Church
despersed, as it is now, and has been of old, over all the face of the earth.
But that Peter or any other man should rule the Church in Christ's stead, you
say it proves much, that Christ is head of the Church according to his
manhood. That Christ, who is God and man, is head of his Church, it is a
Christian confession: But that Christ is head of his Church according to his
manhood, I see not how it differs from flat Nestorianisme, or Arrianisme. For
wholl Christ is head of his Church, according to that he was head thereof
before his incarnation, and flesh assumpted, yet intended: and he is head of
his Church according to that he fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. It is one thing
to say that Jesus Christ, or the man Jesus Christ is head of his Church,
another thing to say, that Christ is head of his Church, according to his
manhood. Beside, I know not what humane head ship you ascribe unto Christ, that
make him head in respect of such external regiment as may be exercised by man,
and yet by no one man alone, but by many men, at once, in this dispersion of
the Church: all which acknowledge Christ to be their only head, because they
must govern the Church by his word only, and by laws framed agreeable unto
the same. That the Protestants bring forth children to Calvin or Luther, it
is nothing but tailing without reason. For the Protestants are willing to
depart with any pretense of right or honout, so that God may have his whole
glory by such means as he has appoin ted. Therefore according to Saint
Augustines allusion, they beget children by preaching of the Gospel unto
Christ, and not to them selves. The function of Preaching. you say, is
Christ's still. If you mean, that he is the author of the doctrine preached,
and so the only master and teacher of his Church, it is true but this
function the Protestants claim not; but to be ministers appointed to declare
this doctrine in the world. This function as a part of his humiliation, has he
clean given over, since his ascension, and appointed in his stead, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors, and teachers, to exercise the same function,
to the edifying of his Church, until the end of the world. You charge us to
say, that the function of Preaching is meant by remitting of sins: which we
say not: For Preaching extends further, then the remitting of sins. But we
say, that by preaching publicly, or declaring privately, as the case
requires, the grace and mercy of God in pardoning all penitent, and believing
sinners, the minister of God does remit sins in the name of Christ, while the
pardon pronounced by him, is of as great force to assure the re pentaunt sinner
of remission of his sins, as if Christ himself should declare it out of
heaven: wherein we speak neither foolishlie, nor against the common sense of
all the fathers, as by some of their writings alleged before I have plainly
declared.


ALLEN. And they that are most tender in outward words of Godshonour, will yet
seem to occupy that his proper function with out all derogation to his right
therein. But in deed their preaching, which is their remission of sin, is
not the power of God to salvation, but it is his permission for our great
punishment. The lawful doctrine of Christ's Church, is truly no less theproper
work of Christ, then is forgiveness of sins, and yet it is with out
controlling of Nouatians and Heretics, exercised by man's ministry in earth.
S. Augustine says hereof thus: Christus est qui docet, Cathedram in coelo
haber, scholaipsius in terra est De discipl. Christiana ca. vlt.
and scholaipsius corpus ipsius est. It is Christ which teaches, and he has
his pulpit in heaven, and his school in earth, and his school is his body the
Church. Christ does not then resign up his office in preaching, no more then
he does his authority of pardoning: no man succeeding him in either of the
rooms, but occupies both under him in his Church, which is his inheritance
for ever: the which Churh holds by him as a school to teach truth in, as a
court and judgment seat to pardon or punish sins in. Thus he.


FVLKE. The proper function of Christ, which is to be the only author of the
true Doctrine, that is taught in the Church, none of us will presume to
occupy; we leave that blasphemy to the Pope, and the popish Church: but the
Gospel which we preach, is the power of God unto salvation in the remission of
our sins, revealed in this age by the singular mercy of God, to the undoubted
salvation of many thousands. The outward preaching of Christ's Doctrine, is not
the proper work of Christ, but common to all his true and faithful servants,
the Prophettes, Apostles, and their successoures, Bishopes, Pastors, and
teachers. It is Christ, as Austine says, that teaches inwardly by his spirit
from heaven, and is the author of the doctrine that is taught on earth: in
which respect he says, He that hears you, hears me, etc. But it is the
voice of man that utters this Doctrine in the outward ears of men, and not
the voice of Christ.


ALLEN. But to bear down the adversaries of truth fullly, we will join with
them touching the sacrament of extreme unction, the sacrament of baptism, and
such other, in which they cannot, nor do not deny, concerning one of them,
but man without all derogation to Gods honor, remitteth sins. And how can it
here seem strange, that in the sacrament of penance God should by man's office
remit mortal crimes, seeing it cannot be denied, but God uses, not only
man's ministry, but also the external service of bare and base water, which
is much inferior by nature and dignity to a Priest or any other man, to take
away sins both original and actual, in the sacrament of baptism: in which
sacrament, seeing as well the Priest is the minister, as the water an
instrument, whereby God remitteth all sins, be they never so many and
grieuouse, whether they be committed by their own act, or by our fathers
offspring, why does it dishonor God any more, that the Priest should be the
minister of remission in the sacrament of penance, then it does by as great an
office almost, in remitting of sins in the sacrament of baptism? Again,
read the Epistle of S. Iamer, and you shall find the Priest made a minister,
the oil an instrument in the extreamitie of sickness, Cap. vlt.
to forgive sins: how much more is the priest, without any imparing of Gods
power, the worker under him of our reconciliation, and pardoning in the
sacrament of penance: in which especially the grace of God is given above all
other sacraments, to that only end and purpose.

I may be more bold to use this comparing of sundry Sacraments together,
because not only Saint Ambrose refuteth the Father of this fond heresy by the
same reason, but also because most of the Doctors of the Church do confess,
that she ever had these ways to remit man's sins by, without derogation to
Christ's sovereignty herein, of whom only she holds her right, as well in
the sacrament of penance, as in baptism or extreme unction. Saint Chrysostom
says Neque enim solum cum nos regenerant, sed postea etiam condonandorum De
Sacerlib. 3.
nobis peccatorum potestatem obtinent: infirmatur (inquit) inter vos aliquis?
Accersat presbyteros Ecclesiae. Neither have Priests power in baptism only,
but afterward also they have good authority to forgive our sins: Is any man
feeble amongst you, says he, Call for the Priests of the Church, let them say
prayers over him, anoint him with oil, and the prayer of faith shall save the
sick, and if he be in sins, they shall be forgiven him. But this sacrament
instituted by Gods word, and Christ's authority, used of old, and well known
to all the Fathers, is now become nothing in our building. Sin is now a days
so favored, that no sacrament may be abiden for the release thereof. The very
express words of Scripture can take no place, where flattering of wickedness
and fantasy rules to the contrary.


FVLKE. Touching extreme unction, we shall speak anon: but of baptism we
say, that to speak properly, man baptiseth with water unto repentance, as an
outward seal of the forgiveness of sins: Christ only baptizeth with the
holy Ghost and with fire, actuallie, and effectually to purge and cleanse our
sins. Of the sacrament of penance, we must first be resolved, before we can
acknowledge any office of man to remitte mortal crimes therein. If Christ had
instituted a sacrament of penance, as he has of baptism, we would acknowledge
the like effects in the one, that we do in the other. Concerning the
anointing with oil, spoken of in Saint James, whereunto besides bodelie
health, remission of sins was promised, it was a sacrament, while that special
gift of healing continued, but no institurio^ of perpetual continuance.
Chrysostom cites this text of Saint James to prove, that not only in the
sacrament of regeneration, but afterward also, the Priests has power to remit
sins, not only by teaching, and admonishing, but also by help of prayer.
But of any perpetual sacrament, there is no mention in him, neither was it
instituted by our savior Christ, with any commandment of perpetual
continuance, as babtisme and the Lords supper are, but only so long as the
gift should continue. Neither does Saint James give it in charge, as a
perpetual sacrament, but only admonishes the Church to use that benefit of
healing, so long as it should remain with men.


ALLEN. There be some that affirm, this annoiling to have been a miraculous
practice to take away the diseases of the sick, and therefore that it did
decaie with the working of other the like miracles, which after the spring of
our religion were not usual. But that is a fond gloss. For I ask of the^,
whether the people then Christianed, were instructed, or rather commanded, to
call for the Apostles or others, to heal them miraculously of their diseases,
or whether all Priests had the gift of working miracles in the Primitive
Church? If they say, yea, touching the first piont, then as well were they
charged to send for them to revive them, after they were dead, because the
Apostles so could do when they same occasion, and so did by some. But that is
plain absurd and false, that ever Apostle gave in charge to any man, much
less to make a general precept (as S. James here does) to seek after
miracles: for that were to tempt God. And for the second, they are not so
unreasonable to answer me, that all Priests could work miracles, which is a
several gift of the holy Ghost, from the power of their ministry, and
therefore Saint James would not have charged the sick persons to have called
indifferently for Priests, to heal them miraculouslie, the gift of miracles
being not common to them all, nor perpetually promised to any of them all.
Again I would know of them, whether there was any miraculous healing that
had the remission of sins joined unto it, or to the external creature, by
which they healed any person? If they say yea: then it follows, that the
Priests might by the office of that creature, heal a man of his sins, which
they affirm to be blaspemie, and dishonor to God. But to what absurdity so
ever you bring them, they will not confess mortal men in external Sacraments
to remit sins.


FVLKE. You are better advised now, concerning Caluines judgment, of the oil,
where of Saint James speaks, then you were when you wrote your defense of
purgatory: for there you were not ashamed to affirm, that Calvin did expound
it for a medicinable salve, or ointment to ease the sick man's sore. But now
let us see how you will prove, his interpretation to be a fond gloss. First
you ask, whether the people then christianed, were instructed, or rather
commanded, to call for the Apostles or others to heal the^ miraculouslie of
their diseases? I answer, they were admonished by the Apostles, that they
might use the benefit of that special gift of healing, and that is manifest by
the words of Saint James. Secondly you ask, whether all Priests had the gift
of working miracles in the primitive Church? I answer, I cannot tell of every
one: but that in every Church some had the gift of healing, it is most
probable, in the Apostles time. And therefore Saint lames wills not one
Priest, but all the Priests or Elders of the Church, to be called for. But
against my first answer, you object that by like reason they were charged to
send for them to reuine the dead, and that to seek after miracles were to
tempt God. I reply, the gift of raising the dead, was very rare, insomuch as
we read but of two that were raised by the Apostles them selves, Tabytha by
Peter, and Eutycus by Paul. And Saint James wills not the Apostles, which
were not in all places hand, but the elders of the Church, which were in every
Christian congregation, to be sent for. Neither is it a tempting of God to
seek after miracles of healing, at their hands, to whom God has given that
gift. To your second objection, I answer, that albeit every Priest had not
that gift, whereof as I cannot affirm, so cannot you deny of certainty, yet
it is certain that in every congregation ofthe dispersed Jews, to whom (...)
writes, there were some that had that gift, as it is manifest by the promise
that he makes, that the prayer offaith shall give health to the sick man, and
the Lord shall raise him up. But howsoever it be, if there were any miracles
of healing, that had remission of sins joined to it, or to the external
creature, the Priests might by that office of that creature, heal a man of his
sins, which they affirm to be blasphemy, etc. I answer, Saint James his
words are plain, from whence remission of sins comes properly. The oil
was a seal of assurance, both of bodelie health, and of remission of sins,
with are the cause often times that man is visited which sickness and bodelie
infirmite, but not allwaies, as our savior Christ shows of the blind man:
therefore he says, if he have committed sin, it shall be forgiven, meaning if
he had this bodily infirmity laid upon him for some greiuos sin. For
otherwise there is no man but sins. and whom God may justly punish for his
sin, although he deal more mercifully, with his children, who though they
want not his fatherly chastisement, yet he does not always lay upon them the
cross of bodily affliction.


ALLEN. In the sacrament of baptism they will not stand with me openly: for
they will seem to acknowldge the forgiveness of sins thereby, and I think by
the Ministry of man to, though in their private schools, yea and in their
open blaspemoous books, the whole pack of Protestants and Zuinglians deny
that sacrament also to remit sins, both acknowledging that children may be
saved and be received to heaven without it, and auouching that sin remains
still in the children after their Christendom, though God will not impute the
same unto them for the hinderance of their salvation. Which false Doctrine is
the ground of their more subtle opinions touching only says, and imputed
justice, and other their pelting paradoxes concerning man's justification, which
I cannot now stand upon. Would God the ignorant sort of their followers could
see through the dunghill of this confuse Doctrine. For these have ever, besides
the flourish of their faith that they make abroad amongst fools, an other more
improbable which they keep for the strong ones at home, that will no more be
offended to hear the Turkish, then the christian faith. And so had the
Epicure, as Tullie teaches. For pleasure of the mind gathered by contentation
and contemplation of heavenly things was his chief God and extreme end of
his endeavors abroad, but his dearlinge^ at home had the pleasures of the
bodelie lusts, and wantonness for the end of all goodness.

Well, but I will reason with them upon the ground of their outward profession,
that baptism is a sacrament, in which truly sins be remitted by the
ministry of men, and without all dishonor of God, seeing it was Gods own
ordinance and appointment. But hear S. Ambrose again, I pray you,
encountering Ibidem.
in this matter with our men's masters: Cur baptisatis (says he) per hominem
peccata dimitti non licet? in baptismo vtique remissio peccatorum omnium est.
Quid interest, vtrum per poenitentiam, an per lauacrum hoc ius sibi datum
sacerdotes vendicent? vnum in vtroque ministerium est. Sed dices, quia in
lauacro operatur mysteriorum gratia: quid in poenitentia? non Dei nomen
operatur? Why do they baptize, if man may not remit sins? for surely in
Baptism all sins be remitted: and what difference (I beseech you) whether
Priests challenge this gift to be theirs in baptism, or in penance? The
ministry of man is like in both. But you will reply perchance, that in
baptism the grace of the ministeries works: And what works, I pray you,
in penance? Does not Gods name bring all to pass there also? Thus he. But
here, good reader, mark diligently in this doctoures words, as also in other
the like of all ancient Fathers, that penance is not here taken for any
virtue either moral, or theological, which is in a private man, when he
amendeth or changes his purpose, or former evil life to the better: whereof
there was some shade amongst the heathen, and is now both commended in
scripture, and given man by Christ's graces not only before the remitting of
the sacrament of baptism, if the party were in case of actual deadly sin,
but also goes alwaie, as a neccssary preparatiue, before sacramentali
confession, and is called in our tongue properly, repentance: this Doctor
therefore speaks not of this kind of penitence, but of a public act of the
Church, touching the reconciliation or repayring of man's state defiled after
his baptism by grievous crimes, in which by Priests judgment the sins
committed be either pardoned, or punished. And this must be called repentance
only, or the amendment of life, as Heretics do term it, to confound the
Doctrine of Gods truth and Sacraments: but it is an external and visible
act-on appointed by Christ in the 20. of Saint John, to reconcile sinners by
that form of absoluing, which the Church uses in the name and invocation of
God for that purpose. And therefore, having the grace of God and remission of
sins joined unto it by Christ's promise, it must needs be a sacrament, as
baptism is: which all the fathers do insinuate, when they make penance to be
one prescribed ordinance of Christ, to forgive sins no less then Baptism
is. Neither was it the preaching of the Gospel, nor the inward sorowfullnes or
repentance of former sins, that Nouatus did condemn: but it was the
sacrament of penance, and act of absolution, by the Priests ministry, which
he so much abhorred, and meant wickedlie to remove. For which cause as he was
justly condemned of heresy by the Roman and Nicen Councelles, so were you,
Master Protestants, both then in them, and since in your Masters, Wiclife,
Luther, Calvin, and the like, accused by Gods Church and Councels.


FVLKE. We will never grant, that baptism, or any sacrament does remit
sins properly: but God by sacraments ministered by man, does assure us, that
he does remit our sins. improperly, we may say the sacraments, and the
ministers of them do remit sins, because the one is the mouth of god, to
declare his sentence of forgiveness of our sins, the other are the seals of god,
to confirm our faith in his promises of remission of sins. To hold that the
children of Christian Parentss, in whom is no contempt or neglect of baptism,
cannot be saved, and received into heaven without it, is to abridge the power
of God, as though he could not give salvation without sacraments: neither has
he declared any necessity of his will to the contrary. For the text of John.
3. Except a man be borne again of water, and of the spirit, pertains not to
the external sacrament of baptism, more then the like saying of our savior
Christ John. 6. Except you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink hu
blood, you have no life in you, pertains to the sacrament of the Lords
supper.

That Original sin remains in the baptized, though it be not imputed to
the elect, both the scripture and our own experience teaches. Saint Paull did
see another law in his members, withstanding the law of his mind, and
bringing him captive under the law of sin, which is in his members. The
Doctrine of only faith iustifyng, Romans 7.
and of imputed justice, although they be the Doctrine Romans 3. 4.
of the holy Ghost, your blasphemous spirit calls, pelting paradoxes, as
your slanderous malice, not only imagines, but stoutly affirms, that we
have a secret Doctrine of Epicurisme, which we teach secretly to certain
strangers at home, etc. Whereof let God, who knows all secrets, be judge and
revenger. Your argument of remission of sins in baptism, confirmed by
testimony of Saint Ambrose, we grant, that it is no dishonor to God, that
man should remit sins, by that power which god has granted him. But whereas
in his words, you would have the good reader to mark, that poenitentia does
not signify repentance, but your popish sacrament of penance, I will desire
the good reader to mark the contrary. For Saint Ambrose by making objection
does plainly distinguish mysteriorum gratiam, which is in baptism, from
panitentia, in which is only the invocation of Gods name, or the name of God
aduouched, for assurance of remission of sins: which whether it be in the
solemn act of reconciling those which are open penitents, or in preaching: and
declaring remission of sins to al truly repentant sinners, it comes all to
one end. For there is not in that repentance mysterium gratiae, that is, a
promise, adjoined to an outward sacrament, which spirituallie works that,
which externallie it represents. Yet you say, there is an external and
visible action appointed by Christ 20. of Saint John. to reconcile sinners by
the form of absoluing, which the Church uses, etc. Here wants nothing, but
proof of that you say. Here such syllogismes, as you make at the end of
every Chapter, were necessary to demonstrate this conclusion. For we can see
no external or visible action inthese words, whose sins you retain they are
retained, and whose sins you remit, they are remitted, therefore no sacrament.
But all the fathers, you say, do insinuat the same, when they make penance
one prescribed ordinance of Christ, to forgive sins by, no less, then
baptism. I deny this argument, for every ordinance of Christ whereby sins
are forgiven, is not a sacrament. But it was not the preaching of the Gospel,
or repentance (say you) that Nouatus did condemn, but the sacrament of
penance, and act of absolution, by the Priests ministry. Epiphanius and
others do writ, that he denied remission of sins, to the that had fallen into
idolatry, after baptism, although they were repentant. Other more favorably
write of him, that he denied only the outward reconciling unto the Church, or
act of absolution by the priests ministry, for them that had so fallen. But
of the sacrament of penance, there is no mention in any ancient writer of
those, or much later times. Therefore Wiclif, Luther, Calvin, and we all do
subscribe to the ancient Churches condemnation of Nouatus for an heretic, and
his opinion for heresy.


ALLEN. The doctors therefore, as I have said, join lightly in talking of
remission of sins, Baptism, and penance, and some time extreme unction
also, that you need not doubt but they took them all three for sacraments
workeing remission of sins. For they do not talk of inward repentance, but
of an action solemnly exercised in Gods Church, whereof the priest, as you
hear by Saint Ambrose and Saint Chysostome, is the minister. And therefore
Epiphanius says, that the Church has two penances, one for an other,
insinuating thereby, the double act of the Church and sacrament, whereby sins
be remitted. As Saint Augustine also says by the Nouatians, quod poenitentiam
denegant, that they deny penance. By Here Is. 38. Lib. 4. Cap. 30. de Sap.
which penance, Lactantius teaches us also a way to discern the true Church
from the false, as in which there is both confession and penance for the
healing of man's frailty. Whereby it is evident, that this penance which they
speak of, was an usual ceremony, and holy sacrament of the Church, whereby
sins were remitted.


FVLKE. Such a sacrament, such arguments: the Doctorsioyne lightly in talking
of remission of sins, baptism, and penance, and sometime extreme unction:
Therefore you need not doubt that they took them all three for sacraments. And
yet you have not brought one Doctor, that speaks of extreme unction. For
Chrysostom speaks of the effect of prayer made by the priest, to obtain
remission of sins, although the gift of healing be ceased in the Church. And
it is manifest that Saint James speaks not of extreme unction, which you
minister to none, but such as are ready to die, when he promises restitution
of health to the diseased that were anointed in those days. Again his unction
was only with oil, yours is with I cannot tell what slibbersauce consecrated
by the Bishop. That anointing was not extreme, when it might be repeated, as
sickness might often take hold of men. Yours is not extreme, it may be
repeated: if it may not be repeated, it is not the unction that S. James
speaks of Of the sayings of Epiphanius, and Lactantius, we have spoken
before, which it were needeles here to repeat. That there was a ceremony used
in reconciling of public penitents, I deny not: but that there was a
sacrament of penance, you have hitherto brought no good evidence. For your
argument to prove, that they talk not of inward repentance, but of an action
solemnly exercised, because we hear that the priest is minister, is no good
evidence: for the priest is minister of the word, as well as of the sacraments.


ALLEN. Which truth Saint Cyrill utters most plainly for our purpose,
treating thus upon the words of institution of this sacrament: Cum
ipsiremittunt aut detinent, spiritus qui habitat in eis, per ipsosremittit aut
detinet: fit autem id duobus In 20. 10. Sermon. de nupt. Christ.
modis: primum, Baptism, deinde, Poenitenita. When the priests remit sins,
or retain them, the holy ghost which which dwells in them does remit or
retein by them. Which is done two manner of ways: first in Baptism, and then
afterward in penance. Saint Cyprian also said, that the holy ghost works
remission of sins, whether it be in baptism, or by other sacraments. Whereby
he cleerelie utters his meaning, that there should be more sacraments then
one, instituted by Christ for that purpose. In all which congruitie of Gods
holy working, by diverse sacraments, the remission of sins, we conclude
against heresy, that the priesis power herein, derogateth no more to god nor
our savior, in the sacrament of penance, then is does before by baptism, or
after by extreme unction: in none of al which, as I have proved before,
Christ does resign his power and proper jurisdiction to the priests, but
continuing everlastingly in like pre-eminence and power as before, works his
grace and remission of sins, in all these Sacraments, by the priests service
and ministry, that it maybe yet as truly, as in his life time said, and so
shall be to the worlds end, Christ baptizeth, Christ shriueth, assoileth, and
anointeth sinners, for remission of their offenses: Although Jesus does none of
these now, nor much did in his life time, but his disciples then, and his
disciples now, do the same holy actions in his name.


FVLKE. There is nothing in Saint Cyrills words to prove that there is a
sacrament of repentance beside baptism but that the holy ghost does remit or
retain by his ministers by two ways, namely by baptism, and by repentance
after baptism. For if you will restrain the word poenitentia, to your
pretended sacrament, then this absurdity will follow, that seeing there are
but two ways by which the spirit remitteth sins, they are not remitted
without that sacrament, neither by true contrition of heart without any
sacrament, not by receiving the Lords supper, nor by your extreme unction.
Therefore poenitentia in Saint Cyrill signifies repentance, and is
necessarily required in them, that shall obtain remission of sins by
participation of the Lords supper, or by faith without any sacrament. That
Cyprian makes more sacraments then one, instituted by Christ, to assure us of
remission of sins, it is true. For by the sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ worthelie received, we have this assurance also, as well as by the
sacrament of baptism. To conclude, the power of Christ or of his ministers,
granted by him, we deny not, but the institution of the sacrament of penance
we require, to be showed out of the holy scriptures, if you will have us to
believe it.


ALLEN. To conclude this matter, I argue thus. It is no dishonor to God for
the priest to remit sins, as well original as actual, of all sorts and
gravity in the sacrament of Baptism, by the Protestants own confession, nor
by extreme unction, by the warrant both of scripture and Doctors: Ergo,
remission of sins is not unlawful, nor dishonorable to God, to be given by
the priest in the solemn sacrament of penance. And further I join with them
thus: The word of God is much more plain and express for the priests warrant
to remit sins in penance, then in Baptism: but they may lawfully do it in
Baptism, Ergo they may do it no less lawfully in penance. Compare the
words of institution of them both, and judge your selves of your indifferency
and sincerity, by what right you remove the one, and retain the other. I
pray God, you seek not shortelie to baptize us only by your preaching, as
you now will only absolve us by the same. But truly, I think you be in the
case that Saint Ambrose took Nouatus your forefather to have been in, not
only for that, that he says, Nouatus where he listed would admit power to
priests of remission: But Vbi supra
where he listed not, there the grace given to them must be dishonored to God.
So that of things equally commended by scripture, and commanded by God, the
good man must have choice for his tooth, not only in this point, I now
compare our choice men, but much more in that which follows in the said
Saint Ambrose of all Nouatians, whom he trippeth pretelie with this term,
delicati mei: My delicate gentlemen (says he) with their lusty looks, and
swelling hearts, can not abide in their bravery to look upon a poor caitisse
weeping for his sins abundantly, apparelled mourninglie, in sad and
sorrowful company, and so forth. And this surely is the disease of our days,
which has not only infected the unfaithful, but also has made these holy
things loathsome even to the better sort of Gods people. So much is man's will
and pleasure pampered, where Gods word and writing should be only followed.
For the necessary bearing with such frailty, even of the good, almost
generally, the Church of God has sought and allowed much more gentle
remedies, then the world had wont full gladly to bear for their grievous
sins.


FVLKE. We confess that it is no dishonor to God, that the minister,
lawfully authorized, should remit sins in such sort as he has commission,
namely by declaring the will of God, that they are by him remitted, and giving
the seals or sacraments of God for more full assurance of performance, as even
the Master. of the sentences teaches out of S. Augustine, and other Doctors,
whose words I will set down, that the indifferent Lib. 4. did. 18.
reader may see, how you agree with your own principal pillar and post of
Popery, who in this point, seems to be more sound yet then you. Cum
veraciter de bapt. contr. Don. lid. 6.
ad Deum conuerso, peccata dimittuntur, ab iis dimittuntur quibus ipse veraci
conuersione coniungitur. Spiritus sanctus ea dimittit, qui datus est omnibus
sanctis sibi charitare cohaer entibus, sieve se nouerint corporaliter, sieve non.
Similiter cum alicuius tenentur peccato, ab eis tenentur, quibus ille cordis
prauitate disiungitur, sieve notis corporaliter, sieve ignotis. Omnes enim mali
spiritualiter a bonis seiuncti sunt Ecce hic dicit peccata dimitti vel teneri a
sanctis viris: and tamen spiritum sanctum ea dimittere dicit: and quod maiori
consideratione dignum est, idem etiam dicit, quod Deus per se vel per sanctos
suos, tantum dimittit peccata, ait enim sic: sacramentum gratiae dat Deus etiam
per malos, ipsam vero gratiam non nisi per seipsum vel pcr sanctos suos, and
ideo remissionem peccatorum, vel per seipsum facit, velper ipsius columbae
membra, quibus ait: si quibus dimiseritis, aimittentur. Ecce quam varia a
doctoribus traduntur super his, and in hactanta varietate quid tenendum? Hoc
sane discere and sentire possumus, quod solus Deus dimittit peccata and
retinet, and tamen Ecclesiae contulit potestatem ligands and soluendi: Sed
aliter ipse soluit vel ligat, aliter Ecclesia Ipse enim per se tantum dimittit
pecca tum, quia enim animam mundat ab interiore macula, and a debito aeternae
mortis soluit. Non autem hoc sacerdotibus concessit, quibus tamen tribuit
potestatem soluendi and ligandi: id est, ostendendi homines ligatos vel solutos
vnde Dominus leprosu^ sanitati prius per se restituit, deinde ad sacerdotes
misit, quorum iudicio ostenderetur mundatus. When sins are forgiven to him
that is truly turned to God, they are forgiven by them, to whom he him self
by true conversion is joined. The holy ghost forgiueth them, which is given to
all the Saints, which are knit together in charity, whether they know one
another corporally or not. Likewise when any man's sins are retained, they
are retained by them, from whom, he is disioyned by prauitie of heart, whether
they be corporally known or unknown. For all evil men are spirituallie
separated from good men. Behold here he says, that sins are forgiven or
retained by the Saints or holiemen: Ana'yet he says, that the holy ghost does
forgive them, and that which is worthy of greater consideration, the same
Doctor also says: that God by himself or by his Saints only remittesh
sins. For thus he says, The sacrament of grace god gives even by euilmen,
but grace it self, not but by himself he causes, or by the members of that
dove, to whom, he says if to any ye shall forgive, they shall be forgiven.
Behold how diverse things are delivered by the Doctors, concerning these
matters, and in this so great variety what is to be holden? This truly, we
may say and think, that only God forgiueth sins and reteineth, and yet he
has given power to the Church of binding and loosing, but otherwise does he
him self bind and loose, otherwise the Church. For he him self by him self
only forgiueth sin, because both he clensith the soul from the inward spot,
and looseeh from the debt of eternal death. But this he has not granted to
the priests, to whom notwihstanding, he has given power of binding and
loosing, that is to say, of declaring men to be bound or loosed, whereupon our
Lord did first by him seifere store the Leper to health, asterwards sent him to
the priests, by whose judgment he might be declared to be cleansed. Thus
writes the Master of the sentences, with more to this effect.

In your second argument brought to prove, that penance is a sacrament, I
deny the Antecedent, that there is any words of institution, to prove your
sacrament of penance. Where you fear vainlie, least we will shortly seek to
baptize by preaching, as we will absolve you only by the same, you declare
nothing, but your hard conceit of us. For we are old enough to know the
difference of the ministry of the word, and the sacrament a sunder. To
compare us with Nouatus, either in the one point, or in the other, you have no
cause in the world, but your own malicious and slanderous humor. For we do
not admit the power of remission where we list, but wheresoever God has
granted it, and in what manner soever, he has appointed it to be exercised.
We are ready to receive the public penitents, that with plenty of tears and
other outward signs, do testify the inward sorrow of their hearts, conceived
for their grievous and notorious sins. Yea we receive them, whose offenses
being not openly known, do nevertheless secretly bewail their sins. And
therefore that you say of pampering man's will, and pleasure, where Gods word
and writing should be only followed, seek among your own sect, where it may
take place. For sins openly committed, or known to be committed, we hold
that they ought with open confession to be chastised, for satisfying the
Church, that is offended by them: As for sins committed in secret, whereby
our neighbor is neither hurt nor offended, it is sufficient that they be
acknowledged, with hearty repentance before god, if the offenders conscience
be not troubled with further doubtfulnes about them. In which case we hold
that it is convenient, that he should consult with the learned minister, for
his further comfort and satisfaction, out of the word of God, concerning the
remission of his sins.


ALLEN. And therefore the manner and order of Penance has bin diverse in
sundry ages and countries: sometimes solemn, which could be but once taken in all a man's life sometimes not solemn, but yet open and public, which might be
iterated, as ofien as man's mortal sins so required: other times private
only, betwixt the priest and the penitent: which is now used, and long has
been, in a manner gencrallie thorough the wholl world. Of all which
diversities we will not now entreat, nor for our matter the consideration of
them is virie needful, seeing that in all sorts, and in every of the sundry
forms of doing penance this is a most firm principle, that the penitent had
remission of sins, for which he did penance, no otherwise but by the
ministry of the Priests. Therefore the substance of the matter being one, of
the diversity of use, and circumstances which may be according to the time
and manners of men altered, we need not much to care. Baptism was once used
with solemnity, at two or three principal feasts of the year, for the time
so required then, and the condition of the people, yet the same sacrament of
Baptism ministerea'now priuatlie as occasion serves by the birth of every
child, is of the same force and grace now, that it was then. Wherein to
reprehend the wisdom of Gods Church, that is assuredly ruled by the spirit of
God, is overmuch wantonness of will, and sedition not tolerable.


FVLKE. There has been diverse manners and orders appointed for the
punishment of sins, and for trial of the offenders true repentance and
conversion unto god: but all these prove not any sacrament of penance. The
manner which the Popish Church does use in the exercise of this pretensed
sacrament, is partly tyrannical, while you enforce men to confess their secret
sins, to a popish Priest, where of there is no commandment in the holy
scriptures, and partly it is an encouragement unto security, and a pampering
in sin, while the frail and foolish man is persuaded, that by the heard
confession and absolution received of the Priest, he is cleerelie discharged of
his sins, and may be toti es quoties, with a little pretty penance enjoined
him for satisfaction. But it is a firm principle (you say) that in all forms
of penance, the penitent had remission of his sins, for which he did penance,
no otherwise but by the ministry of the Priests. A heavy case where the
Priests were straight laced, and would retain sins, where God was ready to
forgive. What is this else, but to restrain the mercy of God to the ministry
of unskillful men. At what hour so ever the sinner does truly repent, the
Lord remitteth his sins. But man can not allwaies see, or by outward tokens
judge of true and inward repentance. Therefore it is a firm principle, that
God often times forgave sins to the penitent, otherwise then by the
ministry of the Priest. Men may err in exercising outward discipline, but
Gods remission is not stayed upon man's error. Where you conclude that as the
diverse use of baptism hinders not, but that in substance it is the same: so
the sacrament of penance, notwithstanding the diverse forms, and manners, in
which it has or is now used, Your comparison is naught. For baptism is a
sacrament of Christ's institution, your popish penance can never be proved to
be a sacrament. Therefore your argument a paribus is of no force. Whether the
Church did well to restrain baptism to certain solemn feasts, I will not
here dispute.


That remission of sins has been joined often, both in the law of nature
and Moses, to some external ceremonies and sacrifices, whereof in the old law
Priests were appointed ministers.

THE NINTH CHAP.
LEt no man, upon consideration of these things, either reprehend or maruatle
at the counsel and ordinance of god, Fxternal sacraments or deined and man's
ministry used for good causes.
that he being hable to govern his creatures, and amend or correct, pardon or
punish every man's misdeedes by himself, without all help and service of
any other his subject natures, that it pleases his wisdom for all that, to
forgive sins no otherwise in his Church, but by external orders joined to
man's ministry in sundry sacraments. In sober consideration of these
things, man's reason may well be satisfied, if he can conceive, that it is the
honor and estimation of our kind with almighty God our maker, that he
governs not our affairs only by him self in his own person, but also
that we be ruled and led in the ways of Gods will, by one an other: that the
majesty of God, which most appears in regiment, and in remitting of sins,
in correcting of (...) and judgment, might be cleerelie seen in our kind
amongst our selves, to our comfort, and Gods no disgracing nor dishonor at
all. And therefore Saint Augustine says of the like doubt of some in his
days, which would not be taught by man, but by Gods own spirit: Abiecta esset
humana conditio, si per homines hominibus In prefa. de doct. Christ.
verbum suum Deus ministrare nolle videretur. Quomodo enim verum esset, quod
dictum est: Templum enim Dei sanctum est quod estis vos, si de humano templo
Deus responsa non redderet? Man's state were too base, if God would not, that
his word should be ministered by one man to another. For how should this truly
be spoken: the temple of God is holy, the which temple you are, if God gave
not answers by man's temple? This is one great respect surely, especialle since
the second person in Trinity took upon him our nature. by whom the
woorthines of mankind is much increased, and more fit then ever before to
serve each other, as in the works that be divine, and properly by nature
belonging to God himself. An other respect why we should by external
sacraments and man's ministry receive grace and remission of sins, is the
singular respect had by God of our infirmity, as well of mind, as body. For
the mind requires in her assured deserving of damnation some external token,
by which she may have good cause to hope of mercy and grace. For where I know
and assure myself that original sin is remitted by baptism, when I have
once received the same, then I am in no further doubt of my self nor any
damnation for that sin, which by the promis of God I have learned, shall be
washed away thereby, as by an external instrument in which he conueigheth
that benefit to my soul, if my soul by indisposition and unaptnes do not
hinder the assured fruit thereof: So where after Baptism man's life is often
defiled by greeuons sins, and God highly displeased therefore, what an
infinite treaskre it is, and how great a comfort to have an assured help
thereof, wrought so by man's ministry in a visible action. that I may know
(saving for mine own lack of connenient disposition) my sins to be forgiven,
and Gods mercy and favor to be obtained again. We may conceive easily what
a passing comfort it was to the parties that heard sensibly, by the outward
words of Christ's own mouth, thy sins be forgiven thee. The said persons
believing in Christ, and lamenting for their sins past, might have had some
hope of remission by Christ, though he had said no such thing unto them: yet he
that perceives not, what comfort of conscience, what inward joy of mind, what
rejoicing of the spirit they must needs have, that had Christ's testimony and
blessing in plain terms, for the same purpose, he sees nothing at all.

FVLKE. That God has used in all ages, to testify and assure men, of his
grace and mercy, to the forgiveness of their sins, by outward signs, and
sacraments, and that for diverse good causes, we are allwaies ready to
acknowledge. But that it pleases his wisdom, (as you say) to forgive sins
no otherwise in his Church, but by external orders joined to man's ministry,
in sundry sacraments, we do utterly deny. For that were to tie the grace of
God to the outward sacraments, which is most free to work, either with them or
without them. The penitent publicane, an example of persons, that seek Luke 18.
justification, had his sins forgiven him, by the only grace and mercy of
God, taken hold of by faith, without al external orders, joined to man's
ministry in any sacrament. For if we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
And Jesus Christ is our advocate 1. Ioh. 1. a. and 5.
with the father, to obtain remission of sins. And if any man shall see his
brother sin a sin not to death, he shall ask, and he will give life unto
him that sins not unto death. By all which testimonies, and an hundredth
more, that are every where to be found in the scripture, it is most clear,
that God forgiueth our sins otherwise, then by external orders or sacramets.
Again the sacrament of Baptism is a seal and assurance unto us of the
forgiveness of our sins, not only such as are com mitted before baptism
received, but even unto our lives end, whenever we are truly penitent for
the same. Also the sacrament of the Lords supper in which we are spirituallie
fed with the body of Christ, which was given for us, and with his blood, which
was shed for the remission of our sins, is a sure pledge, token, and seal of
the remission of our sins committed after baptism, that we need not the
Popish sacrament of penance for the same.


ALLEN. As for my self good Christian Reader, I am not so free from sin, woe
is me therefore, nor so void of man's affection, but as often I hear in the
sacrament of penance the Priest, who to me then is Christ in full power of
pardoning, saying the words of absolution over me, me think truly I hear
the sweet voice of Christ saying with authority: thy sins be forgiven thee.
Whereof no mortallman shall ever forbid me to take hope and singular trust of
remission of sins with the passing comfort that thereon ensues. All these
that are without Christ's fold, seek not to hear his voice, for all their
load of sin, from the heavenly and entire joy whereof they be as far, as
from the conceiving of of the felicity to come in heaven it self. But let
them assure themselves, that Christ writes with his holy finger all their
sins, though to Christ they will not now confess them, whiles they refuse
the power ofremission that he both had, and has in earth to the worlds end:
without which outward solemn act of penance, man should either despair of
Gods mercy, and live in fear intolerable of everlasting perishing, which
often fall to timorous consciences: or else, which is now of days more common,
men would live in such passing presumption, and vain security of heaven, that
they should never, till the very last breath of their evil time, either be
sorry for sin, or seek to do any good work at al.

This time shall testify with me herein, and the very diversity that is
between these our corrupt conditions and the holy studies and endeauours of
our forefathers shalltestifie: but the days that yet are to come must need,
most feel the smart of it, when these that now have the direction of other
men's steps shall be gone, by whom for old discipline, wherein they were
brought up. Some signs and remnantes of virtue be continued in the world. For
when they be spent, and our yonkers that never heard of the Churches
discipline, but have had their full swinge in sin, with the instruction of a
most wanton doctrine, shall be the principal of the people, if this division
so long continue (which God forbid) into what terms shall truth and virtue be
then brought? Me think I see before hand the lamentable state of things, and in
a manner behold the fruit of our only faith, of this bold presumption of
Gods mercy, of removing the discipline of penance, of refusing the only
ordinance of God for remission of our mortal sins. Evil are we now, but a
thousand parts worsse shall they be then, which in long nouseling in this
naughty learning of liberty shall be in perpetual woe, and have no feel nor
sense thereof. And all this must needs follow upon the lack of these outward
acts and external ways of pardoning and punishing offenses, and intended
either for man's present comfort and solace, or else to keep in awe the wantons
of the world by the rod of outward discipline, which in the Church has ever
especially been observed in the sacrament of penance.


FVLKE. When we hear the authorized ambassadors and messengers of
reconciliation, pronounce in the name of Christ, according to the scriptures,
and promises of God, that our sins are forgiven us, whenever we be heartily
sorry and truly penitent for the same, we have sufficient warrant out of Gods
word, to assure our selves of remission of them, with inestimable joy and
comfort of conscience. But for the sacrament of penance, or the Priest to be
Christ unto us, in fullpower of pardoning, or to have any words of absolution
said over us, because we have no ground in Gods word, whatsoever imaginary
pleasure you have therein, we find nothing that is of force to stay a weak
conscience, to comfort a troubled spirit, or to heal a broken heart. To
confess our sins to Christ, who only knows whether our repentance be
unfeigned, God forbid, that we should refuse. But to confess them to a Popish
Priest, or any lawful minister, if they be secret, there is no law or
commandment of God to require us. If our conscience be not satisfied, about
any offense that we have committed, how we should declare our unfeigned
conversion, or repentance, we may use the advice of the Godly and learned
pastor, who is able out of the word of god toresolue our doubts and quiet our
conscience. That the want of Popish penance will drive all men, either to
desperation, or security and presumption, it is affirmed, without any proof.
God be praised, experience cries out of the contrary side. But rather the
doctrine of popery concerning the pretensed sacrament of penance, is manifest
occasion of security, in them that are carnally minded; of desperation, in
them that have a tender conscience. For the one thinks he has an easy remedy
for his sins to discharge them into a priests ear: the other considering
the impossibility of confession, and insufficiency of the satisfaction, that
be parts of this counterfeit sacrament, can find small comfort in the priests
absolution. Your blasphemous railing at the doctrine of God justifying by faith
only, which you call the instruction of a most wanton doctrine, and the
naughty learning of liberty, is sufficiently confuted by the examples of many
thousands of Gods Saints, who acknowledging that they are justified in the
sight of God, by faith only in the merits of Christ, are more fruitful in
good works, then all the popish hypocrites in the world. Where you term your
popish penance to be the only ordinance of god, for remission of our mortal
sins, you utter not only a gross contradiction of the truth taught in the
holy scriptures, but also directly contrary to the doctrine of all Papists,
and even of your self. For what say you, M. Allen, were you well advised, when
you said, that penance is the only ordinance of God for remission of our
mortal sins: If it be as you say, then the sacrifice of the mass is not the
ordinance of God for remission of our mortal sins, as al Papists beside you
do hold and mantaine: and extreme unction, whereof you have lately affir med
the contrary, is not the ordinance of God for the remission of our mortal
sins. The discipline of the Church, whereby wantons are kept in awe, is not
excluded by remoouing the sacrament of penance, which is neither the discipline
of the Church, nor the power of re mission of sins granted to the ministers of
the Church.


ALLEN. It were too teadious, further to declare, how these external means of
working inward grace and remission of sins, be necessary for the outward
man, which is sometimes refreshed, otherwhiles bridled, by things answerable,
as well outwardly to the body, as inwardly to the mind. It is needless
also to treat at large, how it is necessary for the one and visible common
wealth of Christ's Church, to agree together in all points thereof, and be
notoriously known from all other sects and sorts of peoples, that do not
profess Christ's name, by the outward practice of all holy functions, by
which God has promised to give grace, remission, and sanctification to all his
faithful subjects. All these considerations with many the like may serve and
satisfy the quiet peaceable children of Christ's Church, that have learned to
rest in Christ's ordinance, though the causes thereof be not to them opened.

As for other, that are ever doubting, and never settelledin their faith, that
always be learning, and yet never attain 2. Tim. 3.
to knowledge: that had rather understand much, then believe a little, such
fellows I must not so much instruct, as by the scriptures and examples of all
ages, controlle and confound, if I may. Let them therefore be charged, that
God has not only used from the creation of man to bring up al people that
serve him, in some especial ways of outward worshipping, but has also, these
many worlds, delivered man from original and actual sins, by external
sacraments and sacrifices, not without the priests especial procurement and
ministry therein. What did circumcision instituted by God in the law of
nature, commanded to Abraham and his seed, and continued so many ages, even
till Christ's law took place? Did it not after a sort remit sins? Was it
any other thing, but an external work in the face of the world? Was it
ministered by man? Did it derogate any thing to the honor of God, which by
himself for his own glory and namesake was ordained? And afterward in the
law of Moses, which did draw near unto Christian vsages, by many actions of
sacrifices and solemn rites instituted purposelie to represent and foreshew
the state of our present Church, there we have plain proof of certain
outward orders instituted for procuring remission and pardon of sins: not
without especial mention of the priests ministry in every of the said
actions. Whereof Saint Paul speaks to the Hebrews, in these words: Omnia
pene in sanguine mundari, ac sine sanguinis effusione non esse remissionem.
That all things Cap. 9.
were in a manner cleansed by blood, and that no remission could be had without
blood. For so in the 17. of Leuiticus, they were charged to abstain from
drinking of blood: Leuit. 17.
because, sanguis animalium propiaculo est, the blood of beasts stood for an
expiation and cleaning of sins. And therefore, amongst the diverse orders of
sacrifice, mentioned Cap, 4.
in the said book of their ceremonies, there be diverse express ways by
sacrifice to purge men's sins: some for the Priests sins, other for the
Princes, and the third for the common peoples offenses. And one wait for their
sins committed of ignorance, an other for crimes wittinglie done. Finally
some for thoughts, and other some for evil deeds, with many mo diversities,
as you may see in the said book. In all which it is ever expressed, that the
Priest is not only the minister in the said sacrifice (as needs must be) but
also, with offering of the said oblations for sin, that he must make prayer
especially for the offenders, and every of them severally, that God may
pardon them of that sin, for which they offer their sacrifice. For allwaies
after the form and manner of offering be prescribed, according to the
diversity of the peoples offenses, it is added. Rogabitque pro eo sacerdos,
and pro peccato eius, and dimittetur ei. And the Priest shall pray for him, and
for his sin, and it shall be forgiven him. And again, Agat poenitentiam pro
peccato, and offerat de gregibus agnam sieve capram, orabitque pro ea sacerdos,
and pro peccatis eius. Let the soul do penance, and offer a kidde of the
flock, or an ewe lamb, and so the priest shall pray for that soul and the
sins thereof.


FVLKE. That the ministry of man in all ages of the Church and external
sacraments, have been instituted of God, as well for the exercise os men in
his worship, as for the assurance of remission of their sins, it is evermore
confessed of us, and that now also the like be ordained since the coming of
Christ in the flesh. Where fore your long discourse to prove, that we never
denied, is vain, except you mean it against the Anabaptists, Libertines,
Swinkfeldians, and such other condemned heretics. That in all the sacrifices
of the law that were appointed for sin, the priest is ordained the minister
not only to offer the sacrifice, but also by prayer to obtain remission of
sins, it must be referred unto the only high Priest, whereof the Jewish
Priesthood sacrifices, aultars, etc. were sacramental figures, and shadows.
And therefore by that the Priests had then to do according to the law, you do
unfitly gather, that the like is to be done by Priests under the Gospel. For
that Jewish priesthood, is wholly translated unto our savior Christ, who has
it perpetual and without any passing from him to others. The ministry of the
Gospel has no sacrifices to offer for sins, but to preach the only
sacrifice of Christ's death, and the propitiation of our sin by him, and
thereof to assure our infirmity more plentifully, to deliver unto us the
seals of our justification by faith, instituted by God, the sacraments of
baptism, and the Lords supper.


ALLEN. All which, does not only couuince, that Gods will was, that remission
of sins should be had, by external sacrifices, penance and oblation, and
that not otherwise, but by the priests mediationn, but also that there was an
order even then often in the old law, that man should utter his sins, with
the greuousnes thereof and circumstances, that according to the difference of
the faults the diversity of sacrifices and expiation might be used, and that
the priest severally might pray for the remission thereof. In all which
doing, I will not now dispute, whether a carnal Jew that then had no further
respect: but to the present observation of those commanded Ceremonies and
sacrifices, did obtain thereby remission of sins, by which the soul is
reconciled to God: or else only a freedom from some temporal punishment due
to the same by law amongst the people, or otherwise by Gods appointment: but
most sure it is, that the spiritual sort, which from those sacrifices did
not separate, but include Christ's blood, in respect whereof, all their
sacrifices had their force, though not so full as ours now have, nor with
August. supra Number. 25. and Leo sermon. 3. de nati. Domini.
so ample promise of Gods grace: yet sure it is, that they by faith in Christ,
and yet not without those observations, which it was necessary that they
should then keep, were sanctified and purged verily from their sins, nor
without the ministry of the priest, whose prayer and sacrifice was requisite
for the same purpose.

Neither were all external ways of Gods worship and remission of sins,
abrogated by the Gospel, as some do falselie feign, but, to the external
elements, that now even in the new law be instituted for grace and remission of
sins, Gods favor is given and granted a great deal more fully, and
sanctification more plentifully. For else, let us with penance reject baptism,
and other ways of Gods service, that be not only internal, and separated
wholly from outward elements of water, bread, wine, imposition of hands, oil
and such like: which if they dare not do, how can they anouch, that God
remitted not sins by external sacraments? or, not by the hands of
priesthood? seeing without that order, none of these holy acts can be duly
ministered. Seeing then that almighty God of his passing wisdom and careful
providence toward man, has remitted sins in all ages, as by the ministry
of man in outward solemn ceremonies, as by circumcision in the law of nature,
and by the same in Moses government, besides many other sacrifices used and
commanded for diverse sins actual both greater and less: how can it be
otherwise, but there should be sacraments ordained in the new law: first for
remitting of original sins, and other of all sorts at our, first entrance
into Christ's house, and then an other, for more grievous actual offenses
committed by relapse after baptism? For else the law should not fully in
figure fore show the truth, and great grace of our sacraments to come, whereof
lightly, by Gods appointment it did bear a plain and express resemblance.


FVLKE. All this does convince, that there was an order, that man should
confess and acknowledge his sins before God, but not in auricular confession
to the Priests, but by the open act of sacrifising. As for the uttering with
the greeuousnes thereof, and the circumstances whereby you would make a
resemblance of your popish shrift, you find not in the law any thing, by
analogy whreof you might commend it. Diverse kinds of sacrifice indeed were
appointed for diverse states and persons of me, as for the high Priest, the
whole congregation, the Prince, or the private man, but no difference in the
same state, or kind of men, of sins, with the grieuousnes and circumstances
thereof. Leu. 4. Nevertheless by faith in Christ, those sacrifices were seals
and assurances unto the godly, of remission of their sins, as full as ours,
and with as ample promise of Gods grace, as concerning the effect, which was
the salvation of their souls, but not with so full, ample, or clear
declaration, of the effectual means thereof as we have. The ceremonies of the
law were abrogated by the Gospel, not that we should be without all
ceremonies, but that in stead of the multitude of dark, and obscure figures,
the goodness of god has bound the society of the Christian people, with
sacraments, in number the feewest, in observation the easiest, in signification
the most excellent, as baptism the sacrament of regeneration, and the Lords
supper, the sacrament of heavenly and spiritual nourishment, and preservation
in the same state, of the children of God, into which we are sacramentally
incorporated by baptism, the only perpetual sacraments, commended and
commanded in the new Testament, and which comprehend in them, the whole
mystery of the dispensation of God, for our eternal salvation, by which is
sealed up unto us, the doctrine of the remission of all our sins, committed
either before baptism or after, and of that natural corruption, wherein we
are al borne and conceived, which we call original sin.


ALLEN. But besides these for said sacrifices, in which sins were after their
manner remitted, there was another usual act practiced by the Priests, which
did more properly prefigur at and represent our sacrament of penance, and the
Priests authority in the new law, concerning the judgment of our souls, and
the exact discussing of our misdeedes. For neither circumcision nor sacrifice
of old had any face of power iudiciarie, and therefore could not exactlie
represent our Priests power given them by Christ, for the judgment of our
sin. But the authority given them by the law to discern, shut up, and
seperat the leprous and unclean persons, from other the clean of the people,
did plainly represent our sacrament of penance: whereunto by the Doctors it is
often resembled, wherein order is taken the 13. and 14. of Leuiticus, the
authority and practice Leuit. 13. and 14.
thereof being often allowed by our Master Christ, who observed the laws so
humbly therein, that he always, after be had healed any such separated
persons, sent them for all that to the Priests afterward, to offer their
oblations prescribed by the law for the same.

And that this power pronouncing the leapers to be sound or sore, to be
separated or admitted to the company of the faithful; did represent the power
of priesthood, concerning the leprosy of our souls, not only S Bid, but S.
Chryso also does declare. For he talking of confession of sins to the Priest,
writes thus: Quamuis leprae immunditiam iuxtalegem sacerdoti pandamus, atque
ad eius arbitrium qualiter and quanto tempore iusserit, purificari curemus. The
uncleanness of the more grievous leprosy (he means deadly sin) let us open
to the Priest, and according to his arbitrament, howsoever he commands us,
let us seek to purify our selves. And. S Jerome: Quomodo ergo ibi leprosum
sacerdos mundum vel immundum fecit, sic and hic alligat, vel soluit Episcopus
and presbyter, non eos qui insontes sunt velnoxy, sed pro officio suo cum
peccate rum audierit varietates, scit qui ligandus sit, quine soluendus. Look
therefore (says he) how the Priest makes there in the old law a person
clean or unclean, so here does the Bishopor Priest bind or loose, not
binding the innocent, nor loosing the guilty: but when he has heard the
variety and diversity of our sins, then he knows, whom to loose, and
whom to bind. This place is very plain for confession and distinct rekening
of every of our mortal sins. The which the holy Doctor proves to be
necessary, because else the Priest of God could not do justice in punishing
and pardoning, but should of ignorance either bind the good, or loose the
wicked. In which case almighty God that knows exactlie the worthiness and
vnworshines of all persons, will not allow the Priests sentence that did
proceed of ignorance, but will himself give judgment according to the partics
deserving. For the Priest is but a minister of his sacrament, and not the Lord
and instituter thereof he must therefore conform himself to Gods will, whose
place he there occupies. For as the Priest in the old law could not make the
clean person to be unclean, no more can the Priest of the new law bind the
innocent, or absolve the person that continues in sin. Nevertheless the
Priest works more properly under god, touching the remission of sins,
because he is appointed the minister of grace and reconciliation, then the
Priest in the old law. For there in the making of any man whole of the
leprosy, or other uncleanness, the Priest had not to do at all, but only when
one was made whole by god, it was the priests office to discern the same, to
show it unto the people, and to admit him again into the fellowspip of
theresidue, after oblation made for that purpose. For to them it was not said,
whome-soeuer you punish with leprosy, or make unclean, or whome-soeuer you
heal and make clean, he shall be whole: no such promise was made unto them. For
it was enough, that it might represent and have resembling of our sacrament of
penance, and of the maruelouse authoritte given in the new law to our Priests,
concerning the remission of sins. For to ours it was not said, you shall
discern whom I have loosed already in heaven, and show to the world whom I
have retained bound, or not forgiven in heaven: but, as Hilarie says, the
Priests sentence is made prejudicial to God in heaven, not the Priests
forgiving is first, and then Gods afterward, as two distinct actions in time,
but because the Priests, is prius quoad nos, as the Philosophers do term
such things, and by the Priests work, which is plain to us, we straight
come to the knowledge of Gods like work of remission in heaven, which is prius
natura, because Gods action is the principal, and man's must necessarily depend
thereon. But eis both Gods work and man's run jointly together in remission of
sins, as al infirmental and secondarie causes never make a several action from
the principal, but they concur jointly to every effect, as it is most plain in
all sacraments, whereby god works grace, the which grace as it proceeds
from god, so it comes by man's service, not by distinct operation of the
principal, and the serving and secondarie causes, but in one work and
undivided operation of them both. For in baptism God works the remission of
original or actual sins first, and then sends the party to the fount
afterward, that the Priest therein may declare what god has wrought before, or
to work the same again, that so the party might have a double grace of
remission, first by Ggd, and then by the Priest: for that were foolish to
surmise. But god by the Priests ministry and the sacrament does rewit sins
so, that the action hereof, at once sitly may fall upon them both.


FVLKE. The power of remitting sins, as you say, is often compared by the
ancient Fathers, to that authority which the priests of the old law had, in
discerning and pronouncing, who were lepers and who were clean, which is to
give a sentence declaratorie, to pronunce, who was stricken or healed by God,
not a proper power to strike or heal, and yet the words of the law are, that
the Priest should make him clean, or unclean: meaning that he should so
declare him with authority, to be either separated, or received as the case
required, according to those directions, and descriptions, which he had in the
law of God. For though other men by the instruction of the law, might descerne
a leaper from a clean person, yet no man had authority to put him out, or to
receive him into the congregation but the Priest. In citing the authority of
Saint Bede, and Saint Chrysostom, you use such confusion, as I know not whose
words you pretend to allege, saving that Bid has written upon Saint lames
epistle, Chrysostom has not. In cyting therefore of Saint Bedes testimony,
it may seem that you follow some other men's dictates, collection, or
notebooke, and not your own reading. For Bedes words, upon that place of the
5. of Saint James are these, differing both in words, and sense from your
allegation, Si ergo infirmi in peccatis sint, and haec presbyteris ecclesiae
confessi fuerunt, ac perfecto cord ea relinquere atque emendare sategerint,
dimittentur eis: Neque enim sine confessione emendationis, peccata qucunt
demitti. unde recte subtungitur, Confitemini ergo alterutrum peccata vestra,
and orate pro inuicem, and saluemini, In hac autem sententiailla debet esse
discretio, vt quotidiana leuiaque peccata alterutrum coaequalibus confiteamur,
corumque quotidiana credamus oratione saluari. Porro grauioris leprae
immunditiam, iuxta legem sacerdoti pandamus, atque ad eius arbitrium, qualiter
and quanto tempore insserit, purificari curemus. Therefore if the sick be in
sins, and shall confess them to the elders or priests of the Church, and with
perfect heart shall endeavor to forsake and amend them, they shall be forgiven
to them. For without the confession of amendment, sins can not be forgiven
whereupon it is rightly added, Confess therefore your sins one to an other,
that ye may be saved. Now in this sentence this diseretion ought to be, that
we confess, our daily light offenses to our equals, one to another, and that
we should believe that by their daily prayer, we are saved. But the uncleanness
of the more grievous Leprosy, according to the law let us open to the priest,
and according to his arbitrament, how, and how long time, he shall command,
let us have regard to be purified. In this testimony of Saint Bede, though I
do not altogether allow his judgment, and every man may see, how he
restreineth in some case to the priest, that which the Apostle speaks of
confessing one to another in all cases mutual offered, yet we may see his
sentence contrary to your citation, quamuis Leprae, etc. although you have
amended it in your translation. Also that it is confession, acknowledging, or
purposing of amendment that Saint Bede counts necessary for them, that shall
obtain remission of their sins, and not a particular declaration of all
sins counted in a priests ear. Thirdly that the text of Saint James is to
be understood directly of mutual confession, of one man to an other, although
in cases of grievous sins he allude to the law of Leprosy.

In translating the place ofIerome, you render for peccatorum, sins, where
you should rather translate it sinners, that peccatorum may be the antecedent
to the relative that follows: but as for auricular confession, or distinct
reckoning of every of our particular mortal sins, this place makes nothing
in the world, as very plain as you say it is. The reason you add of doing
justice in punishing or pardoning, is of your own imagination. For Jerome
says, that by hearing the diversity of sinners (speaking of them that have
openly offeded) and finding some to be penitent, some to be obstinate, or
dissemblers, he may know who is to be bound, and who to be loosed, which he
cannot do by hearing the diversity of their sins. For if their sins be as red
as scarlet, if they be truly penitent, they are to be loosed and if they
seem never so small, if they be not repentant, nor humbly contrite in heart
for them, they are to be bound. While you seek to make a difference between
the authority of the minister in the Gospel of pardoning sins more
properly, then the priest cleansed the Leper, you declare that you are not
content with the sentence of Saint Jerome, nor of so many of the ancient
fathers as made the case all alike. And where you say, it was not said unto
them, as unto ours, whomsoever you punish with Leprosy, or make unclean, he
shall have a Leprosy, you speak beside the book. For this authority was
given to them, that they should make clean or unclean, and whomesoeuer they
made clean, he was admitted into the congregation, and whomesoeuer they made
unclean, he was so accounted of all men. Yet properly they made neither
clean, nor unclean, but declared them so to be, according to the institution
which they had of Gods law, in exercise whereof although they erred, and so the
party might be received or refused, according to their error, yet was he
neither clean nor unclean in deed by their sentence, but by the work of God,
and so be sinners. The blasphemy, that you ascribe to Saint Hilarie, I have
confuted before. Your distinction of prius natura, and quoad nos, is foolish
sophistry in this case. For except God first work in our hearts by his holy
spirit faith of forgiveness, we can have but small comfort, in the priests
absolution. That God does always De bapt. cont. Don. 1. 4. c. 1.
work at the instant in which Baptism is ministered, it is false, if Saint
Augustines doctrine be true, who reaches that Baptism may be received out of
the Church, but cannot have effect but in the Church, that is, if the party
came from heresy, and submit him self to the Catholic Church.


ALLEN. And so it is in penance, where God the principal, and the priest the
secondarie or seruisable cause jointly forgive together. For so the words of
institution of this sacrament do most plainly convince: whose sins you
shall forgive, they beforgiuen, he speaks in the present tence, as though he
would say: as you forgive them, or retain them, ipso facto, I forgive them,
or retain them. And therefore, saving the honor of the Master of the
sentences, he had not good consideration when he did hold (as some other did
after him) that first man's sins be remitted by God in his contrition and
purpose to come to the sacrament, and afterward, the same remission to be
declared by the priests, and as it were confirmed by his approbation in
confession: being therein partly deceived by the saying of Saint Hierome
before alleged, whom he took, perchance, to have compared in all respects,
the office of the old Priest, for the view of the unclean, and ours of the
new law, in the judgment used upon man's sins: and partly, as I take it, by
a sentence of Saint Augustine, which compared together the receiving of Lazarus
by Christ, and the Disciples loosing his bands, to Christ's pardoning of
sins first, and then the priests loosing the same afterward in the face of
the Church. This, to be short, is a piece of Saint Augustines sentence: Quid
ergo facit Ecclesia, cui dictum est: De verbis Domini. fed. 8.
Quae solueritis in terra, erunt soluta? nisi quod ait Dominus, soluite illum,
and sinite abire. What does the Church then, to whom it was said: vhatsoeuer
you loose, it shall be loosed? Marie, she does that which our Lord said,
loose him and let him go. Wherein Saint Augustine means nothing else, but
that Christ is the principal agent, and that he properly does give life to
the soull, the Priest for all that, being his servant and minister therein,
and therefore by nature is a latter agent in the same work, which else, as I
have proved, ioynilie pertains to them both, for that the effect of a
Sacrament comes not to any man till it be received, except it be in certain
cases of necessity, where the parties can not obtain the external rse of the
appointed element, though they earnestly desire the same.

But how the old Priests office touching the Lepers of the law, represents
our sacrament of the priests ministry in the new Testament, and how far
ours, which is the truth, excels that which was but a shadow of ours, Saint
Chrysostom does excellentlic declare: and therewith fully may put out of
doubt all men, that our Priests properly work remission of sins, as
ministers in the same divine action, and not as declarers or approouers of that
effect, which before was wrought De Sacer. Lib. 3.
by God himself. Thus he says: Corporis lepram purgare, seu verius dicam,
haud purgare quidem, sed purgatos probare, Iudaeorum sacerdotibus solis
liccbat: at vero nostris sacerdotibus, non corporis lepram, verum animae
sordes, non dico purgatas probare, sed purgare prorsus concessum cst: Quamobrem
mco iudicio, qui istos despiciunt contemnuntque, multo sceleratiores ac maiori
supplicio digni fuerint, quam fuerit Dathan vna cum suis omnibus. That is to
say: To purge the Leprosy of the body, or else to say as it was in deed,
not to purge, but to discern who were clean, was granted only to the
Priests of the old law: but it is fully granted to our Priests, not to purge
the bodily lcprosie, nor to snew who are cleaner purged, but utterly to purge
the very filth of man's soull. Therefore by my judgment, whosoever do
contemn or despise them, they are much more worthy punishment, then the
disobedient Dathan with all his company. Thus says this holy Father, with
many words more, which were worthy all consideration, and rememberance in this
case, if the matter were not so abundant, that it may not suffer over long
abode in one place, lest injury be done to other branches of the cause, no
less necessary to be known for full upholding the truth thereof.


FVLKE. Your argument taken of Christ's speaking in the present tense is vain,
and of no force to prove, that the forgiveness or reteining of God and man
concur in one instant. For in the latter sentence of reteining the verb is
of the preterperfect tense, (...), but in the same sense that the verb (...)
in the former sentence, which is of the present tence proouing Gods forgiveness
to go before man's declaration thereof. The Master of the sentences is little
beholding to you, that doc so flatly condemn him of error, whereas he did
write nothing in this point, which was not commonly received in the Church of
Rome in his time, and long after. For among the articles in quibus Magister non
tenetur, there is no fault found with his sentence, of the Priests power in
binding and loosing. Gratian also declares, that learned and religious men in
his time, were in diverse opinions about that point and other, concerning this
popish sacrament of penance. whereby it appears that the sentence which you
hold, was not accounted Catholic nor universally received in their times. If
Peter Lumbard the Master of the sentences was deceived by the sayings of Saint
Jerome and S. Augustine, they were first deceived themselves. for other sense
out of their sayings, then the master of the sentences gathers, no reasonable
man can conclude. And it is but one only saying of S. Augustine that he
cites, not diverse: and not only out of Augustine and Hierome but out of other
writers also, as Ambrose, and Cassiodorus, and Gratian cites maniemore: all
which you must answer, if you will take part against the two principal posts
of popery, Gratiane, and Lumbard, with all them that take their part. But you
think one saying of Chrysostom enough to wipe away all their authorities and
reasons, and to prove that the priests of the new law do purge the fitlh of
the soull, and not only declare it to be purged, as the Priests of the old
law did of the leprosy of the body. The meaning of Chrysostom is, that the
Ministers of the Gospel have power, not only to pronounce and declare the
penitent sinner to be delivered from the uncleanness of his soul, unto other
men, that he may be accepted into the congregation, if he have been excluded:
but to assure the penitents conscience in Gods name, of the remission of their
sins, wherein he does much more for the benefit of his soul, then the priest
of the old law, who only declared unto other men how the party was to be
taken, who knew in himself whether he were sick or healed, before he came to
the priest. Therefore where Chrysostom says, It is granted unto the priests
of the new testament, not only to try and approve the soul to be delivered
of the filihines thereof, but altogether to deliver it, he means of
delivering by assuring the conscience of the penitent sinner of Gods mercy and
forgiveness, whereby he is thoroughly, or altogether delivered therfrom: whereas
otherwise it were blasphemous, and conrrarie to Chrysostomes judgment in many
other places, if the wholl act of purging or delivering the soull from
filthiness were ascribed to man, as the words seem to sound.


ALLEN. Now upon all this foresaid declaration, it may be well understood,
that our adversaries have small reason in reprehending the ordinance of God,
who is proved in all ages and diusities of laws, to have given grace and
remission of sins, not only by external elements, and actions of diverse
ceremonies, sacraments, and sacrifices: but also ever to have dispensed the
said benefits, by man's service and ministry, without all dishonor of his
personage, or diminishing his own proper interest and right therein. And so
much more has he used in the new law of the Gospel, the ministry of the
priests and external sacraments, to the procuring of the said benefits, by
how much more, our law, our sacraments, our sacrifices, and our priests, be
glorified and preferred in respect of the old, and Chrisost. ibidem.
have the more abundant blessing of the spirit, and Christ's blood, which by
these conduites, most largely flow to all men's fouls, that despise not the
blessed benefit thereof.

Yet if they will not be satisfied herewith, because they surmise our new law
to be so spiritual, that man may look for nothing at man's hands, but all
immediately of God and his spirit, for by him they will be taught the meaning
of the scripture, by him they will be baptized, by him they must have remission
and absolution, and at length they are become Anabaptists, and refuse to obey
Prelates of the Church, and Princes of the world, because by God they will
only be ruled and In prolog. l. de doct. Christ.
punished for their offenses: Against such proud cogitations, as Saint
Augustine terms them, God has purposelie, to teach humility and obedience
one to another, both in temporal causes, and especially in spiritual matters
perteining to men's sins and souls, he has (I say) for the nonst, not
only instituted these ways of baser creatures used in the sacraments, to
atteine his grace by, but also has made man the master almost and executor of
his meaning in the same, whose service he uses so much for our salvation, that
he sticked not to send his most chosen and dearest even of those days of grace
and plentifulnes of the spirit, to be instructed by man, and made ready for
his ministry no otherwise but by man. A strange thing surely, and to be well
noted for this purpose, not only of our adversaries for their confusion, but
of the good studious readers for their instruction, how that Paul being
prostrate, and miraculouslie called by Jesus Christ's own voice, was yet sent
by Christ himself, to confirm the authority of his priests, to Ananias, of
him to receive as well instructions, as the sacraments of the Church, for his
incorporation to the faithful, and remission of his sins paste. And again,
that Cornelius, Act. 9.
though his prayers were heard, and his alms acceptable to Ibid. 10.
god, and an Angel sent unto him to declare the same, which was a sign of high
reputation, was yet charged to go to Peter, of him not only to receive the
sacraments, but a so by his instruction to learn, what to believe, what to
hope, and what to love, says S. Austine The Eunuch, might by god himself in
his own coun try, have been schooledor sanctified, and yet it pleased his
majesty Ibid. 8.
so to use the matter, that by Philip both the sense of scripture, and the
sacrament of Baptism should be understood and received at once. So has God
in all ages confirmed the authority of his holy priests and ministers, and so
has he ever checked by his own holy examples the presumptuous temptation of
man, who ever has disdained man's office and ministry for his own salvation.
Therefore let no man marvel, why Christ has given authority to man to
forgive sins, seeing he has from the beginning, not remitted ordinarily
otherwise then by man's service, nor any way else, for the most part, but by
external acts of ceremonies, sacraments, and sacrifices, that we may learn
thereby humility, and obedience to Gods ordinance, by the warrant whereof they
all (as I have proved) challenge all manner of interest in the government of
our souls.


FVLKE. That God by external sacraments, and by the ministry and service of
man has dispensed his spiritual benefits, it is proved but so, that his grace
was never bound, either to the one or to the other, but that he may, and has
bestowed the same most freely, according to the good pleasure of his will. The
fancy of the Anabaptists, that would seem to look for all things
immediately from God, despising the sacraments and ministry of man, we abhor
and detest, no less then you. We marvel not why Christ has given authority
to man to forgive sins, whose ministry he has used in all times, both by
preaching his word, and by administering his sacraments, to dispense his
mysteries unto the rest of his Church upon earth: But that God does not
ordinarily remit sins but by the ministry of the priest, nor any way else
for the most part, but by external acts, we marvel how you are able to
prove it, seeing God often times uses many other occasions, then the priests
ministry, to bring men to repentance, and without all ways of external acts
or sacrifices, to assure men of the remission of their sins by faith. But
this admiration altogether passes the reach of our capacity, to understand
how it may be convinced, That all priests by warrant hereof, may challenge all
manner of interest in the government of our souls. It were much to challenge
any interest in government of our souls, which is proper to our Savior
Christ: but to challenge all manner of interest in government, it sauoureth to
strongly of Antichristian presumption, that any Christian should abide it. The
Apostles in exercise of their calling, acknowledged them selves, not only to
be the servants of God, but also of the Church: for we preach not our selves
(says the 2. Cor. 4.
Apostle) but Jesus Christ, and our selves to be your servants for Jesus
Christ. It is a ministry, and not a Lordeship, that we must exercise, not as
temporal Princes, who although they may be said after a sort, to serve the
common wealth, yet they are so servants, as they are also Lords. But the
ministers of the Church in their spiritual government, are servants, and not
Lords, as Saint Peter testifies: therefore they cannot justly challenge, all
manner of interest in the government 1. Pet. 5.
of our souls. For if they might, we should have many Lords of our souls,
and deny God, our only Iud.
lord, our Lord Jesus Christ our only savior.


ALLEN. Much more might be said out of diverse holy fathers, much out of the
decrees as well of Bishopes as Counsels: the authority whereof no Christian
Catholic did ever reject. In Lateran, in Florence and in Trent Counsels,
Penance is decreed to be a sacrament, and of necessity, to all such as fall
into deadelie Can. 21. Tract de Sacra. De poen.
sin after Baptism. The minister thereof by their holy determination, is a
Priest lawfully ordered: the remission of sins is in them all, challenged to
be his right, not only by declaration that God has or will pardon them, nor
by the preaching of the Gospel, nor any other ways newly devised by the
Devil to delude Christ's ordinance, and misconstrue his plain words: But
properly is the priest proved, to be the minister under God of
reconciliation, and therefore may, by his words, absolve men, in the said
sacrament, of their sins, as in Christ's own stead, whose honorable
judgment seat, byhis commission, and the holy ghosts assistance, he does
lawfully possess. And so surely, do Gods ministers hold this power and
pre-eminence, that no power or dignity of man could ever be so well warranted
and approved by Gods own word, and practice of all ages and nations
christened, as this is. All the Princes in earth, though they reign full
righteouslie, can not yet show the tenth part of the evidence, that Gods
priests can do, for their title of remission of sins: and it booteth not me
in this my base state to admonish them, though I hartelie wish they would
consider it, that the contempt of spiritual jurisdiction and the dignity of
priesthood, salleth at length to the difobedience of all temporal power, and
wicked contempt of civil government also: as in these disordered days, we may
to our great grief behold, when, under pretense of religion and Gods word,
whereof they have no more respect surely then the Devil him self has they
have disobeied not only Peter's keys, but also Cesars sword: Neither let any
man think, that, where the bands of conscience, the awe of gods majesty, the
fear of hell and damnation, the hope of heaven and salvation is removed that
there can be any civil obedience long. Fear of man is much, flattery of man
is more, but bond of conscience passes them both. Thiu therefore have Gods
priests made account of their calling, and long practiced power of remitting
and reteining the peoples offenses.


FVLKE. Whatsoever you can say out of any ancient fathers will not prove
your intent of shrift and pardons: your sacrament of penance, is but a young
beginner that can show no auncienter counsels, for her authority, then
Lateran, Florence, and Trent, the eldest of which is not much above 300, years
old: and yet in the place you send us unto, Confession is straightly
commanded, but penance is not decreed to be a sacrament. Declaration of the
pastor by preaching, that God will pardon al penitent sinners, you count to be
away newly devised by the diuil, to delude Christ's ordinance, and
misconstrue his plain words, as though your deuelishand blasphemous wit and
tongue, were hable to prove out of Christ's words your popish shrifts,
penance, and satisfaction to be of Christ's ordinance, whereas it has been
the doctrine and practice of all the Prophets and Apostles, to preach
remission of sins to all that truly repented, and were turned unto God, and
by authority of their commission received from God, to assure all such of
perfect forgiveness, of all their sins. To compare the evidence, whereby they
hold this authority, with the right of princes whereby they hold their
croune, and so far to prefer it, is a point of antichristian and
anabaptisticall presumption. For civil Princes have as clear evidence in the
scripture to avouch al their lawful authority, as priests have to exercise
that whereunto they be called. Otherwise the particular calling of every
priest must lean upon aiust title, as well as the advancement of princes into
their throne, and much more, or else they have not so great evidence, as you
talk of. For a Prince being in the throne, by what right soever he possesses
it, is to be obeyed: But a minister of the Church, except he be lawfully
called, is not to be regarded. You have great cause to complain of these
days, that under pretense of Gods word and religion, temporal and civil
power is disobeied and contemned, where there is no such manifest examples of
such disobedience and contempt, as in your popish Northern rebellion, and in an
hundredth other vile attemptes, to wring the scepter out of the hands of Gods
anointed, and your most lawful Prince, under pretense (in the Devils name) of
religion and the Catholic Church. But such religion, and such a Church, as
aloweth in Italian Priest to depose any Christian Prince from his throne, God
of his infinite mercy deliver this Ileland, and grant all true subjects of
the same, to yealde their faithful obebience to their Godly Prince, not only
for fear, but alfo for conscience.


Here it is proved, that b ^ mitting sins, the duty the right of the Priest
in renecessarilie rife, for theie of all Christian people does ^ him confession
of every of their mortal sins unto h: as the same is also proved by the
doctrine of the olie Fathers of Chistes Church.

THE TENTH CHAP.
ALLEN. ANd now I must advertise my loving breethrenof the necessary sequel
hereof, which to some I know, seems so hard and vpleasant, that the very
consideration thereof has driven many, that have not felt the sweetness of
Gods spirit, by which every of his commandments, be they never so rough in
appearance, are made easy and delectable, to the fear, misliking, and
lothsomenes of the sacrament of penance. Which, as it is, for other causes
many, much abhorred of the wantons lately departed out of the Church, and of
some worldly Catholics to, that be not so zelouse in following truth, as
they be desirous to know truth: so it is most lothed and feared, for that in
it, there is required a distinct, simple, sincere and plain confesfion to be
made of every sin that is known or suspected to be mortal, unto a Priest,
which is the lawful minister of the same Sacrament, with such diligent and
exact examination of our consciences, as a matter of such importance does of
reason require. This is the great offense and stay, that the weaklings of
Christ's Church do so earnestly respect: and so long they shall be vexed and
molested in mind with the sower remembrance thereof, as they do not prove the
sweet, gracious, and incomparable effect ensueing most assuredly thereon: so
long shall they stumble at so small a straw, as they do not feel the burden of
sin, fear the pains of hell, follow the quiet of conscience, foresee the
dreadful day of judgment: so long shall they be bashful to submit them
selves, to one man's most close, secret, meek and merciful judgment, as they
fear not the infinite shame, open horrible confusion, and everlasting rebuke
before God, Angel, man, and Devil, at the seat and sentence that shall be
pronounced in the face of all creatures, which must fall to them, that close up
under cover and compass of their conscience, such a number of manifold sins,
whereof in that day both account and confession must be made, to their
uttermost confusion. Finally, so long shall man's will and corrupted nature
disobey Gods ordinance herein, as he earnestly and humbly seeks not by
prayer at Christ's hands the grace and gift of obedience and repentance. Fot
as the fulfilling of every of Gods commandments cannot otherwise be had, but
by his special favor, so says Saint Augustine, or, as some think rather,
Fulgentius: Firmissime tene, and nullatenus dubites, De fide ad Petrum. Cap. 31.
neminem hic posse hominem panitentiam agere, nist quem Deus illuminauerit, and
gratuita sua mis ratione conuertis. Hold this for an assurance, that no man can
here do penance, except he be illumined and converted theseunto by his singular
mercy. Neither does this Doctor mean of any otherway of repentance, then is
used for mortal sins after baptism in the sacrament of the Church, putting
there, in a manner by express words, a double sacrament, one for original
sin, that is in children only, and that he calls Sacramentum fidei, that
other for sins afterward committed, which he terms, Poenitentiam, Penance.


FVLKE. That auricular confession, or popish shrift is a necessary sequel, of
the power that Christ has given to the ministers of his Church, to forgive
sins, we must now see in what sorre you are able to prove In which argument,
though most needful for your purpose, you have very little to say, and that
nothing to the purpose in deed, either out of the scripture, or out of the
ancient fathers. First you say, that shrift seems hard to them, that have
not felt the sweetenes of Gods spirit, by which every of his commandments
are made easy and delectable. Here therefore were convenient place for you to
show, where in all the scriptures God has commanded men to confess all their
mortal sins, committed in thought, word, or deed, unto a priest of your
order. But now you are as dry as a kixe, and as barren of proof as a pumisse
stone of water. There be many other causes then you allege, why popish shrift
is so burthenous. And the principal cause is, because it is a tradition of
man, to clogge the conscience with intolerable servitude. And in stead of all the causes of the contempt thereof, that you allege, so long shall every
Christian man despise your auricular confession, as any thing necessary
required of him, until you be able out of the holy scriptures, inspired of
God, to prove that it is such an ordinance of God, as you in many words to no
purpose do brag of, before you bring forth the word of God to prove it.
The saying of Fulgentius is very Godly and grounded upon the holy scriptures,
but that he does not mean of any other way of repentance, then is used in
your popish Church, what argument have you to show? He puts there, you say,
in a manner, by express words, a double sacrament, calling the one,
sacramentum fidei, and the other, poenitentiam, the sacrament of faith and
repentance. This is a strange manner of express words, to prove poenitentia
to be a sacrament, because baptism is so. yea it is manifest, by his express
words, that he acknowledges no sacramentum poenitentiae, but baptisine, Cap.
30. Firmissime tene and nullatenus dubites, exeptis illis qui pro nomine
Christi suo sanguine baptizantur, nullum hominem accepturum vitam aeternam, qui
non hic a malis suis fuerit per penitentiam, fidemque, conuersus, and per
sacramentum fidei, and penitentioe, id est per baptismum liberatus: and
maioribus quidem necessarium esse, and poenitentiam de malis suis agere, and
fidem Catholicam secundum regulam veritatis tenere, and sacramentum baptismatis
accipere. Paruulis vero qui nec propria voluntate credere, nec poenitentiam pro
peccato, quod originaliter trahunt, agere possunt, sacramentum fidei quod est
sanctum baptisma, quamdiu rationis oetas eorum capax esse non potest, sufficere
ad salutem. Hold thou most steadfastly, and nothing doubt, that except those,
which for the name of Christ are baptized in their own blood, no man shall
receive life everlasting, which shall not be here converted from his evils, by
repentance, and faith, and by the sacrament of faith and repentance, that is,
by baptism be delivered. And for them that be of years, truly it is
necessary, both to repent of their evils, and to know the Catholic faith
according to the rule of truth, and to receive the sacrament of Baptism. But
for infants which neither can believe by their own will, nor be penitent for
the sin, which they draw originally, the sacrament of faith, which is
baptism, is sufficient for them unto salvation, so long as their age cannot be
ca pable of reason. yea it seems by this saying going imme diately before,
that he speaks in the next chapter of the first repentance that in men of
discretion, might go before baptism, although it be true of all true
repentance, and conversion unto God.


ALLEN. And let no man think, that true repentance can be in any or effectual
for the remission of sins, if he follow not the appointed ordinance of God
for remission of sins. For I dare be bold to say, that, as since the time
that our Saviors words took place: Nisi quis renatus fuerit, Except a man be
borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom
of heaven, that as since these words no man can be saved without baptism: so
likewise since Christ spoke these words, Whose sins you do forgive, they be
forgiven, I dare say never man was saved, nor can be saved, that either
contemns or neglects confession, or earnestly seeks not for it, if he
fall in relapse of deadly crimes after his baptism. I will speak it
plainly, because I would have it thought on earnestly. As no man ordinarily
can be saved without baptism, so can no man that ever after baptism
commits deadly sin, be saved without sacramental confession, or the
earnest desire and seeking for the same. This may seem sharp to some, but
this will prove true to all contemners of Gods ordinance. For whenever God
works his gifts and grace among men, by any ordinary means appointed for
the purpose, it is great sin to seek for the same eitherwithout it, or to
presume to have it at Gods hands, otherwise then he has prescribed: But the
sacrament of penance, and confession made to the priest, is the appointed
means that God uses in his Church for remission of mortal sins: therefore
whosoever thinks to have remission immediately at Gods hand, he shall first be
void of his purpose, and then further be charged of high presumption and
contempt of his will and ordinance. The remission of original sinner as
properly pertains to God, as of mortal sinner: yet because Christ has
instituted a sacrament, as an instrument and means to convey that singular
benefit to man, he that would now claim the same immediately at Gods own hand,
and therefore neglects the sacrament of baptism, or would minister it to him
self, without the Priests office, he should never obtain remission of his
original sin, but add to that high persumption and disobedience of gods
commandment, which of it self without original sin were damnable.


FVLKE. No wise man thinks that true repentance can be in any, or effectual
for the remission of sins, if he despise to follow the appointed ordinance of
God for remission of sins: but you shalneuer prove, that shrift, or auricular
confession, is a necessary, and general ordinance of god, for all that shall
obtein forgiveness of sins committed after baptism. How many mortal sins
are committed by children and others, where of they have no remembrance, to
confess them, so that if confession were necessary, remission of those sins
for them were impossible. That you dare be bold to say that no man can be
saved without external baptism of water, it argues more boldness then
wisdom, except you were able to prove that the words of Christ by you cited
are necessary to be understood of the baptism of water. And you are bolder,
then Fulgentius, for he as you hard erewhile excepteth them that suffer
martyredome for Christ's name, before they be baptized in water. And Saint
Ambrose is bold against you, to affirm, that the Emperor, Valentinianus the
younger, who was slain before he was baptized, was undoubtedly saved. For
comforting his sisters, he says to them in that several oration, which he made
upon the death of Valentinian the Emperor. Sed audiui vos dolere, quod no^
acceperit sacramentu^ baptismatis. Dicitemihi, quid aliud in nobis est nisi
voluntas, nisi petitio? Atqui etiam dudum hoc votum habuit, vt antequam in
Italiam venisset, initiaretur, and proxime baptizari se a me velle
significauit, and ideo prae coeteris carsis me accipiendum putauit. Non habet
ergo gratiam quam desiderauit? non habet quam poposeit, and quia poposcit
accepit? and vbi est illud, iustus quacunque morse praeuentus fuerit, anima
eius in refrigerio erit? Solue igitur pater sancte munus seruo tuo: quod Moses
dum in Siritu vidit accepit, quod David, quia ex reuelatione, cognouit emeruit.
Solue inquam, seruo tuo Valentiniano, munus quod concupiuit, munus quod
poposcit sanus, robustus, incolumis. Si affectus aegritudine distulisset, tamen
non penitus a tua misericordia esset alienus, qui celeritate temporis esset,
non voluntate sraudatus: solue ergo seruo tuo, munus tuae gratiae, quam ilie
nunquam negauit, qui ante diem mortis templorum priuilegia negauit
insurgentibus, quos reuereriposset, astabat virorum catcrua gentilium
supplicabat senatus. Non metuebat hominibus displicere in Christo: qui habuit
spiritum tuum, quomodo non accepit gratiam tuam? Aut si quia solenniter non
sunt celebrata mysteria, hoc mouet: ergo ne martyrs, si catechumeni fuerint,
coronentur, non enim coronantur, si non initiansur. Quod si suo abluuntur
sanguint, and hunc swa pietas abluit and voluntas. But I have heard that you
are grieved, because he received not the sacrament of baptism. Tell me then,
what other thing is there in us, but our will, but our desire? But long since,
he had this purpose, that before he came into Italy, he would be dedicated,
and next he signified that he would be baptized by me. And therefore, before
other causes, he thought that I was to be taken. Has he not then the grace
which he desired? has he not the grace that he called for, and received it
because he called for it? And where is then that saying, the just, by what
death so ever he be prevented, his soul shall be in rest? perform therefore holy
Sap. 4.
Father, that gift unto thy servant, which Moses while he saw in spirit
received, which David because he knew by revelation obtained, perform, I
say, unto thy servant Valentinian, the gift which he called for, being sound,
strong and in good health. If being stricken with sickness, he had differred, yet
he should not be utterly estranged from thy mercy, which was deprived by
swiftnes of time, not by his own will. Perform therefore unto thy servant the
gift of thy grace, which he never denied, which before the day of his death
denied the privileges of the Idols temples to them that rose up, of whom he
might have stood in awe. There stood by a great rout of heathen men, the senate
made supplication. Nevertheless he feared not for Christ to displease men. He
that had thy spirit, how did he not receive thy grace? Or if this does move,
because the mysteries were not solemnlie celebrated, therefore let neither
martyrs be crowned, if they have not been baptized, for they are not crowned
if they be not didicated. But if they be washed in their own blood, this man's
will and piety also has washed him. Again he says speaking in an Apostrophe
to him. Quis dabit tefrater, fratrem mihi lactentem vbera matris meae? hoc est,
non quicunque te, sed Christus illuminabit gratia spirituali, ille te
baptizauit, quia humana tibi officia defuerunt. Who shall give thee brother to
be my brother, sucking the papes of my mother, that is, not every one, but
Christ him self shall lighten thee with spiritual grace. He has baptized
thee, because the service of man was wanting to thee. By all which words it is
manifest that S. Ambrose understood not those words of our savior Christ of
external baptism, as you do, when he refuses not them that have a purpose
and will to be baptized, and are prevented by necessity of time. But where you
proceed, and dare be bold to say, that never man was saved, that either
contemned or neglected confession, if you mean popish, auricular, and, as you
after call it, sacramental confession, I dare be bold to say, you speak
untruly: because the word of God prescribes no such confession, as necessary
to salvation. Confession of that we believe, and of our sins before God, I
know to be necessary to salvation. Neither can you prove, that they which
despise popish shrift, be contemners of Gods ordinance: for the Minor of your
syllogism that follows, is a loud lie, that your popish sacrament of
penance, and confession made to the Priest, is the appointed means, that God
uses in his Church, for remission of mortal sins: for God has appointed no
such sacrament or confession, as necessary means, without the which remission
of sins may not be obtained. Your similitude of baptism will prove nothing,
except you can first prove, your confession to be of Gods institution, as
necessary for doing away sins committed after baptism, as baptism is by
Christ's ordinance the seal of regeneration, by which we are assured of the
remission of our sins.


ALLEN. And yet me think, I hear already the sound of the deceitful voices
of our Preachers: It is Christ's blood that remitteth sins: Come to me all
ye that are heavy laden, and I shall refresh you. I am he, Mat. 1 1. Esa. 43.
says the Lord, that puts away thy sins, with a thousand such like: as
though Christ's blood did not stand with Christ's ordinances and sacraments,
as though they came not to Christ that keep the way of his will and
sacraments to come unto him: as though God did not remit those sins, which in
his name, and in his sacraments, and by his appointed minister, be remitted.
Protestant, say plainly, will thou refuse baptism, because Christ's blood
washes away original sins? If thou dare not openly so preach, although
covertly thou may chance so intend, how dare thou deceive the people, and
draw them from penance and confession, because Christ's blood does remit
sins? For if the one sacrament may stand with the honor of God, and with all
those places that thou bring so deceitfullie out of the scripture, why may
not the other, seeing both are proved alike to be instituted of Christ? For
the same self savior which said: Come to me, ye that be laden, and I shall
refresh you: he, and no other, said, except you be borne of water and the holy
Math. 12. Ioa. 3.
Ghost, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. The same God that said: I
am he that puts away thy sins, says now to the Apostles and Priestss
whose Psalm. 43. Ioa. 20, Psalm. 105. Iac. 5. Origin. homil. 2. super Leui. Beda
super hunc locum
sins you do forgive, forgiven be they. The same Spirit of God that said in
the Prophet, Confess your selves to the Lord, for he his good, said now
again in the Apostle, confess your sins one to another, that you may be
saved. By which he means not, as Origin, venerable Bede, and other do
declare, so much brotherly acknowledging, sor counselor other causes, the
grief of mind each man to his fellow, as he does the order of sacramental
confession, to be made unto gods Priests, as it may well appear by the
circumstance of the letter. For there he had willed them to send for the
Priests of the Church to annoile them, and straight after adds this alleged
text, of confession and praing over the sick. The which place the heretics
saw to sound so many ways, as well toward the sacrament of extreme
unction, as the sacrament of confession, both which they have unworthily
abandoned, that they thought it not amiss, either to deny the Apostles
authority and the wholl epistle, as no piece of holy scripture, as Luther and
other did: or else, which was after thought more handsome conueiance, to
corrupt the text, and write instead of, send for the Priests of the Church,
thus, call the elders of the congregation. For they thought it might sound
evil, to have in one sentence, priests, Church, confession, remission of
sins, release of pains for sin, annoiling, praying over the sick, and so
forth.


FVLKE. It is no deceitful voice of our preachers, to affirm, by these, and a
thousand such like textes of scripture that it belongs to God only to
forgive sins properly, satisfaction being made for them by the blood of
Christ. And yet we derogat nothing from Christ's ordinances, and sacraments, by
which he works effectual assurance of the same. We acknowledge the
ministry of the Apostles, and their lawful successors, for the remission and
retaining of sins, both by preaching, and by ministering of the sacraments,
instituted by our savior Christ. But we deny and dare stand to the denial,
with all the papists that has been, are, or shall be, that popish penance, and
confession, is any sacrament, of our savior Christ's institution: for he that
said, whose sins you forgive, forgiven be they, has not said, whosoever will
have his sins forgiven by you, must have some penance by you enjoined, for
satisfaction of Gods justice: yea there is nothing more contrary to forgiveness
then satisfaction made by the party to whom sins should be forgiven. And he
that said, confess your offenses one to another, and pray one for an other,
that you may be healed, says no where, confess all your sins unto a
Priest, that you may be saved: but wills a mutual acknoledgeing, and
reconciliation of one Christian man to another, where there has bin any
trespass of such offenses, as one man has committed against another, and a
mutual acknowledging of our sinfullnes one to another, that we may be sturred
up to mutual prayer. By which textre the Priest is as much bound to shriue
himself to his parishioner, as the parishioner to the Priest. But Origin and
Bid are alleged, to prove that the Apostle means not only of such
acknowledgeing, nor so much thereof, as the order of sacramental confession.
Verily when the words of the scripture are plain, and the sense (...) to be
gathered of the plain words, we may not restin any man's opinion that is
contrary to the same. The word (...), every man that has but small knowledge
in the tongue, does know to signify and require a mutual confession, as well as
a mutual prayer of one man for another. But yet let us examine what your
authorities do contain. First Origin in the place by you cited, speaks not
a word of this text, confess your offenses one to another, but only of the two
verses going before. For, making seven means of remitting of sins, after
his corrupt, and vnpure manner of teaching, By baptism, by martyrdom, by
alms, by forgiueing one another, by converting of sinners, by abundance of
charity, he adds the seventh in these words; Est adhuc and septima, licet
dura, and laboriosa, perpaenitentiam, remissio peccatorum, cum lauat peccator
in lachrimis stratum suum, and fiunt ei lachrima suae panes die and nocte. Et
cum non erubescit sacerdoti Domini indicare peccatum suum, and quaerere
medicinam secundum eum, qui ait, Dixi, pronunciabo aduersum me iniustitiam meam
Domino, and tu remisisti impietatem cordis mei: in quo impletur and illud quod
Apostolus dicit, si quis autem insirmatur, vocet Presbyteror Ecclesiae, and
imponant ei manus, vngentes eum oleo, in nomine Domini, and oration fidei
saluabit (...) si in peccatis fuerit, remittentur ei. There remains yet the
seventh, kind of remission of sins, although it be very hard, and painful
by repentance, When the sinner washes his bed in tears, and his tears are
made unto him bread day and night, and when he is not ashamed to declare his
sin to the Priest of the Lord, and to seek medicine acording to him which
says, I have said, I will pronounce against my self my own unrighteousness
unto the Lord, and thou have forgiven me the ungodliness of my heart. In which
also that is fullfilled which the Apostle says, if any man be diseasedl, et
him call the Elders of the Church, and let them lay hands upon him, anointing
him with oil, in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the
diseased, and if he shall be in sins, they shall be forgiven unto him. Thus much
writes Origin. Now it is to be understood, that after his manner, he
alligorizeth upon the sacrifices of the law, comparing these means of
remission to them. And lest you should think that by declaring of sin to the
Priest of the Lord, he does mean confession to a popish priest, he himself
expounds before, whom he means by this Priest. In morali loco potest
pontisex isse esse sensus pietatis and religionis videri, qui in nobis per
orationem and obsecrationes, quas Deo fundimus, velut quodam sacerdotio
fungitur. In moral place, this high Priest may seem to be the sense of
godliness and religion, which within us by prayers and supplications, which we
power forth to God, exercises, as it were a certain priesthood. And so
likewise he takes the place of Saint James alligoricallie, as his application
of the seventh way of remission unto the Judicial sacrifice, does declare.
Si autem in amaritudine fletus fueris, luctu, lachrimis, and lamentatione
confect us, si carnem tuam maceraueris, and (...), ac multa abstinentia aridam
feceris and dixeris, quia sicut frixorium confrixa sunt ossa mea, tunc
sacrificium, similam a sartagine, vel a craticula obiulisse te (...). But if
thou have been in the bitterness of weeping, consumed with sorrow, tears and
lamentation, if thou have afflicted thy slesh and made it dry with fasting,
and much abstinence, and said, my bones are fried, as a frying pane, or a fire
thing, then know that thou have offered in sacrifice flower, of the frying
pan, or of the gredeyorn. Origin therefore gives a color in words, but no
substance in matter, unto this popish confession. Concerning the opinion, and
authority of Bid touching this matter, I have spoken before, but by the
circumstance of the letter, you say it may well appear, that the Apostle
speaks of sacramental confession to be made to gods priests. How so, I pray
you? forsooth, Because he had there willed them to send for the Priests of the
Church, to anoint them, and straight after adds this text of confession, and
praying over the sick. A simple reason god wot, because priests were spoken of
in an other matter, therefore none but priests may be understood in that which
follows: nay rather the circumstances make against auricular confession, and
popish anointing also. For what needs more priests then one to be sent for, to
other of those popish purposes, or what papist sends for more, although there
be never so many priests in the Church. But the company of elders in the
primitive Church, being chosen of the most replenished with heavenly graces,
that were in the congregation, both for the gift of healing, and for prayer to
be made over the sick man, were most convenient to be sent for. But it is in
vain by couller of any circumstances, to restrain the confession to
priests, when the very words of the letter (as you call the text) do make
it general, and mutual: and therefore here was no cause for Luther to deny
the authority of the epistle, or for any other to corrupt the text. But where
you count it a corruption, to writ in stead of, send for the priests of the
Church, this, call for the Elders of the congregation, you do either abuse the
ignorant of wilful malice, to make them think the sound of words being
changed, the sense is any thing altered, or else you ignorantly quarrel about
the translation, which is word for word out of the original greek into
English, as no man meanly learned in that tongue can doubt. It is not the
sound of the words you rehearse that troubles us, for we both like, and use
them in their right sense our selves, but it suffices you to have an
accidental sound, when you cannot sinde a substantial reason of your popish
ceremonies, and sacraments, in the holy scriptures.


ALLEN. But that thou may see, good Christian reader, the necessity of
confession the better, and that it is not grown to such a general practice
and opinion of necessity, upon any charge given by man or positive laws,
mark well with me, that it depends directly upon Christ's own words,
whose sins you do forgive, they be forgiven, and whose sins you do
retain, they be retained, And therefore sacramental confession to be of
Christ's institution. For if Christ gave power to Priests, to forgive, or
retain men's sins, then there must needs be some subject to their power and
judgment: else in vain were so long a confession of binding and lossing men's
sins, if the right of the power did not necessarily charge all men that have
such sins, to be subject to their binding and loosing. Therefore this is a
clear case, that in the very (...) words, that the power was delivered unto
them, the bond of obedience was also perscribed to us. So that after that day,
no sins mortal could ordinariely be loosed, but by the^, and that sacrament,
which in their ministry he then did institute.


FVLKE. Now you come toward the point, when you promis to let us see, how your
popish confession is of Christ's institution. It depends, you say, directly
upon Christ's own words, whose sins you do forgive, etc. That would we
feign see how. For you your self, though you make a very disorderly
syliogisme, cannot tell which way to infer it upon your premises. But thus you
reason, If Christ gave power to Priests to forgive or retain sins, then
there must needs be some subject to their power, and judgment. I answer you,
that every power draws not a judgment with it, and therefore you foist in
the word judgment vnreasonablie, although I grant also a kind of judgment
unto them, and that men are subject to this power and iudegment of the
ministers, by whom is declared the infallible sentence of God. Then say you,
it is a clear case, that in the very same words that power was delivered to
them, the bond of obedience was also prescribed to us. Of what obedience, I
pray you? that we should obey them in any thing they shall speak? or only when
they speak in the word of the Lord? If the latter only, for no man will grant
the former, show us if you be able, the Lords word, and commandment for
sacramental confesso^, as you term it, to be necessary. Your conclusion
hangs as well by your premises, as confession dependeh upon Christ's words,
That after that date no sins mortal could ordinarily be loosed, (...) by them
and in that sacrament, which in their ministry he then did institute. All sin
is mortal and deserving death. The wages of sin (says the Apostle) is
death. But your conclusion is confuted by your self afterward, granting
sins to be remitted Romans 6.
by baptism: and as for other sacraments, I dare say you will not exempt
them, but that sins are forgiven by them. And that which is the chief matter
in controversy, namely that a sacrament was there, and then instituted, you
always affirm, but never are able to prove. And whereas you affirm that the
necessity of auricular confession stands not upon positive laws, but by
Christ's institution, it is marvel, that this institution should so many
hundredth years be unknown in the Church: The Master of the sentences can say
nothing for it, but alleges diverse authorities to and froe, and in the end
has no certain argument to persuade us, that it is of Christ's institution.
Gratian likewise in his decrees, after diverse testimonies producted on both
sides, whether it be necessary or no, concludes in these words. Quib
authoritatibus, vel quibuslibetrationum firmamentis, vtroque sententia
satisfactionis and confessionis innitatur, in medium breuiter exposuimus, cui
autem harum (...) adhaerendum sit (...) is iudicio referatur, viraque enim
(...) habet sarientes and religi osor viros. Upon what authorites, and what
fundations of reasons, both the judgment of satisfaction and confession does
lean, we have briefly brought forth and declared. But to whether of these we
ought chiefly to stick, it is reserved to the judgment of the reader, for
either of both opinions, has wise and religious men favorers of it. If the
Romish Church in Gratianstime, had received the opinion, of the necessity of
shrift to a Priest, to be grounded upon the institution of Christ, neither he
nor the Master of the sentences would have bin in such a mamering about it
wherefore it appears to be but young ware, the institution whereof was so
uncertain to those principal pillars of popery. In so much that the gloss
upon the 5. aistinct. In penitentia, was bold to utter these words, which
should have proved him an heretic, if the popish Churh in his time, had held
that confession was of Christ's institution, and not upon any positive laws, In
hac distinctione and in aliis duabus sequentibus, agitur (...) de illa part
poenitentiae, que dicitur oris confessio, and operis satisfactio, quam de
aliis, and ider videndum est (...) oris confessio fuerit instituta, virum,
necessaria sit, vel (...) voluntaria, qualiter sit facienda, and cui, et
quando: dicunt quidam institutam fuisse in Paradiso (...) (...) peccatum,
dicente Donino ad Adam, Adam (...), (...). ideo enim (...), vt ipso conficente
peccatum, (...) sorma aliis in posterum confitendi. Sed quoniam in ille
interrogatione dominus minus express videbatur adconfirendum (...), idro post
exquisiuit a Cain fratricida expressi^s, vbi est Abel frater tuus? Alij dicunt
quod sub lege primo instituta, quando Joshua percepit A^hor, ^rimen s^um
confiteri, ^^ lapidatus est 45. did. secundum and illud. Alij dicunt quod in
Novo testamento a Iacobo dicente, consitemini alter^^^um peccata vestra. etc.
Sed melius dicitur eam institutam fuisse a qu^d^m universal Ecclesiae
traditione, potius quam ex nouo vel veteri testamento: authorit^s and traditio
Ecclesiae obligatoria est vt preceptum, ait 1.1. di. in his rebus: Ergo
necessaria est confessio in mortalib. apud nos, apud graecos non, quoniam non
emanauit apud illos traditio talis, (...) nec confisiunt in (...), sed in
firmentatis. 5. di cap. 1. si illud ergo (...), (...) alteru^rum peccata
vestra, (...) consilium primo, ali^^uin li^oret et Grecos, non obstanto eor^^
consuetudine. In this distinction, and the other two that follow, it is
entreated as well of that part of penance that is called confession of the
mouth and satisfaction of the work, as of other parts. And therefore it is to
be seen, when confession of the mouth was instituted: whether it be
necessary, or only voluntary. How it is to be made, and to whom and when:
Some say it was instituted in paradise immediately after sin committed, when
the Lord said unto Adam, Adam, where are thou? for therefore he enquired, that
he confessing his sin, a form of confessing should be given to others
afterward. But because in that confession the Lord secmed not so expresselie
to have warned him to confession, therefore he enquired afterward of Cain, the
murderer of his brother, more expresselie, where is Abel thy brother? Other
say, it was first instituted under the law, where Joshua commanded Achar to
confess his fault, and he was stoned, 45. di. sed and illud. Other say, that
it was instituted in the new Testament by Saint James saying, confess your
sins, etc. But it is better to say, that it was institutad by a certain
universal tradition of the Church, rather then by authority, out of the new or
old testament. And the tradition of the Church is of authority to bind, as
it is commanded (ar. 11. di.) in these things. Therefore confession in mortal
sins is necessary with us, but not with the Greeks, because such tradition
has not flowed unto them. Like as they make not the sacrament, in unleavened
bread, but in leauened, 5. di. 1. cap. si. Therefore that saying of James,
confess your sins one to an other, was at the first but of counsel, or else
is should bind the Greeks, notwithstanding the custom. That which follows,
in the gloss, that confession in some case may be made to a lay man, which
also both Gratian and Lumbard do hold, and that which Bid writes of
confession of sins to every man, does prove that confessio to a priest is not
of Christ's institution by their judgment. For if it were, it ought to be of
all, and every sin, as well as of those you call mortal, to a priest only. For
if Christ instituted a sacrament in these words, whose sins you forgive, etc.
and ordained a priest minister thereof, by no other means, but by hearing a
sin ners particular confession, as you seem to hold, what reason is there,
that a lay man should be a hearer of confession, or an absoluer, or that any
sin, be it never so small, should not be confessed?


ALLEN. And that is yet more evident by the second part of Christ's sentence,
where he says: whose sins you do retain, they be Hilar. super hunclocu^.
retained. The which word retinere, by Saint Hilarie signifies, non soluere,
or non remittere: to reteinis as much as not to loose, or not to forgive.
Whercupon, by Christ's express words, it ensues, that whose sins the
priest does not forgive, they be not forgiven, and therefore, that every man
being guilty of deadelie sin in his conscience, is subject to the priests
judgment, by the plain terms of Christ's own words. Mary we must well
note, that the priest has in other sacraments, and namely in Baptism, a
right in remitting sins both original and actual, but there, in the graund
pardon of all that is past, he is not made a judge, or a corrector: because the
Church can not practice judgment or exercise discipline upon the penitents,
for any things done before they came iinto the householde, and therefore can
appoint the party no penance nor punishment, nor bind him according to the
diversity and number of his faults, nor can make search exactlie of all his
secres sins by him committed, that the sentence may proceed according to the
parties deserts, but only upon his seeking that sacrament Council. trident.
Cap. 2. sess. 14.
to minister it unto him, according to Christ's institution: whereupon without
any sentence of remission given by the priest, as I absolve thee, or such like,
a pardon general of all his sins committed, if he come thither qualified,
most assuredly ensues.

But now, in the other sacrament of penance, not only pardon Damas. de ortha.
fidel 1. 4. cap. 9.
of sins, but punishment for sins, is put in the Apopostles and priests
hands, which can not be done without iudiciarie power and exact examination of
the penitent: because Christ would, that, if any did greeuouslie sin after
Baptism, he should, as it were, be conuented before his judgment seat in
earth, in which, as in his room, he has placed the Apostles and priests, as
is already proved. And therefore, men's sins must in this case be known,
with diversity of their kinds, and increase, by diversity of place, time,
person, number, and intent. For withoout this particular intelligence, can
neither the appointed judges of our souls do justice, nor the penitent
receive justice for his offenses. Therefore it is evident, that seeing this
holy order is authorized not only to remit sins generally, as in
Baptism, but also placed with all power over us as the judges of our sins,
we must needs by force of Christ's institution be driven to acknowledge and
confess all our sins to the Priest, so sitting in judgment upon the
examination of our conscience. For no man ever took upon him, not in any civil
causes, to determine and give sentence in the matter, whereof he has not by
some means or other, persit and particular instruction, and in causes
criminal much less, because the importance of the matter is much more. Then
in Gods causes and cases of our conscience, and in things belonging directly
to man's everlasting wealth or woe, which is the life or death perpctuall of our
souls, there, if either negligence in the judge in searching out of our sins,
or consempt in us in declaration, opening, confessing, or clear utterance of
them, do hinder the righteousness of Gods judgment executed by the Priests
office, or driving them to give wrong sentence of delivery and remission,
there the peril is exceeding great, and the danger well near damnation
perpetual.


FVLKE. Although to retain is somewhat more then not to loose, or not to
forgive, yet the conclusion is true, that whose sins the minister of the
Gospel does not forgive, of them that hear the Gospel, they are not
forgiven. But herofit does not follow, that every man is bound to shriue
himself to the priest. If you mean that by being subject, to the priests
judgment, the minister of the gospel denounces damnation, to all impenitent
and obstinate sinners: unto this sentence he is subject by the plain terms of
Christ's own words, that is such a one. But if he be truly penitent in the
sight of God, he is absolved by the sentence of the minister, which pronounces
in the name of God, forgiveness to all them, that be truly converted unto God.
Wherefore here is no place for the necessity of auricular confession, except
you can draw it in by the words of demonstratiue syllogismes, which I suppose,
to be impossible, and you your self shall in conscience confess no less,
whenever you dare go about it. As touching the difference you show betwixt
the priests office, in remitting sins by Baptism and penance, it stands
altogether upon your own surmise, without any authority of the holy
scriptures: For the minister of the ghospelis made as much a judge, whom to
admit and whom to refuse from the sacraments, as he is to pronounce, whose
sins be forgiven, and whose retained. Other judgment or correction, he has
not in the one nor in the other, neither is there any punishments put into the
Apostles or priests hands, for those sins that are to be pardoned, nor
pardon to those that are to be punished. The punishment is no less then the
sentence of eternal damnation, under which all obstinate, and unrepentant
sinners do remain so iong as they continue in their obstinacy, and
impenirencie. And therefore the power iudiciarie and exact examination of the
penitent, and the conuention before Gods judgment fear in earth, which should
be the priest, is nothing but imaginary vanity, without all ground of
authority out of Christ's institution. wherefore except you can prove, that
Christ by giving his Apostles authority to sorgiue or retain sins, did give
this inordinarie power that you speak of, and set up this judgment on earth
like to the courts in civil judgment, in canonical causes, whatsoever you
say without warrant of Gods word, is as easily by us denied, as by you it is
affirmed. Where you quote Damascene, I find in him nothing for, nor any thing
sounding that way in the place by you noted. But in the tenth Chapter, where
he speaks of eight kinds of baptism the fifte he makes Baptism by the
holy ghost and fire. Which may be says he, (...), a punishing Baptism,
because of the fire to come: and immediately follows the sixth kind of
baptism, which is very painfall, by repentance and tears. So that the one
being distinct by the author from the other, I know not by what learning you
do confound to make it seem as both were one.


ALLEN. Neither may we think, that this authority and approved power of
priests, concerns only the open offenses, which by witness and proof may
be convinced, and deferred to the public Magistrates of the Church, as some
Protestants, confounding all places of like words and terms in scripture
do. Wherein they consider not, that the perfectness of the Gospel teaches
man willingly to accuse, condemn, and judge 1. Cor. 11.
himself, that he be not judged of our Lord. Neither do they weigh, that
this judgment of our sins, though it be ministered by man, is yet the seat
and court of Christ, to whom it no less pertains, to bind and loose our
secret sins, then our open offenses. And he without exception, committed
remission of all manner of sins unto the Apostles and priests, saying: Like
as my father sent me, so do I send you: But Christ was sent to heal the
contrite and sorrowful of al sins, private and public: therefore al manner
of offenses, be they never so secret, belong to the priests not only pardon,
but also correction and punishment, whereof, because they be men, they cannot
justly discern or determine, to remit or retain, give pardon or give
penance, except they be confessed by the parties penitent. Christ him self,
perfectly seeing all diseases both of body and soul, Marc. 10.
and the inward sorrow and suit of every man's heart, yet said to the sick
man and blind: Quid vis faciam (...)? what would thou have at my hands? And
shall the priest being a mortal man take upon him to give sentence of the
diseases of our souls before he know them, or pardon him that will not show
unto him, wherein and for what sin he asks a pardon? Furthermore the sins of
man's cogitation, that cannot be discerned by the priest, with out the
confession of the party, be often no less grievous and damnable before God,
then the open offenses: therefore there may be no doubt, but Christ has
ordained mercy, as well for them, as other that be actuallie committed, and
subject to the sight of the world, but yet no otherwise, but by the sacrament
of penance, in which, without exception, the priests have power to remit or
retain sins, as well private, as public. Therefore the same secret sins
being subject to the Churches judgment no less then the open, they must
needs be uttered and confessed, or else they cannot be realesed, much less
have any enjoined penance for them.

But it is mecre wrangling of our adversaries in so plain a case, and folly
in all other to doubt, whether secret offenses, even committed in thought
only against the last two commandments forbiding unlawful coveting and
desires of the mind, be properly subject to the Priests judgment, seeing they
can by no otherwise be released, but in the sacrament of penance, and sincere
confession of them. For here is practiced a judgment. not of civil
Magistrates, which only punish by laws of all nations actually committed
faults against the weal public, but of soul and conscience, which properly
pertain to the cure of Priests, as they properly occupy Christ's own room,
to whose pardon and punishment, not only open sins, but also private
offenses, either in deed or thought committed, do in like perteine. For
external penance, or public, is rather used to satisfy the Church of her
right, in which sins can not openly be committed, but to the great offense
of her children, and therefore must in her, by public penance, be corrected,
for the example of discipline, and prouiso of the like sins to come.


FVLKE. I know no Protestants, neither I suppose you can name any writer of
them, that does think that the authority of sorgiuing and retaining sins,
concerns only open offenses, and not secret. But it may be that some
protestants have written, as all I think do hold, and you your self in the
end of this section do acknowledge, that open confession is most convenient,
fot the satisfaction of the Church which is offended, where and by whom open
and notorious sins have been committed. But that secret confession made to a
priest, is necessary for the discharge of secret sins, all Protestants
deny, neither can any Papists prove it. For such reasons as you bring are
very weak and frivolous. The perfectnes of the Gospel, teaches man,
willingly to accuse, condemn, and judge himself, that he be not judged of
our Lord: Ergo, he is bound to shriue himself to a Priest. Nay contrariewise,
if he be made accuser, condemner, and judge of himself, he need not seek
any other external judge, but in his own conscience, accuse, examine,
condemn, and judge himself before God. And this court of conscience, we
acknowledge to be the seat, and court of Christ, where no priest or other
mortal man has authority to sit and judge. Neither does any correction and
punishment of our sins belong to priests by reason that Christ sent the
Apostles, and their successors, to Preach, as he was sent by his father: but
they may remit or retain sins, without hearing the particular confession of
every sinner, by declaring the mercy of God to all that repent, and his
justice, to all that continue in sin without repentance. But it is a
maruetlous strong argument, Iweene, to prove the necessity of confession,
because our savior Christ caused the blind man, by uttering his request in
particular, to declare his faith. Nay if he had caused all them whose sins he
pronounced to be forgiven, first to make particular confession unto him, it had
been more color, and yet no sufficient argument to prove the necessity of
confession to be made unto other men, much less that he would have the blind
man acknowledge, that he believed that he was able to give him sight: wherefore
upon a Principle shamefully begged, that confession to a priest is necessary,
you go about to prove that confession of secret faults, and cogitations of man's
heart, is also to be made to a priest, and you accuse your adversaries of
wrangling in so plain a case, and all men of folly, that doubt, whether such
secret offenses be subject to the Priests judgment, seeing they can not
otherwise be released but in the sacrament of penance, and sincere confession
of them: but which of your adversaries will grant that they can not otherwise
be released, or how will you satisfy them that doubt out of the holy
scriptures of the institution of such a sacrament, and of auriculer confession
as necessary.


ALLEN. Moreover the sacrifices of the old law were in many cases done by the
Priests, as well for private sins as open; which could not be without the
confession of the penitent: ergo, much more the secrets of our souls be
subject to our Priests, to whom Christ has given all judgment. Yet all this
notwithstanding there be some that keep themselves by vain excuse of sin,
from the very principal point and pith of this sacrament, which is the
particular examination of a man's sins committed by thought, word, or work,
and will yet draw back, and hold, that a general confession is enough with
terms universal, acknowledgeing a man's self to have sins by mind, word,
and deed, though he express not the several points thereof. But this
opinion is confuted, both by all the fore said reasons, and other, as a most
absord and wilful maintenance of sin. For by this rule, he that killed and
murdered thousands, should confess no more after his wicked acts then
before, nor no more then the innocentest man that lives. David's weeping and
confession should have been one after his double deadly sin committed, as
before in his innocence. Peter should not have more bitterly went after his
for saking of his master, then before. Neither should our confession then
pertain more to our selves then to other, who by like general clauses may
truly make the like and the same confession, as it is now in the Church of
England. But the holy King David confessed not sins common to him self and
other men, but my sin, my wickedness, my impiety, says he, and this in
confessing to God that know already his sins: How much more now, where Gods
judgment is exercised by man, that can not discern our faults him self,
must we confess our sins, that he may rightly judge thereof?


FVLKE. The sacrifices of the old law did in deed contain a confession of
sin, but no particular declaration unto the priest, of any sin committed in
secret, therefore your conclusion is naught, as also it is blasphemous that you
say therein, that Christ has given to your priests all judgment. But
confession by a general clause, you do not allow to be sufficient to
salvation, not answerable to Christ's meaning. I pray you sit at the length,
bring forth those words of Christ by which you know his meaning so well, that
you dare deny salvation to them that make not a particular confession to a
priest. By this rule you say, the murderer of thousands should confess no
more then the innocentest man alive: verily to a priest he is no more bound to
confess his murders, then an innocent man his lester trespasses. But as any
man's sins are more heinous and grievous, so ought he to bewail and lament
the same more earnestly before God: So did David and Peter, after their
several and grievous falls, not to inform God, which knew their sins more
exactlie then they could make confession of them, but to stir up themselves
to more earnest hearty sorrow, and repentance for them. That Gods judgment is
so exercised by priests as you mean, you must first prove, and after use for
an argument, or else you beg and get nothing.


ALLEN. Penance must be done for every of our sins. So Peter prescribed
Simon the sorcerer, when he attempted to have bought the gift of Gods Spirit,
that he should do penance for that especial grievous crime: Poenitentiam age,
says he, ab hac nequitia tua, Do penance for this thy wicked Act. 8.
attempt, if perchance God will forgive thee this abominable intent. The man
was baptized not long before, and then no such Penance was prescribed for his
most grievous and blasphemous practices of Nicromancie and witchcrafte long
exercised before. Wherein this naughty pack Simon Magus, is a thousand parts
more religious then our new masters. For he desired the Apostles to pray to
God for him, that this sin might be forgiven him: where these care no more
for the priest or Apostle, concerning their sins, then they do for dogs
Again, Saint Paul did not only confess his sins by a general clause, but
acknowledged his own sins, wherein he in his own person had offended, he
confessed he was of al sinners the greatest, that he had obtained commission to
attache them that believed in Christ's name, and so forth. 1. Tim. 1. Act. 15.
Such as were faithful also at Ephesus, as we read in the 19. of the Acts,
came to the Apostles, Et confitebantur actus suos, and confessed their acts
and misdees, In so much, that certain which had followed unlawful arts, as
Magike, Nicromancie, and such like curiosity, confessed their faults, and
burned their books before all the people.


FVLKE. We must be poenitent for all and every of oursinnes, that we know or
can call to mind: but that penance must be enjoined by a Priest, as you mean,
for every sin, let us see how you can prove it. S. Peter prescribed Simon
Magus, that he should do penance for that grievous crime: Therefore penance must
be done for eucrie of our sins. Although the antecedent were true, yet the
consequence is naught penance must be done for one open and heinous sin,
ergo, for all secret sins. But I deny that any such penance as you mean,
was enjoined unto him by Peter. But that he exhorted Simon to repentance, if he
looked to have any forgiveness of his sins, (...), repent, says he, or change
thy mind from this thy wickedness, and not as you translate, for this thy
wickedness, as though repentance were a satisfaction for his sin. Moreover I
answer, you use not to enjoin penance, before men have confessed their sin.
But when Peter exhorted Simon to repent, he had not yet confessed his sin,
but was a covetous hipocrite. (...) you dissent from your pupills of Rhemis
which deny that doing of penance, was prescribed to men before they were
baptized. For they translate agite panitentiam, as well before baptism, as
after, to do penance, satisfaction for sin. Where you say that your new
maislers care no more for the Priest or Apostle concerning their sins, then
they do for degges, it is a saucic Censure, of a dogged Papist. For they whom
you scorn, do reverence all the ministers of God, as well in the power they
have to remitte sins, as also in all other parts of their office. An other
argument on have of Saint Paul's example, who confessed his own sins, and
namely the greatest, of persecuting the Church of Christ. Yea but not his
secret sins to a priest: but his open faults before his conversion, and
Baptism. And so likewise they that believed, Act. 19 made open confession of
some of their deuilish practizes committed before they were Christians, and in
detestation of their former wickedness, and sign of true repentance burned
their books to a great value.


ALLEN. If the priests had nothing else to do with oursins, but as they had
in the old law to do with the leprous persons, that is to say, should only
discern, which were by God remitted or not remitted, they could not that do,
except they saw the variety of the said sins, by man's confession. But now
seeing they have further interest in our matters, and must properly both pardon
and give just penance for sin, how is it possible they should do this
without exact knowledge of entry of our grievous offenses. In deed a general
confession, such as is often made in divine service to God or his priests,
such as be Catholic, does some times take away the common infirmities of our
sinful life, that our light trespasses be not imputed to us, or such, as we
have so forgotten, that we cannot by any convenient search, call again to our
remembrance: But other greater crimes and deadly sins, for which the
sacrament of discipline was instituted, and the priests judgment seat erected
in the Church, are not discharged before God, without several contrition, and
distinct confession, with ready in tent of the penitent to accomplish such
fruits of penance, as by the priest shall be appointed for the satisfying for
his sins.

And what a marucilous disorder is brought into Christ's Church, by plain
flattery of our selves herein, whiles we hold that this general confession
is sufficient, we see by experience of these our evil days, where there is
now put no difference betwixt small offenders and most grievous sinners, no
diversity of penance, no more sorrow in one then in other, no confession of
the most wicked, no more then of the smallest sinner, or most honest liver. A
common murderer, a filthy whoremunger, a daily drunkerd, a false robber, a
greedy extorcioner, confess as little, do as little penance lament as little, yea
a great deal less, then the honest sort of people do, for much more small and
fewer faults. All men repose themselves now of days so much in Christ's
passion, and there only no faith, that they will neither confess to God nor
man, neither sigh nor sorrow, nor do satisfaction for their sins. Well, let
all men be assured, that God in the next world will not go by general Chapters,
but will have an account of all our proper works and misdeedes, till it come to
our idle words and vain thoughts. The which judgment, because Gods Church
and ministers sentence, to whom Christ gave all judgment of our sins in
earth, does most cleerelie resemble, we may be out of doubt, that the like
particular discussing and examination of our own selves, here before his
ministers, must needs be had, that we 1. Cor. 11.
be not judged of our Lord in the life to come.


FVLKE. By seeing the variety of sins, though the Priest could see them as
clearlie as he that committed them, yea though he were present at the doing of
them, and did see all the circumstances of them: he could never discern which
were by God remitted, or not remitted, except he could see the repentance of
the sins, according to which God does either remitte, or retain sins:
Therefore confession to this purpose is neither necessary, nor profitable. For
the further interest you claim, you must bring better evidence then he thereto
you have showed forth, or else we may never yield it unto you. And greatly I
marvel how you can affirm, that the Priest can properly pardon sin, when
he can not to any man pronounce pardon of his sin, except he be true lie
contrite, and penitent before god. God only and the party penitent are privy
to the con trition of his heart, which in an Hipocrit with a thousand
confessions may be dissembled. And I trow you will not say that without
unfeigned contrition of the heart the priest may pardon a sinner. The doctrine
of your masters is but with condition, if the party be contrite without
counterfayting: therefore he that can not pardon absolutely, can much les
pardon properly. Where you make general confession auailable, either for
small and light offenses, or else for greater sins forgotten, you speak
without proof, and therefore your authoritite may be denied without doubt.

The disorder, you speak of, for lack of shrift, was greater when most me
went to shrift, and not fearing the iugdement seat of God, and thought they
were sufficiently discharged of their sins, if they had powered them out into
a priests lape, or friars coule. God be praised, they that repose them selves
most in Christ's passion, and by the merits thereof believe to receive
forgiveness of sins by faith in his blood, are more ready to confess their
unworthiness both before God and man, then any popish hypocrite that trusts in
the merit of his works, and his own satisfaction, for his sins, and do
more sigh and sorrow for their sins, although they be such as man's law
cannot punish, although they were known, then they that whisper half an hour
in a priests ear, for the sins of one whole year, whereas one hours
offenses, if they were particularie called to mind, and repeated, would ask
longer time to confess them. We know that in the next world God will have an
account of al our misdeeds, even to our idle words and thoughts, and therefore
our wholl life ought to be a continual meditation, and profession of
repentance, and yet we know by his word and assurance ofhis spirit, that the
same infinite multitude and heap of our sins shall not be laid to our charge,
because out savior Christ is the lamb of God that has taken them away, and
satisfied the justice of God for them.

That Christ has given al judgment of our sins in earth to his Church and
the ministers thereof, you often affirm, and thereupon build up your court of
confession, but by what words this may be proved you are never able to show.
For that text, whose sins you forgive, etc. imporeth no such manner of
judgment, but an authority to pronunce a sentence declaratorie of Gods
mercy, in pardoning all them that truly repent, and of his justice in
punishing all them that obstinatly refuse the grace of God offered in the
preaching of the Ghospel. The examining and iudgeing of our selves, whch the
Apostle requires, that we be not judged of the Lord, urges us not to commit
our selves to the examination and judgment of othermen, but to a diligent
discussing of our own conscience before god, that we come not with hypocrisy
or without dew regard of his presence and benefits to the participation of his
sacraments.


ALLEN. And this particular discussing Saint Paull meant, when he commended
unto the Corinthians, and by them commanded all Christian men to prove, try,
and judge themselves, especially before the receipt of the blessed sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, which requires most purity of life in the
receiver, that can be. For to attempt to receive the holy body of Christ
before we have in contrite manner confessed our selves, and purged our
consciences, by the judgment of Christ's Church, of the guilt of deadly
sin, is exceeding damnable to us, and much dishonor to Christ's own person.
Which proving and judging of man's self, to be meant by the diligent dif
cussing of our consciences, sins, and misdeedes, by contrition and confession
of them to our ghostly Father, the practice of the Church does most plainly
prove, which never suffered any grievous sinner to communicate, before he had
called him self to a reckning of his sins, before the minister of God, and
so judged him self, that he receive not to his damnation that, which to every
worthy person is his life and salvation. Whereof S. Augustine, or the author
of the book de Ecclesiasticis De Ecclesiast. dog. ca. 53.
dogmatibus, set forth with his name, gives us good notice for his time. Quem
mortalia crimina post Baptismum commissa premunt, hortor prius publica
poenitentia satisfacere, and ita sacerdotis iudicio reconciliatum, communioni
sociari, si vult non ad iudicium and condemnationem sui, Eucharistiam
percipere, sed and secreta satisfactione solui mortalia crimina non negamus. I
exhort every man (says this holy doctor) that is burdened after his
baptism with mortal sin, to satisfy for the same by public penance, and
to be reconciled by the priests judgment, and to be restored to the communion
of saints, if he mean to receive the holy Sacrament, not to his judgment and
condemnation. And I deny not in this case, but deadly sins may be remitted
by secret satisfaction. Thus he. By whose words you see, in what a damnahle
state men now of days stand, seeing that whosoever receives the sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, before he be reconciled by a priests sentence, and
assoiled of his sins, he does receive it to his everlasting damnation. Unto
whose judgment I join Saint Cyprian in this same matter, complainig very
earnestly upon certain Conuersies in his days, that would adventure upon
Sermon. de lapsis.
Christ's body and blood, ante exomologesim factam criminis, ante purgatam
conscientiam, sacrificio and manu sacerdotis: Before their sins be confessed,
and their consciences purged by sacrifice, and the Priests hand.

Al these things might be at large declared, and confirmed farther by the
judgment of mostauncient Fathers: but because I have been very long, and
enough already may seem to be said for such as by reason will be satisfied,
and a great deal more then any Protestant will answer unto, and also the
scriptures them selves, giving the Priest so plain power of binding and
retaining, as well as of remitting and loosing, will do more with these that
have charged themselves with the belief of nothing that is not in express
writing of Gods word, then the uniform consent of all ages, and the most
notable persons in the same. In respect of their humor therefore, I will not
say much more for this point, then I have said: only my meaning now is, for
the Catholics comfort, to repeat a few such evident sentences out of most
authentic authors, by whom we take a (...) not only of their meaninges,
which is much for the matter, but especially, of the Churches practice in all
ages and most countries christened, since the Apostles time, which I account
the most surest way to touch and try truth by, that by the example of al our
forefathers, every man may willingly learn to submit him self to the sentence
of such as God has made the judges of his soul, and sins.


FVLKE. If Saint Poul had meant Popish shrift, he could and would have said,
Submit your selves to the examination and judgment of the Priest, and not as
he has said, Let a man try him self: and, Judge your selves brethren. If
auricular confession be necessary, under pain of damnation, for every one
that receives the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, immediately before
it, many thousands of your priests which say mass every day, without
shriuing themselves, are in a damnable case. I or there passes no day of man's
life, without some deadelie sin, if not in deed not word, yet at the least
in thought: but that you popish hypocrites by your distinction of venial
sins, flatter your selves to be clear, when you are most foull and filthy.
but the perpetual practice of the Church, you say, proves the necessity of
auricular confession, whereof you take witness the author of the book, de
Ecclesiasticis dogmatibus for his time, which you do honestly not to father
upon Saint Augustine, being a man of much later time, less learning, and more
corruption of doctrine: but you do fraudulently cut of his saying in the
waste, because that which follows declares plainly, that either he means
not of mortal sins, as the Popish Church now does hold, or else his opinion
for secret satisfaction is far differing from that you would have men ween
that he means: namely such as you use to inioine in your confession, five
Ladies Psalters, five fridaies fast, five pence, groates or shillings, to so
many poor men in remembrance of the 5. wounds and such like stuff: but these
authors words require, another manner of satisfaction. Sed and secreta
satisfactione solui mortalia crimina non negamus, sed mutato prius
secularihabitu, and confesso religionis studio, per vitae correctionem, and
iugi, immo perpetuo luctu miserante Deo: it a duntaxat vt contraria pro his
quae poenitet (...), and eucharistiam omnibus dominic is diebus, supplex and
submissus vsque ad mortem percipiat. Poenitentia vera est penitenda non
admittere, and admissa deflere. Satisfactio paenitentiae, est causas peccatorum
excidere, nec eorum suggestionibus aditum indulgere. But also that by secret
satisfaction mortal crimes may be loosed we do not deny, but so that the
secular habit be first changed, and the study of religion confessed by
amendment of life, and by continual, yea perpetual sorrow, God being
merciful: so only that he do the contrary things to those for which he
does penance, and humbly and lowly receive the Euchariste every sondaie to
his dying day. It is true repentance not to commit things to be repented, and
to bewail such as are committed. The satisfaction of repentance is, to cut of
the causes of sins, and to yeald no entry unto their suggestions. Wherefore
it is plain, that in this writers time there was no auricular confession, but
an open confession, and public penance for open and heinous offenses, and that
none was admitted to secret satisfaction, except he changed his habit, became
a Monk, and performed other conditions by him required, by which it is
manifest that the judgment of this writer, though corrupt, yet is contrary to
the practice of the popish Church at this day. But Saint Cyprian is a better
witness (I trow) for the necessity of auricular confession of secret sins,
saving that he speaks of them that had openly fallen to Idolatry, and
without open confession of their fault and public satisfaction of the Church,
by some indiscreet pastors, were admitted to the Lords table: describing
them he says, Mortiferos Idolorum cibos adhuc pene ructantes, exhalantibus
etiamnum scelus suum faucibus, and contagia funesta (...), Dominicorpus
inuadunt, etc. Almost yet belching out the deadly meats of their Idols, the
jaws as yet breathing out their own wickedness, and savoring of the deadelie
infection, they set upon our Lords body. And immediately before the words by
you cited, Plus modo in dominum manib, atque ore delinquunt, quam cum Dominum
negauerant. They do more offend now against the Lord with their hands and
their mouth, then at such time as they denied the Lord. These words declare
of what kind of men, of what kind of sins, of what kind of confession, and
of what kind of satisfaction, this Doctor does speak, whose vehemency
tends to the maintenance of discipline, being in great danger of decaie, by
the untimely and ungodly lenity of some flattering Church men in those
days, that would reconcile such unto the Church by admitting them to the
communion, which after their most grievous fall and denial of Christ before
men, had not given sufficient tokens and testimonies of their hearty repentance
before God, without the which, the wrath of God justly kindled against them for
their henious offenses, couldnot be appeased.

Hitherto therefore, for the necessity of auricular confession, we have seen
nothing, that any learned protestant might voutchsafe of any answer: and as
for the scriptures giving the Priest so plain power, as well of binding and
retaining, as of loosing and remitting, do lay no necessity upon any man to
confess unto them the particularities of his secret faults, nor give any
authority unto the priests to exact the same, I say not by express words,
but not by any necessary illation or conclusion out of the express words of
the scripture, which we hold to be of as great credit, as that which is
contained in express words. As for the uniform consent of all ages, and the
mosie notable persons in the same, whereof you make your common vaunt, can never
be showed for the necessity of auricular shrift, no nor for any other point
of popery, though you would make choice of the eldest error that you hold.
That you take the Churches practice in all ages, to be the most surest way to
touch and try truth by, you declare what reverent opinion you have of the word
of God, which our Savior Christ says, is the truth, wherein he prays his
father to sanctify al his disciples unto the worlds end. Unto which rule of
truth al practice of me must be exacted, and by it be tried. For what mad
blasphemy were it to say, that the word of God, which was before all practice
the only truth of touch, has now lost his credit, or the best part thereof,
if practice of men in all ages be now become the most surest way to try and
touch truth by, as if the manners of men were always the best interpretation
of the law.


That confession has ever been used, of all mortal sins, in all countries
and ages since Christ's time, it is proved by the witness of most learned
fathers, with an answer to such things, as out of the Fathers be sometimes
objected to the contrary.

THE 11. CHAP.
ALLEN. I Am the longer in this approved truth, because I remember what Saint
Chrysostom says: And I see by De sacer. li. 2.
these days, that it is very true which he writes, Multa arie opus esse, vt
qui laborant Christiani, vltro sibi (...) persuadeant, sacerdotum curationibus
sese submittere: That it is a point of high wisdom and cunning, to bring to
pass that Christian men which are sick in soul, would persuade themselves to
submit in all causes them selves to the priests curing. For indeed, in
Nectarius his predecessors days, there was such an offense arose in the
simple sort, and such a tragedy in Constantinople Church, by the naughty
fact of a deaton there, that their Bishop was glad to make the state of
penance, which then was often published even for private sins, to be a great
deal more free then before. Whereupon, the people took occasion of such
liberty and licentious life, that when their common Penitenciarie, by the
commandment of Nectarius was removed, they were exceeding loath to confess,
or do just penance for their sins actual. Though that good man
condescending to the peoples weakness, meant never to take away that wholl
order, wherein he had no authority, because it is no politic provision, but
Christ's institution: but only that the penance should not be public, except
the party listed, of those sins which were to the said Penitentiarie
confessed in secret. Which fact of his, though perchance it was necessary for
that time, yet was not allowed of the writers of the same History. As a thing
(says Sozomenus) that brought much Lib. 9. cap. 35. tripar. histor.
dissolute life, and alteration of the peoples manners into the Church. Yet our
adversaries are in such aistresse, for their maintenance of their contrary
assertion, against holy confession, that they be not ashamed to allege this
man's doubtful example. Which if it were good and to be followed: yet made it
nothing against shrift, which they call now auricular confession, or if it did
make against the whole Sacrament every way ministered, yet it could not of
reason be followed, being but one bishops compelled act, and that disalowed
even of the reporters them selves, and proved to be evil, by the practice of
all Churches christened to the contrary.


FVLKE. Chrysostomes words by you translated, if you had not falsified in
translation, by adding of your own, these words ( in all causes) which are
neither in the original Greek, nor in the latin version, make but a small
show for the necessity of the auriculer confession. For in that place,
Chrysostom shows how much more difficult the office of a spiritual shepard
is, then the charge of a bodily herdman, by this, that the shepperd of
unreasonable sheep may both see the diseases of his cattle, and also compel
them to take his medicines and diet: but the spiritual shepherd cannot
always see with what diseases his flock are infected, neither can he compel
them, but must exhort them, willingly to submit them selves to his cure,
whereby he means his doctrine of admonition, reprehension, and such like. But
because you make mention of a story, and do not express it, and yet excuse
Chrysostom thereby in any thing that he has written, sounding against the
necessity of confessing before men, of sins committed in secret: as though
he durst not fully set down his judgment thereof before the peo ple. I will
set forth the story as it is reported, by the Ecclesiastical writers,
Socrates and Sozomenus. Socrates, L. 5. C. 19. writes thus. About the same
time it was thought good, to take away those elders or priests of the
Churches, which were appointed over public repentance, upon such cause. Since
the time that the Nouatians were divided from the Church, for that they would
not communicate with them, that had fallen in the persecution, that was under
Decius, the Bishops of the Church added unto the Ecclesiastical canon or rule,
a certain priest or elder which should be over them that repented, that they
which were fallen after baptism, should confess their sins before this
appointed priest. And this rule holds still unto this time in other sects.
Only they that hold Christ to be of the same substance with his father, and
the Nouatians which agree with the^ in this faith, have rejected this priest
appointed over them that repent. The Nouatians in deed at the first, received
not this addition. But they which now hold the Churches, having observed it for
a long time under Nectarius, have changed it, by occasion of this matter that
happened in the Church. A certain noble woman came to the priest appointed for
repentance, and made particular confession of those sins she had committed
after baptism: the priest charged this woman to fast and pray cominuallie,
that with her confession she might show forth the work that was meet for
repentance. But the woman proceeding accused her self of another offense, for
she declared that a certain Deacon of the Church had line with her. This being
declared, caused the Deacon to be cast out of the Church, but a tumult was
raised among the priests: for they were sore grieved, not only with that
which was done, but also because this fact tended greatly to the slander and
contumely of the Church. So while clergy men were in great reproach for these
things, a certain blessed elder of the Church borne at Alexandria gave in
council to the Bishop Nectarius, to take away this priest, that was appointed
over repentance and to permit every man according to his own conscience to be
partaker of the mysteries. For by that means only, he should have the Church
void of slander. These things because I heard my self of that blessed man,
I was (...) to commit unto this writing. For as I have often said, I have given
all diligence to learn of every man that knew these matters, and exactlie to
search them out, that I might write nothing beside the truth. But I said unto
Eudemon or that blessed man: your counsel, Sir, has, brought into the Church
God knows what or no. But I see that you have given occasion, that one should
not reprehend an others sins, nor to observe that precept of the Apostle,
which says: Communicate not with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them. But of these matters sufficient. Sozomenus, Lib. 7. Cap.
16. reports the matter after this manner. About this time Nectarius, which
governed the Church of Constantinople, was the first that would no longer
permit that priest, which was appointed for them that repented. And him
followed al most al other Bishops. Now, this matter what it is, or whence it
began, or for what cause it ceased, diverse men report diuerselie. I will
declare what I think. For seeing not to sin at all, it is a matter more
divine, then agreeable to man's nature, and that God has commanded to grant
pardon to them that repent, although they offend often times, and in refusing
to confess sins, the debt grows more burthenous, as it is like, it was
thought good among the priests of old time, that as it were in an open
theater, under the witness of the multitude of the Church, men should declare
their sins. And for this purpose they appointed a priest or elder of the best
conversation, continent of speech, and wise, to whom they came which had
sinned, and confessed such things as they had committed in their life. And he
according to every man's sin, after he had appointed a mulct what he ought to
do, or to abide, absolved them, when they had performed their penalty by
themselves. But as for the Nouatians, which made no account of repentance,
needed not this matter. But in other sects of heretics, it is observed even
until this time. And it is diligintlie observed in the western Churches, and
especially in the Church of the Romans. For there is a certain open place
appointed, for them that are in exercise of repentance For they stand with
heavy cheer and as it were sorowing. And when the service of God is ended,
being not made partakers of those things, that are lawful for the holy ones,
with weeping and lamentation, they cast themselves down flat upon the earth:
the Bishop beholding them, runs to them weeping and likewise falling upon
the earth, the wholl multitude of the Church is then filled with mourning and
weeping. Then first the Bishop rises up, and lifts up the sinners that lie
on the ground, and after he has prayed as it is meets for the penitents that
have sinned, he dismisseth them. Then every one of them willingly afflicting
himself, either with fastings, or abstine^ce from washings or certain meats,
or with other things that are enjoined the^, continues a seaso, so long as the
Bishop has appointed unto him. And at the time appointed, after he has paid,
as it were a certain debt, he is released of the punishment of fin, and com
meth into the congregation with the rest of the people. These things the
priests of Rome observe even until our days. But in the Church of
Constantinople, the priest or elder that was appointed over the penitent, did
exercise that office, until a^ certain noble woman, being appointed by the
priests to fast, and pray to God for those sins which she had declared, while
she continued in the Church, for this purpose, confessed that she had
committed fornication with a Deacon, whereof the multitude hauiug
understanding, was sore grieved, for defiling the Church, and it was an
exceeding great slander unto the whole clergy. Nectarius being in doubt how
to handle this matter, that had happened, first depriueth the fornicator of his
ministry. And being counseled by certain men, to permit every man, as his
conscience served him, and as he might be bold, to communicate the mysteries,
he caused the priest to give over that was appointed for repentance, and from
that time this custom taking hold, has hitherto continued. Now I think the
ancient gravity and precisenes, having begone by little and little to fall
away, into a diverse and negligent custom, seeing before, as I suppose, the
offenses were less, both through shame of them which declared their own
transgressions, and through the precisenes of them that were appointed judges
in this case. And for the same cause I gather that the Emperor Theodosius
providing for the good name and gravity of the Churches, made a law that women
should not be admmitted to the ministry of god, except they had children, and
were above threescore years old, according to the express commandment of
the Apostle, and to expel out of the Churches, those women that were shorn in
the head, and to deprive such Bishops from their Bishoppricke, which did admit
any such women. The story being as I have set it forth, out of the report of
the Ecclesiastical writers, now let us see how sincerely you handle the
matter, and report thereof at your pleasure. First you say, that Nectarius made
the state of penance more free, then before: where as by the story it is
plain, that he took away altogether that public form, and trial of
repentance, leaving every man to his conscience. Secondly, you say, the
people took such occasion of liberty, that they were loath to confess, or do
just penance for their sins at all. It is not unlike that the wicked sort, as
they abuse all Christian liberty, so being left to the examination of their
own conscience, whereunto the scripture leaves them, would be more dissolute:
But the godly being delivered from such a burthenous and unnecessary ceremony
and custom, would nevertheless confess their sins before God, and be
truly penitent, and hartelie sorry for the same. Thirdly you say,
Nectarius, never meant to take away that whole order, wherein he had no
authority. But that he took it wholly away, the story is plain, and that he
had authority in an order, and decree of the Church, first made against the
Nouatians, which was subject to mutation, Socrates does declare. And Sozomene
reports the consent, and imitation, of all the Catholic Bishops of the
East, which they, it is not like, would have yealded unto, if it had been as
you say, an institutio of shrist. That it was not allowed of the writer of the
story Sozomenus, it is a small matter, seeing it was allowed of so many hundred
bishops for so manyyeares before him, that were better deuines then he, and
therefore you say untruly, that it was but one man's doubtful example, and but
one bishops compelled act, which was allowed of all the Bishops of the East, and
followed. But if it were good, you say, it makes nothing against private
shrift, yes verily. for a thousand times greater inconvenience has come by
auricular confession, then the abusing of one gentlewoman. To omit all other,
the story is famous and fresh in memory, within these few years, when the
Inquisitors in Spain, charged al honest women and matrons that had been
solicited by their ghostly fathers unto adultery, to confess the same
before them, how the holy house was pestred with accusations, and how full the
streates were of women repairing to the holy house, to declare the abuse of
confession against their ghostly fathers. Wherefore if one such a fact, as the
old story reports, were thought a sufficient cause unto all the godly and
learned Bishops of the East, to abolish that unnecessary order and custom, of
confessing and doing open penance in the Church for secret faults, how much
more so many and so shameful abuses as have ensued of this ear shrift, ought
to have moved the Church of God in these dates, to put away the necessity
thereof: that I speak nothing of the ungodly opinions that are held thereof,
to the snare of men's consciences, which make it altogether intolerable. Last
of all, where you allege the practice of all Churches christianed to the
contrary, how untrue it is, the very story is plain, and the custom of the
Greek Churches confessed by Gratian not to admit this kind of confession, as
being only a positive decree of men, no necessary institution of God.


ALLEN. And sure it, is that Saint Crysostome, who succeeded Nectarius, hadmuch
a do to bring the people, made more licentious, by the foresaid grant, to
the distinct numbering of all their sins to the priest again, which he knew
to be necessary by Christ's institution: and therefore in exhorting them to
Sermon. de poeniten. and confess.
confession, he speaks much of bashfulnes, which the people had in uttering
their sins, and of fear of vpbraiding such things as they had confessed to
the priests, and of coming forth as it were, to a public stage to open their
offenses, as the use was in his predecessors days. Of all which things and
other impediments of confession, this doctor does discharge the penitents by a
warranting of them, that private confession, which is made without witness,
and to him that shall not lay any thing confessed to their charge, or open it
to the world, is enough, though the open order used before, he counts the
more perfect and better, wherein he says, that Job was not ashamed to
confess his faults before the world, much less Christen men should be
aboshed to open themselves to God, not meaning so by confession made to god, as
though he discharged them of opening their sins in the close consistory of
the priests judgment, which he in deed did not, but he means, as the Master
first answered, and other school men of great and exact judgment Magister
quarto sententiarum.
after him, that in steed of public confession, made in the face of the
Church, secret opening to the priest (who occupies there the seat of God, and
therefore would never shame him before men) would serve.

Marie the truth is, that the late liberty that his people was set in through
the disordered demeanor of the foresaid Deacon, made this cunning shepherd
and expert preacher, so to use his words, as they might win most of the
worste, and be least offense to the weak. And therefore he speaks so warelie
and indifferently, that sometimes he bids them confess to God, and yet
with several numbering of every of their sins, and other whiles in the very
same sermon, he says, atque oportebat maxim apud homines ea dicerc, and yet
they should be opened to men, that so they might understand his meaning, and
yet not be able to reprehend his words, who were so weak, as I said, and so
used to liberty, by the loosing of the law in Nectatius days, that Saint
Chrysostom had much a do to make them submit themselves, and their sins, to
the pastors of their souls. Wherein, not only his great obtestations in the
beginning of his sermon, but also his continual beating on this string, that
they should not be confounded nor abashed to utter their sins, proves
plainly, that his only purpose was, to bring them to confession and penance
sacramental, done by the priests ministry For there he charge them, that
they did not weep nor lament, which he could not do rightly, if those
things were only inwardelie in cogitation and heart to be done. For how
could be know, that they did not make confession to man, as we now know that no
heretic makes, confession, neither lamenteth, neither does penance for his
sins, because they have removed the way of Gods Church, wherebie such things
had wont to be done. And by which Christ has appointed is to be done:
Otherwise they will say, they confess themselves daily to God, and so did
Saint Chysostomes flock, I warrant you, but he counted that no sacramental
confessing, except they did it to God by the priests ministry, which is the
way of confession, which God has appointed.


FVLKE. So sure it is that Saint Chrysostom went about to bring the people to
the necessity of auricular confession, that it stands only upon your own
assurance without any warrant of Chrysostomes words, which are clean
contrary thereunto, even in that sermon you quote, requiring confession of
secret faults to be made only to God, and not to men. Sed confunderis and
erubescis peccata tua effari: Atqui oportebat maxim apud homines ea dicere,
and inuulgare. Confusio enim est peccare, non est confusio confiteri peccata,
nunc autem neque necessarium presentibus testibus confusio confiteri:
Cogitatione fiat delictorum exquisitio, absque test sit hoc iudicium. Solus te
Deus confitentem videat: Deus qui non exprobat peccata tua, sed soluit peccata
propter confusionem. Nunquid and sic grauaris, and retrocedis? verum and ego
scio, quod conscientia non sustinet sua delicta. But thou art ashamed, and
abashed to utter thy sins. Yet thou ought most of all to declare and
publish them before men. For it is ashame to sin, it is no shame to confess
thy sins. But now it is neither necessary to confess in the presence of
witnesses. Let examination of thine offenses be made in thought, let this
judgment be without a witness, let god only see thee making thy confession,
god which casts not thy sins in thy teeth, but too seth thy sins for thy
shame: what? and art thou grieved to do so much, and go back? yet I know
shy conscience cannot abide her own offenses: These words a man would think
should be plain enough, against the necessity of auricular confession, but
that you have found out a most impudent interpretation of them, to say that
by confessing to God, he means the close consistory of the priests judgment,
who occupies the seat of God, and of this exposition the Master of the
sentences should be author, and other schoolmen should be approouers. Verelie
whosoever invented it, or whosoever have allowed it, Chrysostom cries out
plainly, that it is not his meaning, which requires the examination to be in
thought alone, and the judgment without witness, which cannot be, if the priest
do hear it. And although he count it greater perfection to make open
confession before men, yet he denies it to be necessary. Again in his
commentary upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, Cap. 12. Hom. 30. more plainly,
after he has exhorted men, to count all their sins severally, before God,
and to make an hearty confession of our unworthiness, he adds, Non (...) tibi
vt te prodas in publicum, neque vt te a pud alios accuses, sed obedire te volo
Prophetae dicenti, reuela domino taunt viam. Ante Deum ergo confitere peccata,
apud verum iudicem cum oratione delicta tua pronuncia, non lingua, sed
conscientiae tuae memoria, and tunc demum spera, misericordiam te posse
consequt: sihabueris in mente peccata tua contiuuo, nunquam malum aduersus
proximum in cord retinebis. I say not to thee, that thou ought to bewraie
thy self abroad, nor that thou should accuse thy self before other men.
But I will have thee obey the Prophet saying, open thy wait before the Lord.
Confess thy sins therefore before God, prononnce thy offenses before the
true judge with prayer, not with thy tongue, but with rememberance of thy
conscience, and then hope that thou may obtain mercy: if thou shall have
thy sins in mind continually, thou shall never reieine evil in thy heart
against thy neighbor. We must confess our selves before the consistory of
that true judge, where we need not to pronounce with our tongue, but in our
constience, our sinful state: which is not the close consistory of popish
shrift, where without the tongue, the priest can know nothing. Yet again the
same Doctor, upon the 50. Psalm. Hom. 2. writes most plainly. Pecoata tua
dictio vt deleas illa: si confunderis elicui dicere, quia peccasti, dicito
eaquotide in anima tuas non dico vt confiter (...) seruo tuo, vt exprobret:
dicito deo, qui curateoe. Haec enim si non dixeris, ignorant ea Deus? nunquid a
te vultea (...) Cum faciehas ea, practo erat, cum admitteres (...) are non
erubuisti, and confiteri erubescis dicito in (...) us in illa requiem habeas,
dicito ingemiscens and lachrimans. Declare thy sins, that thou may (...)
them out: if thou be ashamed to declare to any that thou have sinned, declare
them daily in thine own soul. I do not say that thou ought to confess
them to thy fellow seruent, that he may cast thee in the teeth: declare them to
God, which does heal them. For if thou shall not declare them, is God ignorant
of them? Or would he know them by thee? when thou did them, he was present:
when thou did commit them he knew, Thou waste not ashamed to sin, and art
thou ashamed to confess? declare thy sins in this life, that thou may have
rest in that life, declare them groaning and weeping. With what conscience could
the Master of the sentences first, or any man after him, wrest these words of
Chrysostom to so contrary a meaning. But what durst they not do, which had
given over them selves wholly to maintain the corrupt customs of the Romish
Church, how concrarie soever they were, either to the holy scriptures, or to
the testimonies of the ancient Doctors: But you have an invincible argument to
prove plainly, that his only purpose was to bring men to confession and
penance sacramental, you mean to Popish shrift. For there he charge them
(say you) that they did not wcepe, nor lament, nor confess their sins,
which he could not do rightly, if those things were only inwardly in
cogitation and heart to be done. For how could he knowthat they did not make
confession. Yes, Master Allen, being their pastor and ouerseer of their
souls, he might know, by their outward, sinful, and careless conversation,
that they did not weep, nor lament, nor confess their sins before God. For
if they did daily examine themselves, as he charge them, they would not have
been so loose in life as they were, and therefore you have not so much as
obscurelie proved your purpose, and lest of all that it was Chrysostomes only
purpose, to drive his people to shrift, which if it had been a necessary
institution of Christ, as you hold, he would not have been so dainty, for
any offense of the weak, as you make him, to call men unto it, upon necessity
of salvation. He that feared not openly to reprehend the Empress, would he
have been afraid of the peoples displeasure? No, no, Master Allen, Gods
institution, necessary to salvation, may not be concealed, though heaven and
earth should run together, about the publishing thereof.


ALLEN. But whosoever list see the most assured and undoubted meaning of this
holy Father touching confession to apriest, whereon I stand the longer,
because our adversaries would pick quarells with Gods Church upon certain
particles of his sentence, let him read the second and third book of the
dignity of priesthood, where he does not only attribute more dignity to
that order, then to any other creature under God, but also makes the priests
to be as well the judges as surgeons of our souls, as to whom the searching,
the cutting, the burning, the hard griping, the opening or the closing of Lib.
2. de sacerdotie
our wounds and sores of conscience, does apperteine. In all which cases he
says. Qui igitur phramacum ei morbo adhibere quis possit, cuius genus
nequaquam intelligat? How should a man salve that sore, the nature and kind
whereof he knows not? and to know it without confession of the party, is not
possible. For the things within a man none knows, but the spirit, which is in
man. And truly said the County Bonifacius to Saint Augustine: Ipse sibi
denegat curam, qui suam Epist. 188.
medico non publicat causam: He hinders his own health, that will not utter
his disease and the cause thereof to his Physician. And further if you will be
assured of the said Chrysostomes mind, touching confession, read his
exposition upon the words of the institution of this sacrament, and of
Christ's breathing the holy Ghost upon his Disciples, for their Super. 20.
Ioannis.
power to remit sins. Where he declares, that these holy things committed
to the priests charge, do properly apperteine to God, by whose special grace
we obtain remission, even then, when the priest does absolve us: where he also
expresses the very manner of the Church, in giving absolution, till this
day, saying: that the priest does but, as you would say, lend his voice, and
his hand: Signifiyng, that the manner was then, as it is yet, to speak the
words of absolution, and lay the hand upon the penitents head, in the
sacrament of penance. So in sense says Saint Chrysostom.


FVLKE. Whosoever list to read that book, shall find nothing in the world,
to prove his judgment, for the necessity of auricular confession, but rather
who so list to see Chrysostomes judgment of the necessity of shrift, let him
consider what we have cited out of his writings in the last section. For in
this place by you cited, he speaks not of confession, but of the difficulty
of a Priests office, as I have showed before, to exact more knowledge, and
diligence of them, because it is harder to be a shepherd of men, then of
beasts. For the diseases of beasts may most commonly be seen, and they
compelled to take the remedy: the diseases of men are hard, and sometimes
impossible to be known, and no way either to compel men to discover them, or
to receive medicine for them. Whereas, if confession were a necessary institu
tion of God, he might have aptly brought it forth in this place, to show what
way the spiritual shephearde has, to understand the diseases of his sheep.
His words are these, after he has spoken of the bodelie shephearde and his
sheep. But the diseases of man first it is not easy for a man to see. For no
man knows those things that perteine to man, but the spirit of man which is
within him. How wherefore should a man use a medicine for that disease, the
manner whereof he knows not: yea many times he cannot know whether a man be
sick. But when that is made manifest, he has more dissicultie about him. For
he can not heal all men, with so great power, as the shephearde does his
sheep. For there he may bind him, restrain him of meat, burn him, cut him.
But here the power to receive health, lies not in him that offers the
medicine, but in the sick person. For this that wonderful man saw, when he
said to the Corinthians, not that we are Lords of your faith, but we are
helpers of your joy. And most of all it is not required in Christians by
force to reform the transgressions of them that sin. But the foreign judges
when they take malefactors under the laws, do show great power over them, and
restreine them, against their will, to use the same manners. But here not by
compulsion, but by persuasion, we must make such a one better: for there is no
such power given us by the laws to restreine sins, neither if the laws gave
such power, have we where to use it, seeing God crowns not them which of
necessity abstain from wickedness, but them that voluntaryly refrain from it.
Therefore there is need of great cunning, that they which are sick may be
persuaded willingly to submit themselves unto the healing of the Priests. Thus
much Chrysostom, nothing favoring the necessity of auricular confession, but
rather denying any means, whereby the inward disease of a man may be known,
except it be by voluntary and not extorted confession. The county Boniface
speaks of a public fact, which he committed in taking a man by force out of
the Church, for which he was suspended by S. Augustine, until he did
acknowledge his fault, and show him self penitent. Therefore his saying can
not be drawn to the necessity of auricular shrift. Neither does Chrysostom,
upon the 20. of John, declare any judgment or opinion, that he thought it
necessary, for a man to shriue himself to a Priest. And where you urge his
words, that the Priest does lend his voice and his hands, it is to far of to
prove, that it is necessary for every man to confess al his secret faults to
a Priest. But I will set down all that he says, in that place, least any man
which has not, or can not understand the book, may suspect there is further
matter contained thererein, toward this purpose then in deed there is. Magna
enim dignit as sacerdotum, Quorumounque, etc. For great is the dignity of
Priests. Whose sins you shall remit, says he, they are remitted. Wherefore
Paul said, Obey your governors, and be subject to them, that you may do
them the greatest honor. For thou look to thine own matter, which if thou
have well ordered, there is none other charge laid upon the. The priest, if he
do dispose his own life, and have not diligently cared for thine, he shall
be thrust with the ungodly into (...): and sometime he is not damned for his
own deeds, but for ours, except he do all things that perteine unto him.
Therefore seeing you see the greatness of the danger, embrace them with much
beneuocence: which Paul also signified saying, They do watch, as those which
shall give an account of your souls, and therefore they are much to be looued.
But if you shall insult against them, you shall not dispose your own things well.
For so long as the master of the ship is of good and cheereful mind, the
Mariners also are in quiet. But if he begin to be hated of the^, and to be
grieved, he cannot likewise watch, nor exercise his cunning and being grieved
against his will, he shall trouble them with many evils. Even so the priest
if he shall see, that the reverence due to him is performed by us, he shall be
able to govern us well. But if you shall kill him weakening his hands,
although he be of never so great courage, you shall cast him into the waves
together with your selves. Understand what Christ says of the Jews, Upon the
chair of Moses the Scribes and Pharisees did sit, do ye all things whatsoever
they shall say to you. Now we must not say the priests are set upon the
chair of Moses, but upon the chair of Christ: for they have received his
doctrine: wherefore Paul says, we are ambassadors for Chist, as though Christ
did exhore by us: Do ye not se that all men are subject to the Princes of the
world, and that often times the worse in birthe, life, and wisdom, are
preferred before the better: Nevertheless, men consider the reverence of the
Prince that has preferred them, not the persons whatsoever they be. so that if
man appoint one over us, there is so great fear: if God have appointed any
man, we despise him, (...) on him, and vex him with innumerable contumelies:
and whereas we are forbidden to judge our breethren, we whet our tongues
against the priests. Of what excuse are these things worthy, when we se not a
beam in our own eye, and judge so seuerelse, a mote in our neighbors eye?
Do thou not know, that thou prescribest to thy self a more heavy
judgment, when thou so iudgest another? This I say, not that I allow
unworthy persons to be taken into the priests office, but having compassion
and weeping: For they are not therefore to be judged by their subjects,
although they live euillie, and vitiouslie. But if thou look well to thy
self: thou shall not affend end in anie'thing that is committed to them. For
if he made an Ass to speak, and gave spiritual blessings by a southsayer,
and wrought in a dumb mouth, and the unclean tongue of Balaam, for the
stumbling Jews: much more for you that be faithful, although the priests be
naught, God shall persorme all things by them, and send his holy spirit: for
a pure mind does not therefore loose his pureness, but grace works all
things. for all are yours, says he, whether it be Paul or Apollo, or Cephas.
For whatsoever the priest goes about, it is the gift of God alone, and when he
exercises man's wisdom, his grace appears less. Neither do I say this,
that we might live more slouthfullie, but least while they that are set over
you live slouthfullie, you that are committed to them, should at any time
procure evil to your selves. And what speak I of the Priest? Neither an
Angel, nor an Archangell can bring any thing to pass, in those things which
are given by God. But the father, the son, and the holy ghost, does all
things. The priest gives his tongue, and his hands, for it is not just, that
for malice of an other man, they that come to our salvation should be offended.
All which things considered, let us both sear God, and greatly reverence his
priests, that honor being given both to our works, and to them, we may
receive great reward of God, by the grace and goodness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to whom with the father and the holy ghost be glory for ever, and
ever. Amen. These words of Chrysostom declare that the ministration of the
word and of the sacraments, in which the Priest lends his tongue, and his
hands, are not defiled by the evil life of the Priest, so he sit in the
chair of Christ and preach the doctrine received by him, confirming the same
by the sacrament of his institution. But of the popish sacrament of penance, or
auricular confession, they speak nothing at all. Contrariwise they show by
what means the Priests do execute the authority granted them in remission
of sins, namely in the whole office of their ministry, consisting
principally in preaching and ministering the sacraments, not in giving private
absolution, only, or principally.


ALLEN. But to leave him, and fall to other of great antiquity and learning,
whose judgments also will prove, not only for the truth of his doctrine,
but also (which is much more) for the uniformity of this open Ceremony, which
the Church of old used, and therefore in the like truth of things, yet
keeps: Theodoritus therefore, a Greek author also, does plainly Diuinorum
decret. Epi. cap. de poeniten.
insinuate not only the whole sacrameut, but even this Ceremony of laying on
hands in the act of absolution. Sunt medicabilia (says he) etiam quae post
baptismum fiunt vulnera: medicabilia autem, non (...) olim per solam fidem data
remissione, sed per multas lachrymas, and fletus, and iciunium, and orationem,
and laborem facti peccati quantitate moderatum. Quienim non sic affecti sunt,
eos nec admittere quidem didicimus, nee diuina sunt manu impertienda. Nolite,
inquit, dare sanctum canibus nec margaritas porcis. The wounds which are made
even after Baptism, be to be healed: marie they cannot be remedied, as before
in Baptism, by remission obtained by only faith, but they must now be cured
by tears and weeping, by fasting and praying, and by penance measured after
the quantity and nature of the fault. For whosoever be not so qualified, we
have not learned to receive them to grace, neither be the holy gifts to be
bestowed upon them, by our hand. Give not, says he, holy things to dogs,
nor precious stones to swine. Thus does Theodoritus allude also to our manner
yet used in the sacrament, where remission is given by the priests word, and
hand. For which cause Saint Aogustine calls this sacrament of reconciliation,
sometimes, Imposition of hands, as he does other sacraments more also, where the
priests, by this external Ceremony of laying on of hands, use to give grace,


FVLKE. Theodoret which lived so long after confession was abrogated by
Nectarius in the Greek Church, speaks nothing for it, but that repentance
must best be testified by many tears, and weeping, fasting and prayer, and
such like labor, moderated according to the quantity of the sin committed,
otherwise they are not to be admitted into the Church, nor to be made partakers
of the holy communion. So that he speaks of them, that for grievous sins
are excommunicated, who are not to be received but upon their hearty
repentance, nor the divine mysteries to be delivered unto them. Wherefore there
is no allusion in his words unto the popish manner of absolution, with the
word and hand. For he speaks of admission and delivery, with the hand.
Which must be understood of them that were excluded, and debarred from
receiving, which are accounted dogs, and hogs. For I hope you account not
all sinners, for dogs and hogs, before they be shriuen, if they be not by
the sword of excommunication cut of from the Church. But Saint Augustine, as
you say, calls this your sacrament, Imposition of hands. If you mean the
place De bapt. contr. Donatistas lib. quinto, cap 20. Because there is no eight
book, whereunto your margent sends us, he speaks in deed of them, on
whom hands are laid, which may be them that are confirmed, or ordained to
the ministry of the Church, as well as of any other, on whom hands were
laid: but of the sacrament of penance, he speaks not there or else where, in
all his works, nor of the necessity of confessing of secret sins to a
Priest.


ALLEN. But to go forward in our matter, Saint Basil a greek writer also,
does evidently show both his meaning, and his Churches practice, touching
confession, both often else, and namely Quaest. 288. regula conera.
where he says, upon the occasion of a question moved touching that matter,
thus: Necessarium est, vt iis fiat confessio peccatorum, quibus dispensatio
mysteriorum Dei (...) est. Nam and hoc pacto qui olim inter sanctos
poenitentiam egerunt, fecisse reperiuntur. It is necessary (says he) that our
confession should be made to them, to whom God has credited the disposing, and
bestowing of his holy mysteries. For so the Saints did penance, as we read.
And he alleges more, that penance was used, and special sorowfulnes for
sins with some kind of confession of sins in baptism, how much more then
must we now use the same, where it is more required, and where Christ has
instituted a Sacrament to that end, to remit suines committed by relapse after
Baptism.

And in deed the custom of John the Baptist proves that there was a kind of
confession necessary, or at the least convenient, Mat. 3. and Mar. 1.
before the institution of this Sacrament. For the Euangelisten do say:
Baptizabantur ab eo in Iordane, confitentes peccata sua: Men were baptized of
him in Iordane, and made confession of their sins. So that John may seem to
have prepared the way to Christ's doctrine and Sacraments, not only by his
baptism but also by the using of the people to confess their faults: and yet
it is not necessary that his usage of penance should be of like force, or
should contain an exact conconfession of every sin, as the institution of
Christ afterward did include, no more then this Baptism may be thought to be
fully answerable, either in manner of usage, or force and efficacy, to the
holy sacrament of Baptism by Christ instituted, for the office of the new
law. And in an other place the said S. Basil treats how young Nuns and
holy sacred Quaest. 110.
Virgens should confess themselves. And in an other place he admonishes all
men to be circumspect in choice of their ghostly father, by whose sentence
sins ought with singular discretion to be judged or examined. Whereby it is
most manifest, that confession to the priests was used, and counted necessary
in his days.


FVLKE. You say well that S. Basil speaks upon occasion of a question that
was moved touching this matter, which question if it had pleased you to set
down, Saint Basil should have served you for no show or color, of the
necessity of shrifte, or confession of private offenses. The question is this
O (...). He that is willing to confess his sins, whether ought be to
confess them to all men, whatsoever they be, or to certain men. By which
question it is manifest that confession was not necessary but voluntary. But
if any man will make confession, S. Basil says, he ought to do it to them,
to whom the dispensation of Gods mysteries is committed. For so they which
repented of old time, are found to have done, unto the holy men: for it is
written in the Gospel, that they confessea' their sins to John the Baptist:
and in the Acts of the Apostles, all men confessed to them, by whom they were
baptized. And we acknowledge as much, that if any man will confess his secret
sins, to be partaker of spiritual counsel, and comfort, for quieting of his
conscience, he may and ought to confess the same to them to whom the
dispensation of Gods mysteries are committed. But what is this for the
necessity of enumeration of all sins unto a priest. The same Basil in the
Hom. 21. upon Psalm. 37. acknowledges in the person of David, confession to God
alone to be sufficient, yea the secret groaning of the heart, without moving of
lips, or uttering any words, to suffice. In the 110. question, for which
you have placed question the 100. as there is somewhat to prove that
confession was used to the priest or Elder, so there is nothing to prove, that
it was counted necessary in his days. The question is this, whether as at
such time a sister makes confession to an Elder, the Elder women must be
present. This question declares, that priests had not such familiar and
secret shriuing of virgins in those days, as they have now among the papists.
S. Basils answer is this. The confession shall be made more decently, and more
reverently, by the Elder woman unto the Elder man, which is able wisely to
set down the form of repentance and reformation. This answer declares that
Saint Basell would not have young women to shriue them selves at all, unto the
Priest, but that if any thing troubled their conscience, which they were
disirous to utter, they should first express it to an ancient woman, and she
should make report thereof to the Priest, as in the colleges of virgins he
prescribes it most convenient, to be done by the matrone or Elder woman, that
had the oversight of the young sisters: and in the next question he affirms,
that the said Elder woman, or gouernesse has just cause to be angry with the
Priest, if he appoint any thing to be done by the sisters, that are under her
charge, without her knoweledge. Whereby he declares plainly that he allows
not that priests should hear the secret confession of such young women, or
appoint them any penance, without the knowledge of their gouernesse. That men
ought to make good choice of them to whom they will confess their secret
offenses, it proves not that confession is necessary, whereupon we stand, or
that it was accounted necessary in Saint Basills days. That John Baptist made
a preparation to shrift, it is a fond dream, when you your self acknowledge,
that your sacrament has no place in them that are not babtized. That the
institution of Christ does include an exact confession of every sin to the
Priest, you can never be able to prove. The Baptism of John was not
instituted by man but by God: therefore of as great efficacy, as that which
was ministered by the Apostles: for Christ was baptized for us, not with the
worse baptism which was ministered by the hands of John.


ALLEN. Necephorus later then he, but a learned Greek writer, declares also
unto Theodosius a Monk, that the power of Niceph. (...) cartophilax ad Theodos.
binding and loosing sins was committed to bishops, by our merciful Lord
Christ Jesus, in so much (says he) that once all men came and confessed their
secret sins to them, by whom they either receued pardon, or were put back.
But now through the increase of Christian people, and great tediousnes of the
work, they have committed this business much what to religious persons, such as
be of tried conditions, for to be most profitable to others. Thus says he in
sense.


FVLKE. This Nicephorus is too late a Greek writer, that we should approve
his judgment, for the necessity or perpetual practice of auricular
confession. Again there is nothing but a fragment of an Epistle remaining, by
which we cannot thoroughlie gather what his judgment was. But this is manifest
in him, that men ought no more to confess them selves to an unlearned man,
then in sickness to take counsel of one that is ignorant in phisike. Again he
says not (as you report,) that once al men came, and confessed their sins to
Bishopes. But he gathered upon the commission granted to Bishops, by those
words, which were spoken to Peter, whatsoever thou shall bind, shall be bound,
and whatsoever thou shall loose, shall be loosed: that olim omnes oportehat ad
ipsos pontifices accedere, suaque illis occulta prodere, and sic vel
reconciliationem, vel repudium far. Ignoro autem qui factum sit, cur haec
minus obseruentur, quamuis existmem pontifices negocij taedio frequentique
(...) turbulentia defatigatos id operae ad Monachos transmisisse, eos scilicet
qui vere probati sint aliisque valiant esse vtiles: nihil enim tale inexpertis
and indoctis permiserunt. In times past it behooved all men to come to the
bishops them selves, and to utter their secrets unto them, and so to receive
either reconciliation or refusal. But I am ignorant how it is come to pass
that these things are not observed, although I think that the Bishops being
wearied by the tediousnes of the business and the often troublesomenes of the
multitude, have set over that labor to the monks, namely those that are
truly appooued, and are able to be profitable unto other: for to inexpert and
unlearned men they have permitted no such thing. In this writer there is
nothing, but his own collection and conjecture, which is not sufficient to
(...) men's consciences with a necessity of confessing all their secret sins
to a Bishop or Monk, and lest of all to an ignorant and unlearned priest,
such as are and have been the most rife, and ready confessors among the
papists.


ALLEN. These therefore and many other do testify for their Church, in what
solemn use sacramental confession has ever been. Wherein we have the less
need to stand long, seeing the same History that our adversaries do sometime
allege, plainly reports, not only in the Church of Constantinople, but
also in the West Churches, and namely at Rome, always since Nouatus the
Heretics false opinion touching penance rose, a virtuous Priest, sad,
secret, and wise, was appointed to hear the sins of all men, and was called
the Pnitentiarie then, as he and the like of that office he called yet. We call
them Confessors, and of old in Greek, they were named Spiritual Masters or
Fathers, as we now term them in our Mother tongue, Ghostly Fathers also,
Quisecundum vniuscuiusque culpam indicebant and mulctans. Who (says Sozomenus)
according to every man's fault, prescribed due penance. Which penance though it
were often openly done by the confessors appointment: yet the sins were not
known, for which the penance was preseribed. For the confession was secret or
auricular, as we call it now, as is plain by the history (else the Priest of
that office should not have been charged with secrecy and silence) though the
confession sometimes was also open, where the penitents devotion or desire so
required, as it may be yet. For it is no matter for the substance of the
sacrament, whether it be public or private. And it is the condiscending to the
peoples weakness, that, that should be so secret generally, which often in
old time has been open. And yet I think no man was ever compelled by any
precept of the Church, to confess in the public face of the Church his sins
that were committed secretly. Though in Leo the greathis days, there was a
custom not allowable, that men Epist. ad Episc. Pice ni and Campaniae.
were forced to give up a libell openly of all their sins. Which rigorous
custom, the said holy father afterward abrogated. Nevertheless the penance
was of old often public, the form whereof appears in Saint Ambrose, in
Tertullian, who both Poenite^tes.
have written several books De poenitentia, in Saint Augustine in sundry
places, and in this present History of Sozomenus. And long after their days
there were called Poenitentes, Penitents, which were barred from the holy
communion, and the secrets and sovereign holy of the blessed mysteries of the
Mass, so long as their prescribed penance endured, besides fasting, alms, and
other like penalties inioyed And especially in Lent time, there were of these
devout public penitentes, as appears by diverse orders of the service in the
Church, appointed and agreeing to them, who lightly were separated till the
celebrating of the Lords supper and passion, in the holy days next before
Easter. Whereof yet in most Churches there remains a small sign, by
discipline given to the people with rods on the same days. But now these
many years, the peoples feablenes considered, there is no public penance
given nor received in the Sacrament, much less open confession made of any
secret crimes, the Church being well assured, that this auricular confession
sullie answers Christ's institution, and agrees also with the often practice
of the Primitive Church herein, though the heretics, and some of their
faulters, as Beatus Rhenanus, or who else soever wrote the preface, that
commonly (...) annexed to Tertullian, deny the same. And truly, seeing their
wanton pleasure is, not to bear secret confession, I dare say, they can much
less away with public penance or confession, which is a thousand times more
burdenous.


FVLKE. There has hitherto no ancient writer bin brought, to testify the
necessity of confession of secret sins, nor that there is any sacrament,
whereof such confession should be part. The story before remembered testifies
of the abolishing of such confession in the Church of Constantinople, but that
there was any such Priest, or confession used in the Church of Rome, it makes
no mention, but only shows that they which did open penance, which was for
open offenses, for which they were excommunicated, were enjoined an exercise or
trial, after the performance whereof they were received into the Church
again. As you think, that no man for his sins committed secretly, was
compelled to make confession in the public face of the Church, so do I
think, that no man in those ancient and better times was ever compelled to
make any confession open, or secret, of all his secret faults committed in
thought, word, and deed. The public penance mentioned in Tertullian, Ambrose,
Augustine, was for public offenses. The ridiculous discipline given with rodds
in the popish Church, by the very name thereof declares, that it is a mockery
of the old discipline, and no sign of any sacrament of confession. And
therefore as yet, nothing is brought to prove auricular confessing of secret
sins, to be a necessary institution of Christ, or agreeable with the practice
of the Primitive Church, or to disprooue Beatus Rhenanus, which denies the
same, accusing both the novelty, and and the tyranie thereof, and the danger
that men's consciences have been in through it, beside many other known
inconveniences.


ALLEN. But now if you confer with the Fathers of all ages and of every
notable Church, touching this confession to Gods Priests, you may begin if
you list, even at this day, and drive up both the truth of the doctrine, and
the perpetual practice thereof, even to the Apostles time. In the late holy
Council holden at Trent, both the doctrine is confirmed, and declared Sess. 14.
Cap. 5. de Confess. c. 3. and 6.
with all gravity, and also the adversaries of that sacrament, and the
misconstructers of Christ's words of remission, to pertain to preaching of
the Gospel, and not to the very act of absolution, be by the consent of all
Catholic states of the Christian world, accursed and excommunicated. It was at
Furence also decreed De Sacrament. Poeniten.
in a most general assembly of both the Latin and Greek Church that as well
the whole sacrament of penance, as that especial part which is called
confession, was of Christ's institution. In the great council holden at
Lateran, there is so plain charge given to every Christian to confess his
sins, either to Can. 21. Omnis (...); sexus.
his own ordinary Parochian, or to some other Priest, that has by him, or
otherwise, authority and jurisdiction over the penitent, that Protestants
affirm, albeit very false'y, that confession was first instituted in the said
Council: and this was more then three hundred years since. And four hundred
years before that in a Provincial Council that was kept at Can. 7.
Vormacia, there is a Canon made concerning the qualities of the priests, that
are constituted to be confessors and Penitentiaries, where it is commanded,
that they be such. Qui possunt singulorum causas, originem quoque, and modum
culparum sigillatim considerare and examinare, That can particularly try out
and examine the causes of every offender, the manner and ground of their
faults.


FVLKE. We are so well accquainted with your often bragges of Fathers, and
Counsels, that we never start for them: seeing we know, you have nothing, but
the dross of the latter times, to cast at us. For the Council of Trentes
decree, we esteem it, as it is worthy, being made by a few buckeram Bishops
of Italy, and some other Epicurian prelates of other countries to patch up,
rather then to repair the ruins and decaies of the kingdom of Antichrist. In
the late Council of Florence, I remember nothing decreed of this matter,
neither do you note, where we should find it. In the Lateran Council, that
was kept little more then 300. years since, the Protestants do truly
affirm, that the necessity of auricular confession was first imposed upon
men, of the Romish Church. For in the council of Worms, which you say was
400 years elder, there is never a word of confession, or confessor, but of
wife consideration to be had of them that did penance, by which are meant open
offenders, that did open penance: neither are you able to prove the
contrary. Paenitentibue (says the Canon) serundum differentiam peccatorum,
etc. To the penitents or such as do penance, let penance be decreed by the
judgment of the Priest, according to the difference of their sins. Therefore
in giving penance the Priest ought severally to consider the causer of every
one, the beginning also and manner of the faulies, and diligently to examine
and manifestly to know the affection and sighings of the offenders, also to
consider the qualities of the times, and persons, of the places, and ages: that
according to the consideration of the places, ages, or times, or according to
the quality of the offenses, and the groaning of every offender, he turn not
his eyes from the holy rules. Thus sarre the Canon, after which follow the
rules of penance to be appointed for diverse kinds of offenses: as for him that
has killed a Priest, a pagane, his parents, or brother or for him that has
slain a man in his madness, or against his will, and such like, whereby it
appears that the Canon was made for penance to be enjoined to public
offenders, and not to compel men to confess their secret sins.


ALLEN. Which decree is borrowed word for word almost, out of the last Canon of
Constantinople Council, called the sixth general, Can. 102.
which was long before all the forsaid Synodes. Their discourse is long upon
the Priests duty, which should sit on confessions, whom they instruct by
these words: Oportebit, qui facultatem absoluendi and ligandi a Deo
receperunt, peccati qualitatem speculentur, and peccatoris promptitudinem ad
reuersionem, vt sic medicamentum admoueant aegritudini aptum, ne si de peccato
sine discrimine statuant, aberrent a salute aegrotantis. Those that have
received of our Lord power to loose and bind, must try out the quality of
every fault, and the readiness of the offender to return unto virtue, that
they may provide a medicine meet to the malady, lest if they should without
distinct knowledge of their sin give judgment, they should err in poruiding
health for the sick person. By which Council kept in Constantinople, you may
easelie gather, that neither confession was ever omitted by the law, nor the
common Penitentiarie long abrogated out of Constaninople Church. And when I
name these decrees of so many general Councels in diu rfe ages, I do not
only call them generally to witness for my cause, which were enough, seeing
every determination there, passes as by the sentence of the holy Ghost and
Christ's own judgment, of whose presence such hotie assemblance is assured,
but I appeal to eueric holy Bishop, Priest, and Prince of the world, that
agreed to the same, and were there assembled, every of which was of more
experience, learning, and virtue, or at the least of more humility, then all
our adversaries alive. But now if you go to try other the learned writers of
all times, for the practice of this point, then our labor shall be infinite,
but our cause more strong, and (...) adversaries sooner confounded. I need not
for that practice, name the learned schoolemem, of excellent capacity in deep
mysteries, because they were so late, and because Heretics can not deny, but
they are all undoubtedly against them, and every one for us: Thomas Aquinas
is ours, Dionysius is ours, I mean the Carthusian. If any man doubt of Saint
Bernard, let him read the life of Malachie, whom he praises sor bringing
into ure the most profitable use of confession, In vitam Malach. Super 5. ca.
Jacob.
in the rude parts of Ireland. Saint Bede is proved before, not only to
have allowed confession to the Priest, but to have expounded Saint James words
of confession for the sacrament of penance, and uttering our sins to Gods
Ministers. And he records that in our Country of England, before his days,
confession was used to a Priest. Whereof, as also os penance and satisfaction,
there is an example or two in the fourth book of his ecclesiastical history
of our Church.


FVLKE. The decree of the Constantinopolitan council in sense is the same with
the former, but not word for word, nay, almost it has never a word alike. But
it is to be understood of public penitentes, to be bound, or loosed according
to their quality of the offense and the greatness of their repentance. The
words are these. It behooves that they which have received of god the power of
loosing and binding, consider the quality of the sin, and the readiness of
the sinner unto returning, that so they may use a medicine fit for the
disease, lest if they should determine of sin without difference, they should
err from the health of the sick person. For the disease of sin is not
simple, but diverse and of many forms, and budding up with many hurtful
branches, by which the evil is spread far and wide, and creeps so far,
until at length it withstandeth the virtue of that which heals. Therefore he
that will show what skill he has in the spiritual art of healing, must
diligently search out, how he that has sinned is affected, whether he incline
unto health, or contrariwise, by those manners to which he is familiarlie
accustomed, provoke the diseased to look against him, and whether he by
himself obeys his Master or whether the sore of the mind does increase by
medicines that are laid to it: and so mercy is to be bestowed by equal
measure. For there is great regard both with God, and with the governor of
this pastoral care, to bring home the wandering sheep, and to heal it being
wounded by the serpent, and neither to thrust it down by the hedlonges of
desperation, nor to loose the raines unto dissolution of life, and contempt,
but by all means as well by sharp medicines as by gentle, to withstand and
strive, that the sore may be healed, that he which knows the fruits of
repentance, may wisely govern the man, being called unto that heavenly
glory. Therefore he ought to know both kinds of medicines, as well them that
be of rigor, as them that be of pity, and not to follow them, which have
taken in hand only the upper face of figures that are delivered as Saint
Basil has taught us. In this Canon there is no word of confession, or
whereby the necessity of confession may be inferred upon all men for their
secret offenses. Neither can it be proved that the penitentiarie priest once
abrogated by Nectarius was ever restored. The schoolmes opinion we are no more
bound to follow in this, then in other points of popery. Saint Bernard
allows in deed confession made unto the Priests, and ministers of God, but
the necessity thereof he does not lay as a clogge on men's consciences. The
like I say of S. Bid, who in the book and Chapter by you quoted, speaks of
one Adamanus a scot, who having committed some great wickedness in his youth,
when he considered the greeuosnes of his fact, was in great distrust of mind:
and coming to a priest, of whom he hoped that the way of salvation might be
showed unto him, he confessed his guiltines, and desired him to give him
counsel how he might avoid the wrath of God that was to come. After this
manner to come to confession, we deny not, but it is most expedient for them
that are not quiered in conscience but that al men are bound by this or any
other example, to make a particular rehersall of their sins to a priest,
before they can have remission, Beda neither here, nor else where teaches.


ALLEN. Before him, S. Gregory, so well likes and knows this practice of
sacramental confession, that in his Pastorll, he Cap. 15. In Pastoral
Gregorij.
prescribes the Priests of Gods Ghurch, many ways how to seek out the
diseases of their peoples souls, and according to the variety of the same, to
admit or put back, to pardon or to punish: yea so plain he is in this matter,
that he De Poen. did. 6. Cap. de Sacer. 5.
charge the Priest to be exceeding grieuoslie punished, that in any case
shall utter the Penitentes confession or any part thereof. Again far above
these, holy Leo the great amending the hard custom that in some places of
Italy Epist. 80.
and Campania, was used, touching public confession of private sins, he says:
Reatus conscientiarum sussiciat solis sacerdotib? indicari, confessione
secreta. Quamuis enim plenitudo fidei videtur esse laudabilis, que propter Dei
timorem apud homines Vide eunde^ ad Theo. dor. Iuli. (...).
eruhescere non veretur, tamen quia non omnium huiusmodi suntpeccata, vt velint
in poenitentiam ed publicari, remoueatur tam improbabilis cohsuetudo, ne multi
a poenitentiae remedijs arceantur, dum aut erubescunt, aut metuunt (...) sais
facta suareserare, quibus possint legum constitutione per elli. Sufficit enim
illa confessio, quae primum Deo offertur, tunc (...) saccrdoti, qui pro debitis
confitentium precator accedit. Tunc enim demum piures ad poenitentiam potuerunt
prouocari si populi auribus non publicetur conscientia confitentis. It is
enough, that the guilt and offenses of man's conscience be opened to the Priests
alone in secret confession. For though the foruour of faith be very laudable,
which is content for Gods sake to be ashamed before men, yet because the sins
of every man be not such, that the penitent would gladly utter openly, let
so raprobale custom be abolished, lest many be holden from the remedies of
penance, whiles either they are ashamed, or fear to open their deeds to their
enimes, by whom they might by order of law be punished. For that confession is
sufficient, which is made first to God, and then to the Priest also, who will
be an intercessour for the sins of them that confess. For then might more be
provoked to penance, if the secret conscience of the confessed be not published
to the ears of the people. Thus says Saint Leo, a man of that time and
credit, as our adversaries would wish. Let them say now, that private
confession began in the Lateran Council, because that thing which ever was
counted and used as necessary, was there decreed for the amending of the
peoples sloth, to be done every year once at the lest, before they received
the blessed sacrament. As truly may they say, that the Euchariste and
receiving thereof, was begune in the same Council, and by the very same
Canon. For as there is charge, that every man should be confessed, so there is
commandment given, that every man shall receive once a year the blessed
Sacrament. So little care they have, what they say, so that they say enough to
beguile them, that can skill of nothing.


FVLKE. If Saint Gregory in his pastoral or else where, had written any thing
that might but make a face of the necessity of auricular confession, you would
have set down some part of his words, or at least quoted the book, and
Chapter: where we might find them: but in truth there is no such matter in
all that work containing three parts and many Chapters, but he teaches the
behavior of a pastor and preacher toward alkindes of persons, both in his
life, and in his doctrine: of auricular confession never a word. Therefore you
fly to Gratians decres, where Gregory in deed is cited for such a matter, but
which Gregory, it does not appear, therefore it is more like to be one of the
later Gregory's, then Gregory the first: in whose works long enough you can
not show that sentence: and where you say, the priest may not in any case
utter the penitents confession, the gloss upon the text is against you, who
holds that he may lawfully reueal it, to avoid excommunication, if the
Bishop shall excommunicate all them that are privy of such a fact. But Leo in
deed speaks of auricular confession, or at the least of confession made
only to the priests, not urging it as necessary to salvation, nor requiring
an exact numbering of every mortal sin, as the Papists do, which be the
matters we stand upon, and not whether it be lawful for men to confess their
offenses to their pastor, which we think to be most expedient for them that
are troubled in mind, about them, but not necesrie for all men, nor for all
sins. The time and credit of Leo, although it be of better account then of
his successors, yet it is not such, as we would wish. For the time had many
corruptions and superstitions: the person was over careful to maintain the
dignity of his sea, which by little and little after him was turned into the
seat of Antichrist, and therefore his ambition was controlled by the general
council of Chalcedon, which made the Bishop of Constantinople his equal in
all primacie of honor and authority, although he by his Legates would have
withstoode it: but in vain: for all the Bishops allowed it, except Lucentius
and Pascasius his deputies. We may still say that the necessity of auricular
confession came first from the Lateran Council, for before it, you cannot
prove that it was enjoined upon necessity, although it was used voluntarily,
and thought of some very convenient.


ALLEN. But to hold on upward, holy Prosper gives good evidence for his
time, touching the practice of Confession, and needful recourse to Priests
for the release of their sins. De vita con tempt.
Sundry remedies he shows for every sore of man's soul, and much he moves
al Christians to confess their sins, aduertising them of the danger
thereof, if they keep them close. Thus he says: Illi, quorum peccata humanam
notitiam latent, nec ab ipsis confessa, nec ab (...) publicata, si ea confiteri
aut emendare noluerint, deum quem habent testem, ipsum habituri sunt and
vltorem. Et quid eis prodest, humanum vitare iudicium, cum si in malo suo
permanserint, ituri sunt in aeternum (...) retribuente supplicium? That is to
say, Those men, whose sins be secret, and be not confessed of themselves,
nor lib. 2. c. 7.
published by other men, if they will not confess them or correct them, they
shall have God their just revenger, whom they have now a record of their
wickedness. And what are they the better to escape man's verdict, when, if they
continue in wickedness, by the just judgment of God they shall go into
everlasting punishment? And afterward in the same Chapter, which is exceeding
much to be considered, he gives all Priests careful admonition, that if any
of them having committed deadelie sin, do notwistanding without confession
and uttering of the same hold on his ministry of the blessed Sacrament,
because he would not in the sight of men be noted worthy, that in this case he
damneth himself before God, whose heavy indignation he cannot avoid, whiles
he is ashamed to utter his sins unto men.


FVLKE. Prosper has nothing for the necessity of auricular confession, but
rather against it. For he speaks against them that will neither confess
their secret sins, nor amend their lives without confession to other men,
showing that if they continue in their sin in vain shall they avoid the
judgment of man, and fall into the eternal judgment of God. It follows
immediately. Quod si ipsi iudices fiant, and veluti suae iniquttatis vltores
huius in se voluntariam poenam seuerissimae animaduersionis exerceant,
temporalibus poenis mutabunt aeterna supplicia, and lachrimis ex vera cordis
compunctione fluentibus restinguent aeterna ignis incendia. But if they become
judges themselves and as it were reuengers of their own iniquity, do
exercise hereupon themselves the punishment of most severe correction, with
temporal pains, they shall change eternal punishments, and with tears
flowing out of true compunction of heart, they shall quench the burning of
eternal fire. These words declare by what means without confession of secret
faults men may obtain remission and avoid everlasting punishment. Which
thing is yet more clear in that careful admonition, which he gives to
Priests, not to communicate without confession, or at least wise secret
repentance, and punishment enjoined to themselves. His words are these.
Quapropter Deum sibi facilius placabunt illi, qui non humano convict iudicio,
sed vltro crimen cognoscunt, qui aut proprijs illorum confessionibus produnt,
aut (...) alijs quoles occulti sint, ipsi in se voluntariae excommunication is
sententiam ferant, and ab altari cui ministrabant, non animo, sed officio
seperati vitam tanquam mortuam plangunt, certi quod reconciliato sibi efficacis
poenitentiae fructibus Deo, non solum amissa recipient, sed etiam ciues
supernae ciuitatis effecti ad gaudia sempiterna perueniant. Wherefore those
men, shall more easily pacify God unto themselves, which being not convicted
by man's judgment, but of their own accord acknowledge there fault: which
either bewraie the same by their own confessions, or though other men know not
what they are in secret, they themselves give sentence of voluntary
excommunication against themselves, and being separated not in mind but in
office, from the altar which they served, do bewail their life as dead,
being certain, that God being reconciled to them by the ftuites of effectual
repentance, they do not only recover that they have lost, but also being
made citizens of the heavenly city, they come into the eternal joys. By
these words of Prosper it is evident, that confession of all particular
sins, was not thought necessary to salvation, but that a man confessing his
sins before God, and enioyning unto himself the ftuites of repentance
without the knowledge of men, he might assure himself of remission and of
eternal felicity


ALLEN. All this meaning has Saint Prosper, and his equal in age Saint
Augustine touches the disease of our days very sharply, saying thus: There
be some which think that it is enough De visit. infirmorum 1. 2. cap. 4.
for their salvation, if they confess their faults to God alone, to whom
nothing is hid, and from whom no man's conscience is close. For they will not,
or they are ashamed, or at the least they disdain to submit themselves to the
Priests, whom God has given power unto, to discearne the clean from the
unclean. But I would thou should not beguile thy self by false persuasion,
or some respect of shame that thou have to confess unto the priest, who is
Gods Vicare. For I tell thee, thou must under his judgment, whom God does not
disdain, to constitute his Vicegerent. But this Doctor made a wholl work of
penance, and the ways of recovery of Christian man's fall after Baptism by
the Priests judgment, and sacrament of Confession. Of the which books if any
man list doubt, yet let him be assured, that they be both ancient, Catholic,
learned, and agreeable to the doctrine of Saint Augustines days, whosoever
made them. And our cause is so much more helped, because not only Saint
Austine, who is plain in these matters, upon Saint Matthwes Gospel, and else
where, as it is declared already, but also other of great antiquity, confirm
the same, and plainly confound the pride of our days, in which men are not
so much ashamed of their sins, as they be disdainefull to confess their
sins unto a poor priest, though he justly accupie the very judgment seat
of God.


FVLKE. You do wisely to deuorce upon his meaning when you have not his
words to warrant you. For so you may blind the eyes of the ignorant, to
believe that you have some farther intelligence of meaning then can appear even
by the words that you have cited out of him. For the (...) of condemnation, is
not by (...) (...) against them, which are ashamed to confess their faults to
men, if they amend them before god, but against them that fly the knowledge
and judgment of men, and yet do not repent before God. And therefore he
says, si ea confiteri aut emendare noluerirt, if they will not confess them
or amend them, and again, si in maio suo permanserint, if they shall continue
in their evil. But if they will amend their faults, and not continue in
sin, he dare promise them forgiveness and life everlasting, as is declared in
the last section. But now you charge us with Saint Agustines authority, and
yet you will not abide by it that it is Saint Augastines authority, wherein
you deal more sincerely, then Papists are commonly wont to do, to
acknowledge that these books you vouch are not admitted for Saint Augustines
authority. Among so many great and large volumes, as are certeinlie known and
generally received to be of Saint Augustines writing, where you can find
nothing but these books of uncertain credit, to maintain the necessity of
auricular confession, the indifferent reader may well gather how little ground
your purpose ca^ find in that age of S. Austins. For that you have declared
already out of S. Austine upon S. Matthewes Gospel, and else where, how plain
it is for these matters, let the reader judge by that I have answered in those
several places. But as touching the books de visitatione (...), being one of
the two treatises that you cite, as it is certain that it was not of S.
Austines writing, so has it no similitude with the doctrine of his time, or
with the style of any learned or ancient father. The Censure of Erasmus upon
these books is this, Sermo locutulei, nec docti nec diserti. Quid habuerunt
vel frontis vel mentis, qui talia scripta nobis obtruserunt nomine Augustini,
etc. These books are the speech of a pratler neither learned nor eloquent.
What shame or wit had they which have thrust upon us such writings under the
name of S. Augustine? Yet you dare assure us that they be ancient, Catholic,
learned, and agreeable to the doctrine of Saint Augustines days. But the
reasons of your assurance you spare to show, giving us nothing but your bare
word, which is sufficient among unlearned and sottish Papists, whose ignorance
you knew would accept whatsoever you brought, and therefore were carles what
all the learned of the contrary part might judge of your impudent and
shameless assertions. Concerning the other whole work of penance, which you
affirm that this doctor made, although it were granted that Saint Augustine
was author of that work of repentance, as it shall be easily granted, that
if not Saint Augustine, yet some other ancient and learned father, was the
writer of them: nevertheless there is nothing in them by which you are able to
prove the matter in controversy, namely the necessity of confession of all
mortal sins to a Priest. And therefore albeit you set a good face upon the
matter, you have never a sentence to set down, out of those books, that is
able to give but only a gloss, or color to your Popish confession. For if
you had, you would not have been silent in setting forth the sentence of
another beside Saint Augustine, as you say, and as I think, of great
antiquity, who against them that be impenitent, and neither acknowledge their
sins unfeignedly before God, nor study to amend and reform their wicked
life, writes vehemently, showing three kinds of repentance, one before
baptism, in them that are of years, another after baptism, which is daily
sorowing for our infirmities in saying the Lords prayer, the third of heinous
and notorious sins offensive to the Church, of them that are excommunicated
and are not to be received, without open confession and signs of humility.
But the necessity of confessing all things to a poor priest justly
occupying the very judgment seat of God, there is no word in either of those
two books, De medicina poenitentiae and de vtilitate poenitentiae.


ALLEN. And Saint Ambrose, these men's ancient somewhat, did know this
practice so well, and allow it, that he did sit in his Ambrosius ex Paulino.
own person on confession, as Paulinus does record, whose behavior in that
divine office, that all Priests may perceive, and all the people note, I will
report: Quotie scunque illi aliquis ob percipiendam poenitentiam lapsus suos
confessus esset, it a flebat, vt ilium flere compellerat. Causas autem
criminum, quas illi confitebaniur, nulli nisi Domino soli apud quens
intercedebat, loquebatur, bonum relinquens exemplum posteris sacerdotibus, vt
intercessores apud Deum sin: magis quam accusatores apud homines. That is to
say: So often as any man came unto him to confess his faults and receive
penance, he so wept, that he made the Penitent to weep also. But the faults
themselves which they confessed, he uttered to no man, but to God alone, to
whom for their sins he made suit, leaving a blessed example to all Priests
of the posterity, to account themselves rather as intercessours to God for
sins, then accusers of men before the world for their sin. This says
Paulinus of Saint Ambrose, whereby at once we see the judgment of them both
for our matter.


FVLKE. The judgment of Saint Ambrose concerning the necessity of popish
thrift, or auricular confession, we have heard before out of his own
writings. Neither does Paulinus testify any other thing of him: nor any
other thing then might be said of Luther and Calvin, who were no friends of
Papisticall confession. For if any man did confess unto them his offenses,
that he might show himself truly penitent, and receive comfort, and counsel
for his amendment, no doubt but those holy men were greatly grieved at his
fall, which moved the offendour to greater sorrow for his sin: and yet those
faults, as were discovered to them, being such as might with duty to God,
and the state be concealed, they would never utter to aniebodie. What would
this make to prove, that they say on confessions like popish Priests, and
required all men under pain of damnation to confess unto them their secret
deadly sins, as pop sh Priests do. But popish prelates disdain to do that
which they feign Saint Ambrose to have done. Many of them being such for their
knoweledge, as you might rather seek water out of a pumise stone, then the
doctrine of comfort out of their mouths, and for their lives and
conuersations, such as deserve, if there were any hope of amendment in them,
to stand in the Church among open penitents, rather than to sit in the chaires
of government, and judgment over other men. Wherefore by this citation we
neither see the judgment of Paulinus nor of saint Ambrose, for your matter of
the necessity of auricular confession. For that secret confession may be made
in some case we deny not: but that it is necessary to be made of all deadly
sins, that man can remember, you have not yet proved.


ALLEN. But to go forward, Saint Cyprians meaning is so plain for confession
of sinnnes, that he prescribes the very thoughts of man, that be sinful
and damnable, to be uttered unto the Priests, praising them, that upon only
intent and purpose Sermon de lapsis.
of committing idolatry, hoc ipsum apud sacerdotes Dei dolenter and
simpliciter confitebantur, did simply and sorowfullie make confession thereof
to the Priests of God. And now that we are for the practice and proof hereof
at S. Cyprian, which is high in Gods Church, we need not stay here, though we
be far enough paste our adversaries account in such cases, that lay it down
at I ateran Council, a whole thousand years short of those days. I will not
much speak of Tertullian, whom Tertul. de poenit.
Saint Cyprian calls Master, his wholl book written of penance, does make
altogether for this sacrament, and for confession to be made to Gods Priests,
which he calls exomologesin, and prosternendi atque humiliandi hominis
disciplinam: and amongst other things pertaining to the act of confession and
penance, which then was much more public and severe then it is now, he
reckeneth this to be one, Presbiteris aduolui, to be humbly laid at the
Priests fecte, where he also resembles a man that is loathe to confess his
inward faults, to him, that having a filthy botch in the secret parts of
his body, had rather let it (...) up the member, then for foolish
shamefastnes, utter the grief to his surgeane.


FVLKE. You slander Saint Cyprian greatly, to make him be so plain of your
meaning, that he perscribeth the very thoughts of man, that be sinful and
damnable, to be uttered unto the priests, although he praise them that upon
only intent and purpose of committing Idolattie did sorowfullie and simply
confess the same before the priests of God. His words are these. Denique
quando and fide maiore and timore meliore sunt, qui quamuis nullo sacrificij
aut libelli facinore constricti, quoniam tamen de hoc vel cogitaueru^t, hoc
ipsum apud sacerdotes dei dolenter and simpliciter (...) exomologesin
conscientiae faciunt, animi sui pondus exponunt, salutarem medelam, paruis
licet and modicis vulneribus exquirunt, scientes scriptum esse: Deus non
deridetur. Finally seeing they are both of greater faith, and better fear,
which although they be guilty of no wicked fact of sacrifice, or libell, yet
because they have so much as thought of such a matter, they sorowfullie and
simply confess the same, before the Priests of God, they make confession of
their conscience, they declare the burden of their mind, they seek for
wholesome medicine, although for small and little wounds, knowing that it is
written. God is not mocked. What prescription is in these words, of any
necessity of confession of all the sinful thoughts of men? his meaning is,
that they show them selves more faithful, and to fear God better, which
voluntarily, when there is no necessity, offer themselves to open repentance.
For their only purpose of sacrificing, to the better quieting of their
conscience, then they which being polluted with libells as they called them (by
which they professed to pay money, that they might not be compelied to
sacrifice to Idols) yet would not acknoweledge that they were in any fault,
which was necessary for them to do, before they could be admitted into the
congregation. And therefore you have neither practice nor proof, of the
necessity of auricular confession in Cyprians time, which was 1000. years
before the Lateran Council, which decreed the necessity thereof. That you
will not speak much of Tertullian, it is because you have little, yea nothing
at all in him to uphold your purpose. His book de Poenitentia is well known,
to be written of open penance for such as were to be baptized, or else had
openly fallen with offense of the Church, but as for your popish sacrament of
penance or confession before the priests, otherwise then before the whole
Church, you have nothing in that book: and therefore among other things
pertaning to that severe discipline, of public repentance, where he reckeneth
Presbyteris aduolui to be one, he adds immediately, and arie dei
adgeniculari, omnibus fratribus legationes deprecationis sue (...). And to
kneel before the altars of God, to require all the brethren to pray for them.
And immediately it follows, haec omnia exomologesis vt poenitentiam
commender, All these things confession requires to set forth repentance. And
as touching him that refuses this discipline for shamefastenes, his words are
these: Plerosque tamen hoc opus vt publicationem sui aut suffugere, aut de die
in diem differ, praesumo, pudoris magis memores quam salutis, velut illi qui
in partibus verecundioribus corporis contracta vexatione conscteniam medentium
vitant and ita cum rubescentia sua pereunt. Yet I suppose that many do either
eschew, or defer from day to day this work, as a defamation of themselves,
being more mindeful of shamefastnes then of their health, as those men, which
having gotten a vexation in the secret parts of their body do avoid to have
it known to them that should heal it, and so perish with their shamefastnes.
This saying does not prove the necessity of confession of all our sins so
often as we fall, but the necessity of open confession for them that had
openly and notoriously fallen, in so much that the ancient Church did admit
no man, but once in his life unto this kind of confession and open penance,
and so the words of Tertullian are plain of this austere work of public
confession, which he calls exomologesis by the greek name. Haecigitur venena
eius prouidens Deus, clausalices ignoscentiae ianua and intinctionis sera
obstructa, aliquid adbuc permisit patere. Collocauit in vestibulo poenitentiam
secundam, quae pulsantibus patefaciat: sediam semel, quiaiam secundo: sed
amplius nunquam, quia proxime frustra. Non enim and hoc semel satis est? God
therefore foreseing these poisons, (of the devil) although the gate of pardon
be shut up, and the lock of baptism be stopped, yet has permitted something
to be open. He has placed in the porch or entry, the second repentance which
may open to them that (...) but now no more but once, because it is now the
second time: but never hereafter, for the next time is in vain. For is not
this once enough? Habes quodiam non merebaris, amisisti enim quod acceperas.
Thou have now that thou did not deserve, for thou have lost that which thou
had received. These words do evidently declare, that this doctor speaks
not of the popish sacrament of penance, nor of popish confession, which is
iterated often times, but of a rigorous kind of discipline, used in the
primitive Church, if he do not incline to the heresy of Montanus as in other
places. But it appears by Augustine that this solemn kind of penance before
the Church, was admitted even of the Catholic Church, but as for them that had
greeuousely fallen in all their life, although they did not exclude offenders
from repentance before God, and remission of sins, so often as they truly
repented.


ALLEN. But of all other Origin is most plain. In one place he says thus:
Qui non prius animae suae vitia, and peccatorum cognoueritmala, and proprij
oris confessione prodiderit, purgari atque absolui non poterit. He that knows
not perfectly the sins Lib. 3. peri archon.
of his own soul and the naughtines of his offenses, that he may utter them
by the confession of his own mouth, he can not be cleansed nor absolved of his
sin. And in an other place thus: there is one painful way of remission of
sins, Cum lauat super Leuit. homili. 2.
peccator lachrymis stratum suum and non erubescit sacerdoti Domini indicare,
and quaerere medecinam, sicut scriptum est, Iniquitaiem means pronunciabo. When
the sinner waters his coutch with tears, and is not ashamed to utter al his
sins to the Priest of God, and to seek remedy, as it is written: I will
confess mine iniquity.


FVLKE. We had need of a plainer testimony then we have hard any yet, and
therefore let us see now toward the end what Origin has for the necessity of
popish shrift to a Priest. The first place is Li peri archon. 3. Cap. 1. which
I will rehearse somewhat more at large, that the readers may judge how plain
it is, for the necessity of auricular confession. His purpose is to declare,
how men are said to be forsaken of God. Hi vero qui nondum se tanta constantia
neque tanto affectu offerunt Deo, neque parati sunt accedentes adseruitutem
Dei, praeparare animus suos ad tentationem, derelinqui dicuntur a Deo, id est,
non erudiri, pro eo quod ad erudiendum parati non sunt, in posterum sine dubio
tempus eorum dispensatione, vel curatione dilata: qui vtique quid a Deo
consequentur ignorant, nisi prius ad beneficia consequenda per desiderium
venerint: quod it a demum fiet, si quis ante seipsum cognoscat, and sentiat
quid sibi desit: and quid sibi deest, a quo quaerere vel debeat, vel possit,
intelligat. Qui enim non intellexerit prius infirmitatem, vel aegritudinem
suam, medicum quaerere nescit, vel certe cum receperit sanitatem, non egerit
gratias medico, quoniam non prius periculum sui languoris cognouit: It a and si
qui non prius animae suae vitia, and peccatorum suoruns cognouerit mala, ac
proprij oris confessione prodiderit, purgari is, absoluique non paterit, ne
ignoret sibi per gratiam concessum fuisse quod possidet, and diuinam
liberalitatem proprium bonum putet: quae ret sine dubio arrogantiam generes and
elationem, and denuo ei causa sit ruinae. Quodetiam de Diabolo sentiendum est,
qui primitus honores suos proprios, and non a Deo datos esse credidit, quos
habebat tunc cum immaculatus erat: and impleta est in eo illa sententia quae
dicit, quod omnis qui se exaltat humiliabitur. But they which do not yet offer
themselves to God with so great constancy, nor with so great affection,
neither are ready when they come to the service of God, to prepare themselves
unto temptation, are said to be forsaken of God, that is, not to be taught,
because they are not prepared to be taught, the disposing, or healing of them
without doubt being deferred unto the time to come: who truly know not what
they shall obtain of God, except they come first by desire unto the obteining
of benefits. Which thing at the length shall be brought to pass, if a man know
himself first, and feel what is wanting to him: and understand of whom, he
ought or may seek for that which is wanting unto him. For he that shall not
first understand his own infirmity or sickness, cannot seek the Physician: so
if there be any also which shall not first know the vices of his soul and
the evils of his sins, and bewraie them by the confession of his own mouth,
he cannot be purged and absolved, least he should be ignorant, that thing to be
granted to him by grace, which he possesses, and thinks the liberality of
God to be his own goodness: which thing without doubt may gender arrogancy
and pride, and may again be cause to him of falling. Which thing also we
must think of the devil, which at the first did believe that his honors
which he had, when he was undefiled were his own, and not given by God, and
that sentence was fulfilled in him which says, every one that exalts
himself shall be be brought low. What reasonable man out of this discourse
would gather the necessity of shrift to a priest, where it is certain the
writer speaks of the acknowledgeing of our sins before God, without which
we can obtain no pardon, or remission of them at his hands, and not of
confessing them to a Priest, as he would have the ignorant reader to surmise.
But let us examine the second place, and see if that be not more plain, for
the necessity of auricular confession. Origin in that place in Leuit. Hom. 2.
allegorizeth upon the seven kinds of sacrifices prescribed by the Lord for
remission of sins, and says there are seven kinds of remission of sins
in the gospel, namely. 1. In baptism. 2. In martyrdom. 3. In alms giving.
4. Inforgiuing to other men. 5. In converting a sinner. 6. In abundance of
charity. the seventh he expresses in these words, which you rehearse very
vnperfectlie, and translate falselie. Est adhuc and septima, licet dura and
laboriosa, per poanitentiam remissio peccatorum, cum lauat peccator in
lachrimis stratum suum, and fiunt ei lachrimae suae panes die ac nocte, and cum
nou erubescit sacerdoti domini indicare peccatum suum. and quaerere medecinam,
secundum cum qui ait: dixi, pronunciabo aduersum me iniustitiam meam domino,
and turemisisti impietatem cordis mei. In quo impletur and illud quod Apostolus
dicit: Si quis autem infirmatur, vocet presbyteros Ecclesiae and imponant ei
manus, vngenteseum oleo, in nomine domini, and oration fidei saluabit infirmum,
and si in peccatis fuerit, remittentur ei. There is yet a seventh kind of
remission of sins, though hard and painful by repentance, when the sinner
washes his bed with tears, and his tears are made to him his food day and
night, and when he is not ashamed to declare his sin to the priest of the
Lord, and to seek medecin, according to him which says: I have said, I
will pronounce against my self mine own unrighteousness unto the Lord: and
thou have remitted the ungodliness of my heart: wherein that also is fulfilled
which the Apostle says: if any man be sick, let him call the elders of the
Church, and let them lay their hands upon him, anointing him with oil, in
the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall save the sick person, and
if he have been in sins theyshal be remitted to him. These are the words of
Origin, but you in your latin after indicare, leave out pee catum suum, and
translate it, and is not ashamed to utter all his sins, to make the place
seem more pregnant for auricular confession. I pass over that you alter the
words following, which are secundum cum qui ait initio, sicut scriptum est, by
which it appareth that you borrowed this place out of some other man's
allegation, or note-booke negligentlie gathered, and do not cite it of your
own reading. But to the matter, I answer, that Origin is not plain for any
necessity of shrifte to obtain remission of sins, when he shows five
other means to obtain it after baptism, beside this. Secondly it is
evident, that he speaks of open confession to be made in the exercise of
public repentance, which is not necessary for all men. For otherwise there
is no remission of sins after baptism, but unto them that be penitent before
God, althouh they suffer martyrdom, give alms, forgive other men, convert
sins, abound in charity, if they be not sorry and repent for their own
sins, they shall not obtain forgiveness at the hands of God. He speaks
therefore of open repentance where there is open confession, which also may be
gathered by his allegation of the text of Saint James, where not one priest
for auricular confession, but the Elders of the Church are called for. The
priest of the Lord also. that he names, by the text following of Dauides
confession before God, may be understood of Christ, of whom the Leuiticall
Priest, to whom Origin alludeth, was a figure, as I have declared before: so
that here is no plain testimony, nor any certain warrant for the necessity
of ear confession: For that confession may be made for quieting of a man's
conscience we deny not: but that it is necessary to be made by all men of all
their mortal sins, and that without such confession there can be no
remission of sins, that (I say) we utterly, and always deny.


ALLEN. S. Dionise also an Apostolic man, does inuinciblie prove unto us,
that confession to a priest, and the sacrament of penance was in use in his
days, that is to say, in the Apostles time, for he was S. Paul's scholar. He
checketh very earnestly Epist. ad De mophilum.
one Demophilus a naughty Monk, that you may see Monks be old, when there
was an evil one in S. Dionise days, and yet there was an evil Apostle,
before there was an evil Monk, that you may see both orders be ancient,
though, be they never so holy, they cannot be always void of evil. But this
Demophilus I say, bare a great rebuke of Dyonisius, that he usurped once a
Priests place and function, and that on a time he thrust back from the
Priest, and rebuked contemptuously a poor penitent that came to confession,
and called the Priest sitting on confession a wretch and a miser, that he
durst take upon him to make a sinner a just man. Which words were very fit
for Luthers mouth, an other. religious man of like humor and honesty. So
soon was confession hated of the wicked, and so speedily was it desended of
the faithful, as of Saint Dionise, who here calls the orders and divine
acts of penance the decrees and institutions of God.


FVLKE. Indeed we read that one Dionysius Areopagita was converted by Saint
Paul, but that the author of these books, which go under that name, was an
Apostolic man, we do utterly deny. For Eusebius, S. Hierome, Gennadius
would not have omitted the mention of such a writer and such books, being so
diligent sertchers of ancient monuments of the Church as they were, if any
such had been heard of in their times, by the space of five, or six hundredth
years after Christ. But concerning the matter, this Dyonise whosoever he be,
says nothing for the necessity of auricular confession, which is the matter
in question, although he rebuke Demophilus for abusing a poor penitent, and
presuming to rail upon the Priest and to command him to avoid. Neither is
there any mention that the Priest did sit upon confession, or that the
penitent came in popish manner to shriue himself, but to seek medecin for
his sins, perhaps to offer himself to open penance for some heinous
transgression openly known, as it should seem by the words of Demophilus
reported by Dyonisius. But thou as thine own betters declare, did thrust
away with thy heels, an ungodly and sinful man (as thou say) even when
he was fallen down before the priest. Thou being present against thy self,
then did he entreat and confess that he was come for the healing of his
diseases. But thou wast not terrified, but increasing in boldness, did rail
upon the good priest, that he was a wretch in justifying a penitent and an
ungodly person, and at length saidest unto him, get the out, etc. These words
prove not although they were the words of Dyonisius the Areopagite himself,
that it is necessary, that every man is bound to confess, even his secret
sins, to a Priest: And as for the sacrament of penance, which you say is
inuinciblie proved by this place, to have been in use in his days, here is no
mention thereof. Finally where you would build the antiquity of works upon
this man's authority, to be as high as the Apostles, I must tell you, that by
this place you can not, albeit the Epiflle were granted to be written by the
Areopagite: For he calls not Demophilus a Munke, as Perionius translateth the
word, but (...), a servant or inferior minister. I know that Maximus and
Pachymeres, expound that word to be meant of Munkes, and that this Dynoise
also elsewhere names Monachos, that were in his time, but his time was far
under the Apostles, as is proved inuinciblie by this argument, that neither
Eusebius, nor Hierome, nor Gennadius makes mention of any such works extant
in their time, of Dyonisius Areopagita, and therefore it is certain they were
counterfaited long after, under his name.


ALLEN. I can not stand upon every point, which greeueth me much, my matter is
so fruitful, and one worthy witness is yet behind, S. Clement (I mean him
that S. Peter made his successor. Si forte (says he) in alicuius cor vel
liuor vel infidelitas, vel aliquod Epist. adfra trem Domini.
malum labenter irrepserit, non erubescat, qui animae suae curam (...)
confiteri ei qui praeest, vt ab ipso per verbum and consilium salubre curetur,
quo possit fide integra and bonis operibus, poenas aeterni ignis euadere, and
ad perpetuae vitae praemia peruenire. If either envy, or infidelity, or any
other greeuouse sore privily possess man's soul, let not him that has any
care of his salvation, be ashamed to confess it to him that is his Prelate,
that through his word and counsel, he may be healed of his sins, and that
in true faith and good works he may escape hell, and attain to everlasting
life. Thus Saint Clement.


FVLKE. The points are not so many that you should prove, but you might have
leisure enough to stand upon them, your matter is so passing barren that for
lack of authentical writers, you are driven to pray aid of impudent
counterfeiters, as of shameless and unlearned asses, which counterfeyted the
Epistles that go under the name of Clemens and that without either wit, or
learning, or likelihood of truth. For who would think that the holy man
Clemens could not write his mind in true latin? who would think, that such
barbarous latin was written by the bishop of Rome at that time, when boys
and girls did speak a hundredth fold more pure latin? what wise body would
think, that Clemens the Apostles schooler would take upon him to teach the
Apostle Saint James, and that such bables, as of keeping the sacraments from
myse dong and rottennes, nay not only to teach him, but to give him charge, a
principio Epistolae vsque ad hunc locum de sacramentis deleganti been
intuendis, vbi non murirum stercora inter fragmenta dominicae portionis
appareant, neque putrida per negligentiam remaneant clericorum. From the
beginning of this Epistle unto this place, I have given in charge of the
sacraments to be well looked unto, where no mise ^urdes may appear among the
fragments of the Lords portion, neither may they remain rotten through the
negligence of clerks. This is that worshipful Clemens that prescribes
confession to a Priest. I beseech thee reader (as Erasmus says) what wit,
shame, or honesty have they, that will bear men in hand, these Epistles to be
written by so ancient, so holy, so wise, and so learned fathers, in which is
nothing but folly, barbarousnes, ignorance, and impudency.


The conclusion of this treatise, remoouing the impediments of confession.

ALLEN. THus far in despit of heresy and al her abbettours has truth brought
it self. By Christ power was given to the Apostles and Priests, to remit
sins: by Christ confession was instituted: by the Apostles it was commanded
to all Christians: by their example all nations faithful afterward have used
it: by general Counsels, which be of most sovereign authority, it has
been both confirmed and commanded: by all learned Doctors liked and allowed:
by all Christian people frequented reverently, as the only refuge after their
relapse. Therefore whosoever shall see this case so clear, and so consonant to
all reason, to all learning, to all the examples of antiquity, and to Christ's
own institution, let him school his conscience as he thinks good.


FVLKE. As a cowardly traitor that is fled out of the battle, wherein he had
greater care to hid him selse frostrokes, then to fight, to attain the
victory, when he thinks him self to have escaped danger cease not to
brag and boast of his valiant acts, and strong adventures in defense of his
Prince or country: so it fares with you. For as though you had fought under
truths baner, you boast of the victory against heresy, whereas you have
served heresy, and done your endeavor against the truth, striving for nothing
so much, as that heresy might change names with truth. But they which will
you voutchsafe to consider, with how little labor you have bin encountered, and
chased out of the field, will be able to discern truth from heresy, and to
give truth her true name of truth, and heresy her right name of heresy. But
let us see what great matters this Champion of truth has brought to pass.
First, that by Christ, power was given to his Apostles, and their successors
to remit sins, this victory indeed is soon archiued, against them, which
never withstood this tlitle. But what manner of power this is, and how to be
executed, by sentence definitive or declaratiue, according to the will of God,
or man, and by what means it is exercised, by preaching the Gospel, or by
murmering of words, wherein truth controulleth heresy, you have
broughtnothing to fortify your errors. Secondly you say, that confession was
in. stituted by Christ, and yet have no word in the scripture to prove that
popish confession to a priest, after your position, was either instituted, or
allowed by him. The like I say of the commendation of shrift to all
Christians. Neither have you proved the necessity of confession, by the
example of any faithful nation, that used it, and allowed it, nor by any
Christian general council, before the Lateran council gathered in the name of
Antichrist, to maintain his pride, and abominable heresies, neither has any
one learned Doctor, for 500. or 600. years after Christ, liked, or allowed of
confession, according to your popish definition thereof, much less that by all
Christian people, it was reverently frequented, and lest of all that confession
is the only refuge, I mean confession always to a priest, for Christians
after their relapse, which most absurd proposition, I think few learned
papists will maintain, sure I am many of the Elder papists have denied,
holding that by contrition of heart men might obtain remission of sins,
without confession of the mouth to a priest. Wherefore he that sees such an
impudent brag, set upon so false a matter, wherein he sees neither Christ's
institution by his word, nor the example of antiquity by any credible report,
nor practice of any Christian people, by any necessary ground, nor (...) by
learned witness, nor reason by necessary conclusions, to uphold and maintain
it, let him school his conscience according to the holy scriptures, and
nothing be moved with the vain glosing of such shameless boasters.


ALLEN. For if upon consideration of this practice so approved by all means
possible, he can not charge him self with obedience to the truth and the
exercise of that in his lise and works, which he sees to be most sure and
certain, as well by the Churches usage, as Gods own writing and will, more
words will not weigh with him, nor the persuasion of man shall ever much move
him to that, which the continual terror of conscience, always acknowledging
that truth in mind, the practice whereof in outward fact he abhors, can not
effectualliie force him unto. Hard it seems, I know, to the wordlinges, and
to the weak (and so hard, that never man could have brought it into the
Church, much less to have continued it so long, if it had not proceeded from
the precept of Christ's own mouth) to open the whole heart and mind to man.
And it can not but be joined with some natural bashfullnes, in this our
frailty, to utter that to an other, which in it self, of what sort of sin
so ever it be, is most filthy and loathsome. But knowing and feeling
undoubtedly, that the continual close keeping thereof in the court of our
conscience, is much more great and greeuose torment, and therewith concerning
Christ's ordinance to be such, that no consideration of our imbecillitle, nor
contrary liking of our fantasy, may or ought to withdraw us from that
thing, which for us all is accounttd most convenient and necessary, let us
never by our disobedient wills, strive against Gods wisdom.


FVLKE. When you can show Gods own writing and will out of the same, that
popish shriftis so necessary, all good consciences will run as fast unto
it, as now they despise and abhor it. Such confession as the holy writings
of God do require, all Christians will be ready to make. But that confession of
all our mortal sins, as you term them, is of necessity to be made to any
man, we find no scripture that does charge our conscience with it. And where
you say, that no earthly power could have established, or begun any such
burthenous thing as shrift is, I agree with you, and yet it follows not, that
the force of Christ's institution has driven the world thereunto. For the
subtlety of the Devil has more prevailed to deceive the minds of ignorant
men, then any 2 Thessalonians. 2.
earthly power against knowledge could have prevailed. Yea God himself has
sent the efficacy of error into the world, that Antichrist (then whose tiranie
nothing is more burthenous) might prevail to the deceiving of the reprobate,
for punishment of their (...), which have not embraced the knowledge of the
truth, to their salvation, that they might believe lies to their condemnation.
Wherefore let no man marvel, that Antichrist has laid so many, so heavy,
and intolerable burdens upon men's consciences, which no earthly power could
bring to pass: for his coming is foreshewed to be according to the effectual
workeing of Satan, in all power, and signs, and wonders of lies, and in all
deceitfullnes of unrighteousness, in them that perish. Neither let any man be
blinded with this foolish Sophistry, and inconsequence of Allen: Never any
earthly power could have established or begun any such burthenous thing, as
Popish shrift is, therefore it has the force of Christ's constitution and
ordinances, whereof there can no word be brought out of the hol e scriptures.


ALLEN. If the hurthen therefore of confession seem to any man intolerable,
as in deed it is not, but very pleasant to all such as have tasted how sweet
Christ is, let him ease it with earnest consideration, that it is exceeding
commodious to break the pride of man's heart, and to make him know himself.
And, if that any burden of shamefastenesse appear in the uttering of his
sins, he may learn to take it gladly as some worthy pain for his
offenses, and some piece of recompense and satistisfaction for the same. It
pleased God at the first fall of our fathers, to join shame and confusion to
sin, by which they were bashefull at the voice of God, and of their own
nakedness. Seeing that of his infinite wisdom, it pleased him to make it the
first punishment for sin, and to lay it upon his own sons most innocent
person, in his contemptible death and manifold rebukes suffered for our sins
and sakes, let us not disdain to bear some portion thereof in this sacrament
of confession, for the release of our sins. That shamefastenes so much
abhorred and so much respected shall often preserve man from further offending,
whereof he knows after he must again so soon before God and his minister be
rebuked.


FVLKE. To all wise and Godly men, the burden of Popish confession seems
not only intolerable, but also impossible. But to foolish hypocrites that
would gladly fall to a composition for their sins, it seems easy enough,
especially since every man for a little money may choose his confessor,
according to his own conceit, into whose lap he may vomit out the burden
of his seared conscience, and be assured of absolution, toties, quoties.
Neither is pride much abated, nor shame greatly regarded, where one simple
obnoxious person is made privy of a man's fault, who also, as it is holden, is
bound to conceal the same for ever. Neither were all the shame of the world
sufficient to make satisfaction for the least of our sins, which deserve
eternal confusion, and pains, for which the son of God, and none but he,
was able to satisfy by temporal pain and shame, much less the shame of
confession before one priest, and he commonly an ignorant contemptible ass,
may be any piece of recompense, and satisfaction for all our sins confessed
to him. Jesus Christ the righteous, is the propitiation for our 1. Ioa. 1. 2.
sins, and his blood purges us from all our sins, and therefore your
Popish confession, with this opinion of some piece of recompense and
satisfaction for our sins, is justly abhorred of all true Christians, who
know that what piece soever of recompense or satisfaction for sins be
ascribed to any other thing, so much is detracted from the glory of Christ's
redemption, and the inestimable price of his blood. As for the preferuatiue
from sin, that you imagine shrift should be, is but a foolish fantasy. for
he that never fears not shamerh to fall so often in the sight of the
righteous God, will have but a small regard to bewraie the same to sinful
man.


ALLEN. But what should we talk of sosmall a let, where the comfort of opening
our sores and wounds to man, that by nature is a like sinner, and by use of
hearing many faults, can not much marvel at ours, and by office there is
most secret, and careful over us, what should we talk of other impediments,
where this comfortable motion is so great? What comfort can be more, then to
have such a friend, who, for that I join with him, yea even mine own soul
to his, after the dearest manner and most secret sort, must needs be to me a
full stay of conscience, a witness of my sorrowful heart, an intercessour for
my sins, a surety before God for my amending, a minister in my
reconciliation, and one that under Christ (as Saint Clement Clemens li. 2.
costi c. 23.
also says) shall both bear my sins upon himself, and take charge of me to
salvation? in which case me think surely, man is after a sort set in
marvelous quietness, and almost discharged even of himself, and his own
custody, whiles he gives over his own advise and judgment, and wholly
hangs in earth upon him, whom God has appointed to be his pastor, and
governor of his soul. Therefore, good reader, call upon Christ for increase
of faith, and believe only this ordinance of God was of infinite wisdom and
high providence provided for thy sake, and it can not be burdenous unto thee.
Christ shall give thee courage and heart to withstand the contrary temptations,
and to serve him, though thou forsake thy self. To us therefore confusion of
face for our sinful life, and to him honor and glory everlasting. Amen.


FVLKE. You do well to confess, that shame is but small ales, where a man is
brought into a fools paradise, of so easy remission of his sins, for so
light a confession, before one man, as sinful, and perhaps more sinful then
he, and bound (as you say) by office to secrecy. But the comfort you speak
of is vain and miserable, though all confessors were learned, and able to give
good counsel, as not one among an hundereth of your hedge Priests and friars
are. For how can he be a surety before God for an other man's amending, when he
cannot be surety for his own reformation? He may well bear other men's sins
upon himself, and take charge of other men's salvation, to his own damnation,
when he preaches not Christ the only propitiation for our sins, but will so
be a minister of reconciliation, that he will rob Christ of his glory, and
the people of their salvation. In which case in deed you set men in a
marvelous, and mischeuous security, and almost discharge them even of
themselves, as your own words are, and of their own custody, while you
make them give over their own advise and judgment, and wholly to hang in
earth upon you, and not upon Christ, whom God has appointed to be the Pastor
and governor of their souls, even ypon earth, though he be in heaven, and
they upon the earth. Therefore good reader, mark how blaspemoussie these
Popish dogs would have thee to hang thy self wholly upon them in earth, as
the only Pastors and governors of their souls, by which they exclude
Christ altogether, from any feeding or governing of our souls upon earth, and
debar all Christians, not only from depending wholly upon Christ, as they
might, and do, but from hanging any thing at all upon him in earth, seeing
they will have men to hang wholly upon their co^fessor on earth, as though god
had made any such pastors and governors of men's souls, as should put Christ
out of office, and challenge the whole trust of men's salvation unto themselves.
These be the right lims of Antichrist, that challenge the chief honor of God
unto themselves which is faith and hope of salvation, to be reposed on them:
for what other thing is it, that a man should quiet him self by, be discharged
of himself and his own custody, and wholly hang upon his gostlie Father, but
to believe in him, to put his whole faith, hope, and confidence of salvation
only upon him, while he is upon earth. And for this matter he is content to
accept only faith, because he has no other argument to persuade thee, but
remember that faith comes by hearing of the word of God, which abhors and
accurseth al confidence reposed in man. And therefore confusion of face be to al
blasphemous papists, not only for their sinful life, but also for their
abominable heresies: and to god be al glory, honor, and dominion in Christ
Jesus our Lord, for ever and ever.


Amen.
THE SECOND PART OF THE TREATISE, CONCERning the Popes pardons.
The author by just causes was moved to believe the truth of this doctrine of
Pardons, before he knew the meaning of them and afterward found them of greater
importance, then he took them before to be.

THE FIRST CHAP.
ALLEN. OF the high power of remission and pardoning of sins, given by Christ
to his only spouse the Church, in the Church, in the persons of her holy
Bishops and priests, as a thing annexed to the wholl order, and to be exercised
in the sacrament of penance, upon all men that be of their several
jurisdictions, and humbly shall submit themselves by confession of their
faults to their judgments, I have already spoken so much, as may suffice for
the satisfying of the sober, and just reproof of the contentious. And now
because, as well the course of my former matter, as the special need of these
days drives me thereunto, I will make further search and trial of the right
of that challenge, which as well the high priest, as other principal Pastors
and Bishops make, by the force of their Prelacie and keye of jurisdiction, over
and above the power of orders, touching Pardons and Indulgences. Whereof whiles
I do entreat, the more attention and heed I require of thee (gentle reader)
because here all the lamentable tragedy and toil of this time first did
begin, and here have al those that perished in the late contradiction of Core
principally fallen. And in no article of Christian faith ever more offense
has bin received of all sorts almost even of the wise, then in this one of
the Popes pardons.


FVLKE. WHen you have heard what were these just causes which he pretends,
you shall plainly see, that the authors faith was not grounded upon Gods word,
but upon humane presumption, and therefore deserves to be called rather a
fancy then a faith. Likewise, when you shall have read over the whole treatise
to the end, you shall perceive though you read no confutation, that he has
not any warrant either out of the holy scriptures, or out of the ancient
fathers, for any Popes pardons, such as he should take upon him to defend. For
that the Church of God and pastors thereof, have power to release them that are
bound, and upon persuasion of their repentance, to remit or pardon some part
of the trial appointed for them, it is no question between us: but of the
popes pardons, granted under his Leaden Bulls for remission of sins, but a
poena and culpa, from the pain and from the fault, some plenarie of al their
sins, some partial of part of their sins, some for a number of days, some
for many thousands of years, which every one that paieth money for them, shall
have the benefit of them, or which he gives to such an hospital, gylde, or
brotherhoode, or to him which says such a prayer, or goes on such a pilgri
mage, and such like, whereunto may be added his dispensations, absolutios,
exemptions, lycenses, these are the popes pardons of which the controversy is
between us, and of which he cannot prove, that there was either use, or
approbation, no not in the Church of Rome for a wholl 1000. years after
Christ. And these when he has said, as much as he has learned to say for
them, out of the decretalls, Clementines, and Extrauagants, you shall find to
be by his and their own determination, nothing else but as they are called in
Latin, Bullae Bubles, great in appeerance, but altogether empty and void of
profit. The attention of the gentle reader I do likewise require, beccause he
may see, what good occasion Luther had to separate himself from the Popish
Church, as from the whore of Babylon, Apocal. 16.
which so obstinately defended such abominable blasphemies, which all wise and
reasonable men have either abhorred, or as he confesses, been offended at
them. And yet let the reader mark, how boldly he calls this article of the
popes pardons, an article of Christian faith, whereof the Church of god never
heard for a thousand years and more since Christ's assension, before the
loosing of Satan out of the bottomless pit, when Antichrist was bold to set
abroad al his impieties, and to sit not in a mystery of iniquity, but openly
in the sight of al men, in the temple of God, and to exalt himself above all
that is called God or worshipped.


ALLEN. And to be plain in the matter, where sincerity is most required, two
causes moved me to believe, like, and allow of the power of pardons and
indulgencies, long before I either knew the commodities of them, or had sought
out the ground and meaning of them. The first was the Churches authority,
which I credited in all other articles before I knew any of them, or could by
reason or scripture maintain them. Whose judgment to follow by my Christian
profession in all other points, and to forsake in this one of Popes pardons,
had been mere folly, and a sign of fantastical choice of things
indifferent, which is the proper passion of heresy. Neither did I then know,
that the Church of Christ had allowed such things, because I had read the
determination of any general Counsels, or decrees of some chief governors
of the said Church, touching such pardons, or because I had by histories and
note of diverse ages seen the practice of the faithful people herein, by
which ways her meaning of doubtful things is most assuredly known, but
only I deemed that the Church allowed them, and misliked the contrary,
because such as bare the name of Christian folk and Catholic did approve
them, and sometimes lamented the lack of them. And surely for an unlearned
man, I count it the briefest rule in the world, to keep him self both in
faith and conversation ever with that company, which by the general and
common calling of the people, be named Catholics. For that name kept Saint
Augustine himself in the truth and Contra Epistolam Ma nicgaei qua^ vocant
fundament. Cap. 4.
true Church, much more it may do the simple sort, who is not hable to stand
with an heretic, that will challenge the Church to himself, by Sophistical
reasons, from the Christians, that for lack of learning can not answer him.
Well, this company of Catholics brought me to know the Church, and my creed
caused me to believe the Church no less concerning the Popes Pardons, then any
other article of our Christian profession, which though it were not of like
weight, yet it was to me of like truth, and all in like unknown at that time.


FVLKE. Your pretense of plainnes, and sincerity, is but craft and sub tiltie,
to deceive the simple and ignorant, that they might please themselves in their
blindenes, and by your example think themselves at ease in their ignorance.
For what reasonable man will be persuaded, that you could believe, like, and
allow that thing, whereof you know no use, nor whence it came, or what it
meaned. But here you show what faith is accounted among the Papists, a fond
persuasion of any thing that is told them by their teachers, although they
neither know what commodity it brings, nor what ground of truth it has,
nor finally what it means. But howsoever it was, two causes moved you,
whereof you profess that hearing of the word of God was neither. The first
was the Churches authority, which you credited in all other articles, before
you knew any of them, or could by reason, or scripture, maintain them. So by
your own confession you did as many papists do, believe you knew not what,
which faith would never bring you to eternal life, which consists in
knowledge of God and Jesus Christ according to that which is written, that Ioh.
17. and 20.
we might believe and be saved. But seeing you could neither by reason, nor by
scripture, maintain those articles to be true, which you believed, how could
you be persuaded that this company was the Church of Christ, the pillar of
truth, rather then the Church of Antichrist, the mother of heresies and
errors? For all swarms of heretics challenge unto themselves the name of the
Church, and require credit to be given unto them: and the more heretics the
less care they have to make any trial of their doctrine to be truth: what
had you more to persuade your conscience, that you were in the right way, then
a lew or a Turk has, which crediteth the company amongst whom he is bred
and borne, without examining by reason, or the scripture, whether those things
which they teach them be the truth or no? But it had been a sign of
fantastical choice of things indifferent (you say) which is the proper
passion of heresy, to follow the Churches judgment in all other points, and
to forsake it in this one of Popes Pardons. Where you say the fantastical
choice of things indifferent is the proper passion of heresy, I know not what
you mean, except you think that heretics are deceived only in the choice
of things indifferent, or that whosoever makes some fantastical choice of
things indifferent, is an heretic: neither of which opinions, I trow, you
are able to maintain. For though some heretics make a fantastical choice of
things indifferent, I suppose it is not proper only to heretics: for some
schismatikes that be not heretics, make such a fantastical choice; and the
fantastical choice of heretics is most occupied about principal grounds,
and articles of faith, not about things indifferent only. Moreover I would
know, whether you account the Popes pardons to be things indifferent, or
necessary for the Church: for if they be but things indifferent, you do not
wisely, to be contentious about them. Finally, seeing a company of heretics
may err in one article, and teach soundly in all other, as the Arians,
Donatists, Nouatians, and such like, a man may follow the judgment of such a
company, in all other points, and without folly or sign of fantastical
choice, depart from them in that one wherein they err. And therefore your
faith was as good, as his, that believes there is a man in the moon, because
he hears many men say so, whom he dare credit in other matters, and is
loath to forsake them in this' one. But your Christian profession, moved you to
follow the Churches judgment in all things. And what heretic will not say as
much, without trial or proof, which is the Church, or what is Christian
profession? Therefore what ground had you that your profession was Christian,
or your fellowship the Church of Christ? You confess you had neither the
determination of general counsels, nor the decrees of the chife governors of
your Church, nor the practice of the people in diverse ages, by which ways you
say the Churches meaning of doubtful things, is most assuredly known: but
only you deem the Church allowed them. So that you, because such as bare the
name of Christian folk and Catholic men did approve them, had nothing but
the bare name of Christian folk, and Catholic men to ground your deem upon.
And is the bare and only name of Christian and Catholic men, so sure a
ground to build faith upon, without either the authority of the scriptures,
reason, determination of general councels, or decrees of the chief governors
of the same, or the practice of the faithful in ancient times? then surely
Iet all heretics content themselves, where they are, and dwell together: for
there they shall have the name of Christian folk and Catholic men: which you
account to be the breefest rule in the world for an unlearned man, to keep
himself both in faith, and conversation, with that company, which, by the
general and common calling of the people, be named Catholics. The rule indeed
is very brief, and you say in the margent also, that it is good. But who I
pray you prescribes this rule, does God the author of truth? where find you
it in his word? shall the general and common calling of the people be the
unlearned man's rule to direct him to the Church, which is the pillar and stay
of truth? then surely the unlearned Grecians, Aethiopians, Armenians, and
other that dissent from the Church of Rome, and from the truth it self, have a
good and brief rule to hold them where they are, for by the general and
common calling of the people in those parts of the world, they be named
Christians, and Catholics. Yea the rule serves them ten times better then you
Papists, the forgers of it, for they have the more general and common calling
of the people, to be Catholics in those places, then you have here in Europe,
by a hundred parts. For there no man calls them otherwise then Christians and
Catholics, here you have (God be praised) many hundredth thousands of the
people, that commonly call you Papists, heretics, antichristians, Cacolikes
and such other names, agreeing to your heresies. If you will cavil that by the
general and common calling of the people, they be not named Catholics,
because you Papists do neither so call them, nor count them, they may
answer you by the same reason, that you are not by general and common calling
of the people named Catholics, because neither they nor we do so call you, or
account you. But it is fufficient belike that you call your selves, so and the
rule is to be restrained to people of these parts of the world, and among them
to Papists only; and so it is as good a rule, as that, ask my fellow if I be
a thief. A good rule indeed for unlearned Papists, because draffe is good
enough for swine, which had rather sleep in the mire, and puddle of ignorance,
then come to the knowledge of the truth by searching the scriptures, in which
Christ the way, the truth, and the life, is to be Ioh. 14. 6. Ioh 5. 39. 1.
Pet. 3. 15.
found, and out of which all Christians ought to gather knowledge, that they
may be able to give account of that hope that is in them.

But Saint Augustine (I wene) should be author of this rule, for unlearned men,
although he himself were not unlearned, Contra epistolam Manichaei quam vocant
fundamenti, Cap 4. This is great impiety to feign so absurd a rule, and then
to slander so godly a father, to be either the author or approouer thereof. For
Saint Augustine indeed, against the Maniches, which were a particular sect of
heretics, confesses that among many other things, the name of the Catholic
Church did hold him in the bosom thereof: but not that the only name of
Catholics was a good rule for unlearned men to know the Church by. But
protesting to reason the matter with them, without any prejudice, and to try
the truth without any rashness, as one willing to yeald unto the^, if they can
persuade him with truth, so that they shall not require him to yeald, before
they can give him a clear reason without any darkness, of allthinges
pertaining to the salvation of his soul, thus he begins; In Catholica enim
Ecclesia, vt omitta^, etc. For in the Catholic Church, that I may omit that
most sincere wisdom, unto the knowledge where of a few spiritual men do
come in this life, that they may know it, but of the lest part, because they
are men, but yet without doubt: for the rest of the multitude not the quicknes
of understanding, but the simplicity of believing does, make most false:
Therefore that I may omit this wisdom, which you believe not to be in the
Catholic Church, there are many other things which may most justly hold
me in her lap. The consent of people and nations holds me, the authority
begun with miracles, nourished with hope, increased with charity, confirmed
with antiquity, holds me: The succession of Priests from the very seat of
Peter the Apostle, to whom our Lord after his resurrection commended his
sheeepe to be fed, unto this present bishoprike does hold me: last of all
the very name of Catholic Church does hold me, which not without cause among
so many heresies, this Church alone has so obtained, that whereas all
heretics would have themselves to be called Catholics, yet to a stranger
that asks, where men meet at the Catholic Church, none of the heretics dare
show either their own Church or house. Therefore these so many and so great
most dear bonds of Christian name, do rightly hold a man that believes in
the Catholic Church: although for the dulnes of our understanding, or the
desert of our life, the tructh does not yet show it self most openly. But
among you, where none of these things is that may inuit or hold me, there
sounds nothing but the promise of truth, which indeed if it be showed so
manifest, that it cannot come in doubt, it is to be preferred before all those
things, by which I am holden in the Catholic Church. But if it be only
promised, and not exhibited, no man shall move me from that faith, which
binds my mind with so many and great knottes unto Christian religion. Let
us see therefore what Maniche does teach me, etc. These words declare that
setting aside the wisdom of the Church grounded upon the scriptures which the
heretics would not acknowledge, there were many other things that might
justly hold him in the Catholic Church, among which the name of Catholics
was but one, and served only at that time, when the Catholic religion was
most commonly embraced: therefore he denied not that the name of Catholic
only was sufficient to teach a man to know the Church, and the truth by it:
but acknowledges that all these motives of universality, consent, miracles,
succession, name of Catholic, must give place to the truth, when it is
plainly showed out of the canonical scriptures, as in the chapter following
he urges them to show out of the gospells of Christ, where it is written, that
Manicheus was an Apostle of Christ, as his sect affirmed, and his epistle
pretended. As for the reason you allege, that unlearned men are not able to
stand with heretics in disputation, which will challenge the Church to
themselves, is of no force. for the unlearned man ought to know the Church by
the true notes thereof, contained in the scriptures, which is sufficient for to
satisfy his conscience, although he can not cunningly avoid all the
Sophistical arguments that the adversary brings: whereas theonelie name of
Catholics can breed no true faith, or quietness of mind, which is not
obtained by the peoples judgment, but by authority of the word of God. And
seeing the people are commonly deceived in many matters of difficulty, and
most of all in misnaming of things, what assurance shall the unlearned have,
that they be not deceived in this so weighty a matter, and wherein their
speech may so easily be abused. But howsoever it was, the common calling of
the people, brought you to know Catholics, Catholics to know the Church, and
the creed taught you to believe the Church rules in Popes pardons, then in
other articles. Thus is your faith builded altogether upon humane presumptions,
the ladder whereof is this. you believe Popes pardons, because the Church of
Rome allows them, you believe the Church of Rome, because it is the Catholic
Church. you believe that it is the Catholic Church, because the people
commonly call it so. But of Christian faith, Saint Paull describes another
ladder, faith comes by hearing, hearing by the word of God, preached by
ministers Romans 10.
sent of God: so that against the authority of god, who gives both his word
and preachers, and by them true faith, you have the general and common calling
of men, which give authority to that company to be the Church, which is
surnamed Catholic, which company so called may cause you to believe what they
list, and this indeed is the ground of al your heresies, if you had gone one
step lower, that the Devil inspireth ignorant, and wicked men, to call his
foul blouse the Romish synagogue, by the name of the beautiful spouse of
Christ his Catholic Church.


ALLEN. The second cause that moved me to reverence the power of pardoning in
the high Bishup, and to like his Indulgences, was the very persons of them
which first reproved the same. In whom because I saw the world to note and
wonder at other many most blasphemous and inexcusable heresies, I verily
deemed (though I was then for my age almost ignorant of all things) that this
opinion and impugnation of Pardons, could neither be of God, nor of good
motion, that first began in them, and begat such a number of most wicked and
co^tentio is opinions, as straight upon the controlling of the Churches power
herein did ensue, not only against Christ's officers in earth, but against his
Saints in heaven, and against himself in the blessed Sacrament. This extreme
and intolerable issue me thought verily could have no holy entrance, and
therefore, with the other named cause stayed me in the Churches faith, even then
when I had no feeling nor sense in the meaning of these matters.


FVLKE. You were a wise young man in those days, when being almost ignorant of
all things, as you confess, you would follow the judgment of the world, in
condemning the persons of them that reproved pardons, and were not able to
judge whether they were justly condemned of other blasphemous and inexcusable
heresies. Nay at this present time as great a cleark as you are taken to be
among your friends, you are not able to convince the^ of such blasphemous and
inexcusable heresies as you prate of. And yet if you had bin tho^ as able
justly to have reproved the^ by the scriptures of such monsters as the world
did wonder at in them, yet you stayed upon a weak staff, except this be a
good atgume^t with you: heretics hold manifest false opinions, therefore they
hold no true opinions. Much more wisely and soundly you should have sought
the true Church, as Saint Augustine teaches, out of the scriptures, and
thereby judged of the worlds noting and wondering, which because it consists
most of wicked men, does commonly condemn Christ and his Gospel. Out of the
same scripture you should have learned, who were Christ's officers, and who
the limbs of Antichrist, what honor is due unto the saints in heaven, and
what manner presense there is of Christ upon earth. But as your faith was the^
grounded upon simple sophistry, in supposing that which no wise man will
grant: so is it not now much differing from the same, although you have
learned with more craft, to pervert a few scriptures, and to wrest the sayings
of some dctors, for a flourish, having no more substance of true faith which is
builded upon the word of God, then you had before. For if your shameless
principle be denied, that you are the Church of Christ, then you come back to
these beggarly motyues, as in your articles, and Bristowes motyues is
manifest, being not able either to find the notes of the true Church in the
synagogue of Rome, nor to justify the doctrine of the Church of Rome, to be
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, when trial is to be
made by their writings.


ALLEN. But afterwad, reading the history of the pitiful fall of our time, and
there considering the sinister intent and occasion of the first improofe of
Pardons, and all the strange endeavors of Luther (whose name is cursed to all
good men) who first in all man's memory, saving one Wicleffe, who was condemned
in Constance Council for the same, was so bold only upon contention and
covetousness to condemn that, which himself in Conscience knew to be true and
lawful, I could not but much be confirmed in my faith thereby. And yet all
this while though the matter of pardons seemed to me to be more and more sound
in it self, and as true as the Spirit of God is true, who was the author
thereof in the Church, yet I did not then consider of it, as a thing of any
great importance, but I conceived it to be a small matter, subject to a
certain iugling in reason, such as wicked men lightly make their close and
crafty entrance by, to more mischief, and further attemptes against the
common faith of the Church: I could not then conceive, which I after ward so
plainly, and now more and more by the better surueie of the cause do perceive,
that in this one falsehood there was covertly contained the very pith of
falsehood, and improofe of the greatest matters which life and faith does stand
upon.


FVLKE. Your first motives to this faith of yours were not more feeble, then
your confutations in the same were fond and foolish. You did read the story
of the alteration in religion that has fallen in our time. But of whose
writing I pray you? even of such as were proctors for the Popes pedlarie ware,
or pillars of his pretensed power, which was none other, but according to the
proverb before mentioned, ask my fellow if I be a thief. If you had read the
story written indifferently, without partiality to either party, you might
have judged better of the wholle matter. Some perhapes are living that can
testify of the things that were done, and public monuments are extant
totestifie the same, so much more intolerable is your arrogancy, to judge
upon the only sinister report of the adversaries of Luther (of holy and
blessed memory, with all true Christians) that only contention and
covetousness moved him to condemn that, which himself in conscience knew to
be true and lawful. Like boldness you show in affirming, that Luther was the
first in all man's memory, saving one (...) that despised pardons, forgetting
the Waldenses, that were long before Wiclefe, and the Bohemians that were after
him before Luther, who condemned popish pardons as much as Wiclife or Luther.
For they condemned the Pope to be Antichrist, as much as these did. But now let
us examine the story as it is known to be most true in Saxony where Luther
first found fault with pardons. When Pope Leo. 10. had sent abroad his pardons,
which were preached by Terelius a Dominike friar in such impudent manner, that
they seemed to serve for no end, but the Popes covetousness, and the
licentiousnes of the people: Luther at that time having a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, did mildly and modestly admonish the people of the
deceites and abuses of pardons and pardoners, which long before his time were
reproved, in the Counsels of Latrean, and Vienna, he complained to the
Archbishop of Ments, to the Bishop of Branderburg, to the provincial of the
Augustine friars, and to the Pope him self: in all things submitting him
self to the Pope, and Church of Rome, so it were not against the holy
scriptures. When he could find no equity, nor redress of these abuses, In
suppl. Nau.
which even Surius the papist, confesses to have been justly complained of by
him, and unjustly manteined, or dissembled by the prelates, he proceeded
farther, as God gave him knowledge; and at length compelled by intolerable
injury, and neglect of manifest truth and reformation of lise, did cast of
the Anrichristian yoke of the Popes obedience. Now whereas you charge him with
contention, and covetousness, the world your judge before, may gather whether
Luther, if against his conscience he would have set forth the Popes pardons,
especially at such time as the Pope had great need of money for war against
the Turks, might not have made a more easy way, for him self, to honor and
ri hes, then by setting himself against them. But howsoever it was your fault,
faith was thus confirmed, and that to such blasphemous boldness, that without
authority of the holy scriptures, the matter of pardons, seemed to you, as
true, as the spirit of God is true, and having none other arguments to persuade
you, but that Papists called them selves the Catholic Church, and condemned
Luther of many heresies, and write in their stories that Luther was moved by
contention and covetousness, to oppose him self against them, you nothing
doubted but that the spirit of God was author of popes pardons in the Church.
Being now resolved of the substance, you were not yet persuaded of the
quantity, but thinkeing the matter at the first was but small, at length you
came to a perfect knowledge, how great and weighty it is, and how it draws
with it all other weight, in so much that the very pith of the greatest
matters of popish life and faith do stand upon it. If then the pith ofthe
greatest matters of popery do stand in Popes pardons, and this pith has no
ground either in the scriptures, or the fathers of the Church, for a thousand
years after Christ, we may the more easily see, that the plant of popery,
whereof pardons is the pith, is not of Gods own planting, and therefore shall be
plucked up by the roots.


ALLEN. Thou would not think, I dare say, into what a sum and abridgment
heresy has by the Deuilles devise and Luthers service drawn her self into.
For by this one false conclusion, and for maintenance thereof, this man and his
posterity have taken away all penance and satisfaction for sin, have
spoiled the Church of her just and and most necessary discipline, controlled
Gods own holy usage incorrection of his children, have entered into his
secrets of the next world, and there abandoned the place of his justice and
judgment for sins that be remitted, but not enough to his wisdom and will
corrected, have robbed the holy Saints of all their merits, that is to say,
Christ of his gifts and grace, whereby only they besosoneraigne and
satisfactorie, have imbarred the body mystical of Christ, of the benefit
which the wholl and every member thereof should receive by the satisfaction
and holy works of the common head, which is Christ, have broken the communion
of Saints, and the sweet fellowship of all the holy members of Gods Church, and
the benefit which rises frometh to other, by mutual participation of their
good works and deserts, and to be short, have by this one falsehood preached
against pardons, done injury to Christ, to his Church, to his Saints, and to
his sacraments, and have mightelie shaken the whole frame of Christian religion
and doctrine. I do not here riot in words to ouerrunne my adversaries in
talk, or to make more of the matter then it is: but assuredly without
destruction of all these so necessary articles of our faith, there can no man
defend Luthers doctrine against Indulgences. I know he fumbled at the
beginning otherwise then his fellows and followers to disgrace the same,
sometimes by holding the pardons to be lawful, but not profitable: other
whiles, to be deceites, but yet invented for holy purposes, now by avouching
they could not stand with Gods justice, if they should remitte any part of
the appointed pain for sins, and else when that there was no pain for
remitted sins at all, whereupon the indulgences should not be needful but
vain and frivolous: with such other inconstant stammering, as lightly is
common to them that seek to up hold falsehood against their own skill and
consciences.

But his followers, as well of the Protestants, as Zuinglians and Caluinistes,
to make the way of wickedness more easy and plain, have boldly denied all
penance and temporal pain for sin remitted, whether it be by Christ's or the
Churches enioyning, have taken away Purgatory, have bereued Priesthood of all
power, and the Church of all her treasure of Christ's copious and abundant
redemption. Whereupon I cannot otherwise judge, but that doctrine which else
can not be refelled, but by the waste of so many undoubted articles, should
stand exceeding fast, and be grounded most surely upon all these foresaid
truths, without the destruction whereof it can not be of any force
ouerturned.


FVLKE. As no man would think any such matter, if you had not put it in their
heads: so no wise men can think otherwise of Pardons, then he did before you
took in hand their defense, saving that all reasonable men may think them so
much the worsse, because you are able to defend them no better. And if all the
principles of popery (as you say) be contained in the matter of pardons, as in
a sum, or abridgment, the children of God may behold the providence of god,
more clearelie, in setting Luther first against them, at such time as he knew
no such matter, neither had any purpose but to dissuade the most gross
abuses, and palpable impostures which were that time mantained about them,
alowing the pardons still as good and lawful. But for the mantainers of this
conclusion, you say, he and his, have taken away all penance, and satisfaction
for sin, etc. Naie they have established and restored the true use of
repentance and showed that the death of Christ, is the only satisfaction for
sins: the discipline of the Church, from a batbarous antichristian tyranny,
they have reduced within the limmites of the scriptures, and the practice of
the primative and pureit age of the Church: the chastising that God uses, for
correction of his children, they have taught out of the scriptures, how it is
to be taken patiently as an admonition for amendment, not an amends for our
misdoing, which sauoreth as much of pride, as their doctrine does of humility.
The secrets of the next world not reueiled in the scriptures, they leave until
the time of the general revelation of al secrets, and therefore they presume not
to allow purgatory pains, for the clensing of those sins, which the
scripture teaches to be purged, by the blood of Christ, in whom all our
sins are thorowlie punished, to the full satisfaction of the justice and
wisdom of God. They have left to the saints al their merits, which is nothing
else but the grace of God, sufficient for their salvation, not placing the
works of saints in the place of Christ's passion which is only of it self
sovereign and satisfactorie for all men. The mystical body of Christ, and
the holy communion of saints, they believe to receive all virtue and power of
life from Christ the head, and every member to exercise that office, which by
his grace is assigned unto it, therefore they have done no injury to Christ,
his Church, his saints, sacraments, or his holy Religion, but their duty in
purging the doctrine ofChrist, his Church, his saints, sacraments, and
Religion, from error, falsehood, heresy, and blasphemy. You tell the reader
that you do not riot in words to ouerrunne your adversary: but if he be
wise, he will remember, that a crafty orator, does sonest deceive, when he
pretends most plainenes. What Luther thought, and taught, at the first of
pardons his writings are extant in print to declare, in which he confesses
that he did fight in the dark, yet it pleased God by the importunity of his
adversaries, to stir him up to search the truth out of the holy scriptures.
Neither has Zuinglius or Calvin, or any of the Protestants taught otherwise
of repentance, satisfaction, power of priesthood, or the tresure of the Church,
then Luther did, after God had reueiled the truth unto him, and he openly
preached the same. Seeing therefore the matter of pardons cannot stand, but
upon the blasphemous heresies, which the popish antichristian Church does
teach, against the glory of the only redemption of Jesus Christ, our only
and whole savior and reedemer, it must needs be one of those pestilent
poisons, which Satan, after his loosing out of, the bottomeles pit, has
powered forth into the world the defacing of the glory of Christ, and the
destruction of many ignorant souls.


ALLEN. Therefore, least any man by making smaller account of so little a
branch of the Churches faith, then he should do, fall further unto the
mistrusting of other many of known importance, I thought it good, to debate
the question of Indulgences, which be now commonly called the Popes Pardons,
though not only he, but also other Prelates of Christendom have their
several right, each one according to the measure of the Churches grant, and
his jurisdiction therein. In which matter, because most men of smaler trauail
have erred, rather by misconstruing the case, and mistaking the state of the
cause, then for any lack of sufficient proof of the matter after it were well
understood: I will study first clearly to open the meaning of that, whereon
we stand, and then to go through the whole question with as much light and
brevity as I can: tempering my self, as much as I may, from all such (...),
as the depth of so grounded a conclusion, and the learned disputation of
Schoolmen might drive me unto. Wherein I am content, rather to follow the
desire and contentation of the reader, then to satisfy my own appetite, which
I feel in my self, to be somewhat more greedy of matter sometimes, then the
common people, whom I study most to help, can well bear: and yet if they
think it any vantage to know truth, and the necessary Doctrine of their
faith, they must learn to abide the orderly method, and compass of the
cause, and further I shall not charge them.


FVLKE. You come to late after the vanity. treachery, and blasphemy of
pardons has been so long set abroad, and known to the world, and bringing no
better stuff then you do, to suppose that you shall be able to restore pardons,
into the ancient credit they had, within these four score years, even with
the simplest papist in Europe. You would make the matter more plausible, by
communicating the right of pardons, to all prelates of christendom, as well as
to the Pope, whereas indeed your popish Church keeping no proportion, aloweth
none of the^ above 40. days at once, except it be at the dedication of a
Church, and the^ he has but one year: and this authority also pinched with
diverse restraintes, whereas the pope smelling the sweetness of them, since the
Laterane council, in which his modesty is commended, that though he had fulness
of power, yet he used it not, to be ouerlauish in granting of pardons, has
bro ken al banks of moderation, and granted 10000 20000. 40000. 100000. years
of pardon, yea general pardons ofIubelie, a poena and culpa, from all sins
and penances due for them, whether men have erred by misconstruing the case,
and what orderly method you have observed with regard of the peoples capacity
we shall consider in that which follows.


For the true meaning of Pardons, and to remove some untrue surmises touching
the same, it is declared that the Pope never took upon him by pardoning to
remit deadly sin, much less to give any man license to sin.

THE SECOND CHAP.
ALLEN. FOr the understanding therefore of the term, Pardon, or grace, or
Indulgence, let it be oansidered, that proper lie they import not the remission
of any deadly crime considered in themselves, and as separated from the
sacrament of penance, nor yet signify any release of eternal damnation or
everlasting punishment, which only allwaies is remitted when the deadly
sin, for which it was due, is forgiven. For there can no power in earth be so
great, nor any man's jurisdiction so simple, that he may forgive mortal
offenses, since the institution of the sacrament of penance, except he use the
confession of the party with his contrition and sure intent never to commit
the like again, yea and with purpose to satisfy the justice of God, by
Christ's grace, as he may, according to the enioyning of his judge therein.
For God himself, because he is righteous and true, can not forgive any man
his sins, either by this sacrament of penance, or otherwise, being of years
and time of discretion, except he be penitent for the same: that is to say,
except he be both contrite, and at the least willing to confess his offenses,
if it be after relapse, and to suffer due correction therefore. And seeing God
can not pardon any man of his deadly sins, except he be thus qualified,
much less may a mortal man, be he never so great in dignity or calling in
the Church, take upon him to forgive or pardon him that is guilty of deadly
sin and damnation, without the confession and submission of the penitent, as
is premised. All this truth hangs orderly upon the necessity of the
sacrament of Penance, and Christ's ordinance therein, whereby he has made
deadly sins only remissible in that sacrament, by the confession of the
party to a Priest, who has in his order received power to remit them, as is
sufficiently proved in the former part of this treatise, and it is only a
Priest, whether he be of base state, or high dignity, that can lawfully loose
men's sins, as by the key of his order, as they term it, with sufficient
jurisdiction over the penitent, for the secret discussing of his conscience in
this sacrament of Confession.


FVLKE. This wholl Chapter contains nothing but positions, without any ground
of authority of scripture, or testimonte of Doctors, as though it were
sufficient only to affirm them: which if they be not granted, all that
follows of Pardons is nothing worth. The first is, That Pardons do not
properly importe the remission of any deadly crime, or the punishment due for
the same. The reasons that follow serve to prove, that pardons for deadly
sins, and the pain due for them, are unprofitable, but they prove not, that
they do not import such remission, either by the Popes intendement, or by the
pardoners preaching of them, or in the opinion of the purchasers, and receivers
of them. The gloss upon the Clementine. l. 5. de poenitentiis, and re
missionibus. c. 2. yealding a reason why the Pope reproves the pardoners which
took upon the^ to grant ple nary remission of sins, and to absolve men a poena
and culpa, has these words: a poena and culpa ista est plenissima peccatorum
remissio, quae conceditur cruce signatis pro subsidio vltramarino, etc. quam
solus papa concedit. From the pain and the fault, this is a most full
remission of sins, which is granted to them that are marked with the cross,
for aid beyond the sea, which the Pope alone does grant: by which it
appears, that the Pope takes upon him justly, to grant pardon of all
sins, mortal and venial, which the pardoners unjustly presumed to do,
without sufficient warrant. So does Pope Boneface the 8, the inuentor of
Jubilee pardons, grant, Non solum plenam and largiorem, immo plenissimam
omnium suorum veniam peccatorum, not only a full and large pardon, but a most
full pardon of all their sins. If the pope speak improperly, when he
utters such emphatical and superlatiue speeches, how shall plain men understand what he means. I know that some of the Canonistes, who have more care
that his decrees should hang together, then the Pope him self, when he
grants pardons for advantage, do interpret the word peccatorum to signify
pains due for sins, and yet by this cursed gloss, that corrupts the text,
release of eternal pain due for deadly sin is not excluded. The author of
the gloss confesses, that this epistle was very grossly made. Haecepistola
satis gross fuit composita, and therefore it must be healped by glosses, for
their sakes that can dispute against it, but for the common people it is good
enough in the literal sense. In so much that the gloss says upon the word
plenissimam. Sed quomodo ista compatiuntur plena^, largiorem, and plenissima^?
Dico Papam interpretatum fuisse in consistorio me presense, hane indulgentiam
adeo plenam, prout clauium potestas se extendet, quod intelligo prout verba
patiu^tur. But how do these words hang together, and the one abide the other, a
full, a more large, and a most full pardon? I say that the pope in the consistory
in my presense, did interpret this pardon, to be so full as the power of the
keys does extend it self, which I do understand as the words do suffer.
Whereby it is manifest that the Pope restraining the fulness of his open
pardon, sent into all the world by his privy interpretations in his
consistory, does nothing else but delude the world by his pardons, as it shall
more plainly appear by the rea sons that are afterward brought forth to defend
them from the pretended slanders of their impugners. But further to prove,
that the Pope has taken upon him, by pardon to remit deadly sin, I allege
a Bull of confirmation granted by Pope Leo the tenth anno. 1513. Sept. id.
martij, Pontif. anno primo, the copy whereof is printed, with the subscription
of two public notaries, to testify that it agrees with the original: which
Bull was granted, Hospitali Sancti (...) in Saxia almae vrbis. In which is an
approbation of all pardons granted by his predecessors to the said hospital
and the members thereof. Whereof there are rehearsed, that Innocent the third
granted to the faith and devotion of the faithful, and the salvation of their
souls, to all that visit the said hospital and the members thereof, from the
feast of the nativity of our Lord, and every day unto the octaues thereof,
two thousand and 800. years of pardons. The same Innocent granted to the said
hospital and the members thereof in every festiuite of the Apostles 2000.
years of pardons. The same Ionocent granted to the said hospital, and the
members thereof, every day of the wholl year, one year, and 40. days of
pardon. Also Pope Alexander the fourth, granted to the said hospital, and
the members thereof, from the feast of the holy ghost, in the month of
January, every day until the octaues of the same feast four thousand
years, and eight hundred Lents of pardon, and remission of the seventh part of
al their sins. And on the Sundaie in which there is song, for the introite of
the Mass, Omnis terra, the said Alexander granted to the said hospital, and
to all and every the members thereof, the first Sondaies of every month of
the year 3000. years, and as many Lentes, and remission of the third part of
all their sins. The same Alexander granted to the said hospital and the
members thereof, from the feast of Corpus Christi every day until the
octaues 2000. years, and remission of the seventh part of all their sins.
Pope Celestinus the 5. granted to the said hospital and the members thereof,
from the feast of the Epiphany unto the octaues every day, a hundredth
thousand years of Pardons. The same Celestine granted to the said hospital,
and the members thereof, from the feast of the nativity of the Virgin Marie,
and in the octaues every day thirty thousand years of Pardon, and as many
Lentes. Also Pope Clement the 5. granted to the said hospital and the members
thereof, from the feast of the resurrection of Christ unto the octaues thereof,
every day, two thousand and eight hundredth years of Pardon. Item Pope
Boneface the 8. granted to the (...) hospital, and to the members thereof,
from the feast of the ascension of Christ unto the octaues 2500 years of
Pardons. Item Pope Clement the sixth granted to the said hospital, and to all
the members thereof, from the feast of Pentecost unto the octaues thereof
every day 8000. years and 8000. Lentes, and full remission of all their
sins. Item Pope Innocent the 6. has granted to the said hospital, and to
the members thereof, from the feast of the assumption of the blessed Marie,
unto the octaues thereof, every day, 2000. years and 2000. Lentes of
Pardons, Item Pope Benedict the 12. has granted to the said hospital and
the members thereof, from the feast of all Saints, to the feast of Saint
Leonard 3000. years, and as many Lentes of Pardons. The sum of the days of
pardon granted by Popes, and by 60 Archbishops, and by 70. Bishops, in the
consistory of Lateran confirmed by the authority Apostolic, makes 700.
years and as many Lentes. The sum of the Masses of the wholl order by the
year, makes thirty two thousand, and as many psalters of the brethren which
are of the order.

In these liberal grauntes, where there is not only thousands of years and
Lents, by which you understand pains, and penances, enjoined, or due for
sin, what means the remission of the seventh part, of the third part of all
their sins, yea full remission of all their sins? except the Pope mean
either to mock men, that receive his pardons, or else took upon him to remit
deadly sin, as the words sound, and can have none other sense, seeing there is
not only the universal particle, all their sins, but also remission of
sins is distinct from pain of penance due for sins. Again, what should
need so large pardon for venial sins, which may so easily be remitted
without pardon, except the pope means to release the pains, due for deadly
sins? Do ventall sins, which may be washed away with holy water, deserve
so many hundred thousand years of penance or punishment, as are contained in
these pardons? Finally what shall we say to those pardons that are granted
for saying of certain prayers, whereof diverse printed books are full, in
which is express mention of pardon, for mortal sins. As for example, Pope
Alexander the sixth, grants to him that says a certain prayer devoutly in
the worship of Saint Anne, and the Virgin Marie, and her son Jesus, ten
thousand years of pardon, for deadly sins, and twenty years for venial
sins, tottes, quoties. The prayer with the indulgence, is to be found in a
book printed at Paris, no longer ago, then in anno. 1534. fol. 85. in horis
sanctae virginis. What face then has this proctor for the Popes pardons to
affirm, that the Pope never took upon him by pardon to remit deadly sin?

But now let us consider his reasons, how he proves that the Popes pardons
do not properly import remission of any deadly crime, etc. Since the
institution of the sacrament of penance, no man can forgive deadly sin
without confession of the party, and purpose to satisfy the justice of God.
Here are three positions assumed, without proof, always denied of us, namely
the institution of the sacrament of penance, the necessity of Popish
confession, or of the purpose of satisfying the justice of God, which no man
can satisfy in any part, but only Christ has fully satisfied the same for
us: and therefore it is open blasphemy to say that God can not forgive a man
his sins, except he be willingly to suffer due correction therefore. For
Christ has once suffered for us and found eternal redemption: That God
requires 1. Pet. 3. Heb. 9. 10.
repentance in them that receive forgiveness of sins, being of discretion,
that is such as hear the word and believe it, is not so to be understood, as
though God were restrained of his power, by the impenitencie of man, but that
God gives repentance to all such as whose sins he forgiueth: For except he
convert us we cannot repent. Therefore it is a presumptuous saying to affirm,
that god cannot, because he is righteous, forgive a man without he be penitent.
For his righteousness is thoroughlie satisfied in Christ, before we were borne.
And if it be his pleasure to forgive a man his sins, he will also give him
repentance, and faith to apprehend Christ, to his justification. But the Pope,
who is not able to give repentance, is no more able to forgive sins. If this
matter hang (as you say) upon the necessity of the sacrament of penance and
confession to a Priest, neither of both those necessities being proved, it
hangs in the air, and is concluded without proof. Now if God only by the
ministry of every priest, with the conditions by you required, do forgive
sins, it follows that the Popes pardons are nothing, but mere delusions, to
promise that which he cannot perform, or which every hedge Priest of his
Church, is able to perform to his subjects, as largely as the Pope,
concerning the remission of deadly sins.


ALLEN. Upon which ground you may well perceive, that the Popes remission and
pardon, being a public act of the key of his jurisdiction and rule over the
flock of Christ, and not an exercise of his power of order, which only is
occupied in ministering the sacraments, and such like, you may well perceive (I
say) that his Pardon or assoyling out of the Sacrament, cannot extend in any
case so far, as to forgive sins without confession of the penitent, yea
although he be otherwise sorrowful for the same: much less may he release any
offenses without all repentance of the party. And therefore it is a great
slander, to say as many do that for money ye may obtain of the Pope a free
Pardon before hand, of any greeuouse sins that you commit afterward, as of
robberies, murders, misbehauiours in body, or such like, which were no pardon
of sins, but a wicked protection and license to commit sins. There was
never Bishop of Rome, or of other place, that ever gave or could give any such
pardon. Naie, not only they take upon them no such thing, but they never gave
pardon to this intent to remit mortali sins at all, by force of the Pardon
only, and without the confession of the party, were they of never so large
or liberal grant. For every Indulgence has this clause in it, either
expresselie, or necessarily, and by course to be supplied: Confessis, and
contritis, to the confessed and contrite: and sometimes this clause of like
importance, to all as be in state of grace. Whereby it is evident, that the
giver means not, to make any man partaker of the Indulgence, grace, or
pardon, and that the party cannot have any benefit thereby, if he be not
released of his sins before, and by the sacrament of penance, set in state of
salvation. Whereby also you see, that the Pope takes not upon him to forgive
any their sins (I mean always deadly sins in this case) by his pardon.
For the Priest before hand, that hears his confession, does forgive him in
the sacrament, and so needs not of any Pardon for those offenses them selves,
which belong to the Priests office to remit, and therefore be alwaie in the
said sacramental manner forgiven. And if he be unworthy of forgiveness and
loosing by the just judgment of his ghostly father, then cannot the pope or
any other power in earth forgive him by any grace or Indulgence, which takes
only place from such as be already loosed from their mortal crimes.


FVLKE. The second position is, that the Popes pardon cannot extend to forgive
sins without the confession of the party, much less release sins without
all repentance of the party. We do easily grant, that the popes pardons, is
of no validity at al, and therefore you may pinch it and strain it in, at
your pleasure. But where you say, it is a great slander to say as many do,
that for money men may obtain pardon before hand, etc. You should have done
well, to have set down, who says so, or what impugner of pardons so
slaundereth them or the Pope. And yet it is manifest, that although no such
pardon go forth in such form of words, the Popes pardons dispensations and
absolutions, tend to that effect: seeing they are openly prostrate for all men
that will give money for them. For what skilleth it, If a man can not have a
lycense to commit murder, perjury, adultery, etc? If he be sure before hand
to have a pardon, dispensation, or absolution for the same, he will not be
greatly afraid to commit any of them. And seeing the Pope takes upon him to
dispense against the commandment of God, in many cases, and to grant
absolution for any crime never so great, the Pope is not greatly slaundered,
if he be called a protector of sin, and a graunter of license to commit the
same. Neither can he be excused by requiring contrition, confession, and
satisfaction in the parties, seeing he grants pardon for the defaults of
every one of them, and that which is the chiefest, of satisfaction, which
according to your learning, must be greater or lesser, as the contrition is
more or less, according to the priests simple discretion. For the gloss upon
the Bull of Pope Boneface the 8. says, that the contrition of him that
confesses may be so great, that not only the fault, but also the pain, may
be clean taken away without penance: but because men can not judge of that,
some satisfactorie penance must be enjoined, by the Priest or Pope, etc. Now if
the Pope by his pardons, as you say, forgiueth no sins, but such as be
forgiven before by the priest, in the sacrament of penance, then does he
nothing but play mockholiedaie with his most full pardons, a poena and culpa,
with the pardons of the third part or of the seventh part of men's sins, and
so is he no better then a co^ener, to sell his pardons for money which contain
nothing but that men have before they bought them. Thus while you go about to
excuse the popes pardons of presumption, you condemn them of cosening, and
declare them to be meerelie unprofitable, which promis pardons of deadly
sins, yet take place only upon such as be already loosed from their mortal
sins.


ALLEN. Then hereupon the Reader must learn, and diligently consider, that we
attribute a great deal more power to any simple and base Priest, in this
case, and by force of the sacrament, then we do to the highest Pope or
Patriarch in the world, out of the sacrament, working only by the right of
his jurisdiction and governance of the people. The cause is, that the effect of
remission of sins proceeds from Christ more abundantly in the grace of
sacraments, which be ministered by the priest, principally by his power of
orders, then it does by the high jurisdiction and key of government of any man
without the sacrament. I trust every man understands, that there is in the
Church a double key (for so the Doctors and schools follow Christ in that
Metaphore, and himself the Prophets) the one of order, which is the power
annexed or given in the order to work any holy function, by ministering of
sacraments, or other things to them belonging: as to consecrate the Sacrament
of the Altar, to absolve in penance, and so forth in the rest, to work in
every of them according to their institution.


FVLKE. The metaphore of the Keys is well known, to the Doctors, as used by
Christ, and the Prophets, but this division of the keys, if the ancient
Doctors had known, you would not have spared to make us partners of their
knowledge in the keys, and yours in the Doctors. The schoolmen in deed be
authors of that double keie you speak of, namely the keie of jurisdiction or
government, and the key of order. But the ancient Doctors knew no such
distinction. The keys of power or authority and the keie of knowledge the
Scripture speaks of, and so do the ancient doctors. How be it even as your
fathers the Scribes and Pharisees and lawier did take away the keys of
knowledge, and shut up the kingdom of heaven from men, neither entering in them
selves nor suffering Math. 23. 5. Luke 11.
other that would: so do you: for you have taken away the key of knowledge of
the Scriptures, by which as Chrysostom says, in opere imperfecto the kingdom
of Hom 44. in c. Matt. 23.
heaven is opened, and in steed thereof forged a key of strange and
tyrannical jurisdiction, which neither Christ nor Peter, nor any of his godly
successors did know or exercise. This ancient writers words are these. Regnum
coelorum est beatitudo coelestis, ianua autem etus est Scriptura, per quam
introitur ad eam. Clauicularij autem sunt Sacerdotes, quibus creditum est
verbum dicendi, and interpretandi Scripturas. Clauis autem est verbum scientiae
Scripturarum, per quam aperitur hominibus ianua veritatis. Adapertio autem est
interpretatio vera. The kingdom of heaven is the heavenly blessedness, the gate
thereof is the Scripture, by which men go into it: the key-keepers are the
priests, to whom is committed the word of preaching and interpreting the
Scriptures. And the key is the word of the knowledge of the Scriptures by which
the gate of truth is opened unto men. The opening is the true interpretation of
the scriptures. These two keys of authority and knowledge, will make a
sufficient minister of the Gospel, that is able to open, and shut, bind and
loose, forgive and retain sins, and where these want, or either of them,
there can be no good minister of Christ to open the kingdom of heaven, that
men may enter therein. But now let us see the reason you give, why you
attribute more power to a simple priest in remitting of mortal sins in
shrift, then to the Popes high jurisdiction by pardons. The cause is (say you)
that the effect of remission of sins, proceeds from Christ, more
abundantly in the grace of sacraments, then by the high jurisdiction without
the sacraments. This is nakedlie affirmed, without any proof in the world, as
other positions before and after. But in deed there is no reason that the
effect of remission of sins, shoud proceed more large from the sacrament of
penance, as you call it, then from the jurisdiction of the Pope, if it had the
same foundation which you would bear men in hand it has. For if Peter's and
the Popes jurisdiction be builded upon Tu es Petrus, and to thee I will give
the keys, and what soever thou bindest or loosest, shall be bound in heaven,
etc. Why should not all mortal sins be subject to his jurisdiction, as well
as to the priests power in penance. The words be as ample to Peter, Math. 16.
as to the Apostles. Ioh. 20. If Peter's key of jurisdiction papal be not
grounded upon this text, as you aduouched lib. 1. cap. 4. Sect. 7. tell us
where he has it any where else committed unto him. If it be committed by this
text, certainly the key of jurisdiction is as large as the key of orders.
Therefore either he forgiueth mortal sins by his jurisdiction, or else his
jurisdiction is no greater then any other man's, that has any key committed
unto him.


ALLEN. There is another key of Regiment and rule of the Church or some
principal portion thereof, which is called the key or power of jurisdiction.
Now by this power of regiment and rule, as no man can take upon him to
consecrate, so no man out of the sacrament of penance, can take upon him to
absolve any man of deadly sins and damnation due therefore. For though some
do think, that Saint Paull did absolve the incestuous Corinthian both of his
sin and damnation, with all temporal punishment due therefore, after assured
repentance of the party, out of the sacrament of penance: yet I cannot agree
in any case thereunto, because the sacrament of confession has ever been of
necessity since Christ's institution thereof, and because the remission of
sins is so proper a work unto God, that no creature could ever work the
same absolutely without sacrament, saving only the humanity of Christ, to
which the acts, of divinity, as being united to the godhead, were communicated,
upon which it is certain, that Christ our savior might remit sins
absolutely out of all external sacraments, by his word and will only, which
being the power of excellency, was, as Divines do think, communicated to no
other creature, in what jurisdiction or pre-eminence soever he should be
placed: and in the act of absolution and remission of sins proceeds
jointly from that one excellent person, being both God and man. Neither is it
to be thought that Saint Paull did pardon the foresaid Penitent any other
ways, then by the hands of the ministers and Priests of the Corinthian
Church. For though the confession and penance of the party were public, as
the sin it self was open, yet the usage of the Apostie, and open practice of
the Corinthian Church toward him, was no less a sacrament then, then it is
now being secret. Therefore I doubt not, but Saint Paull spoke especially to
the Priests of the Corinthians, when he willed them to confirm their charity
toward the sinner, and to forgive him by their ministry, whom he thought in
absence worthy to receive the grace and pardon at their hands, whereof we
shall speak more hereafter in place convenient. We do not then exalte the Pope
or Bishops in this case any thing so far as heresy seems, or the
simplicity of many men conceiueth, whereas they may well understand, that we
give more authority to the most simple Priest alive, in respect of his order,
and because of the sacrament, by which he works, then to the Pope or highest
Potentate in the world, considering but only his jurisdiction. And therefore
Saint Peter him self, who received both the keys, as also other Apostles and
Bishops, having as well the keie or power of Orders, as the keie of
jurisdiction, and regiment of their subjects, may do the acts of both the
keys, that is to say, may as well lawfully minister sacraments of all
sorts, as also exercise jurisdiction upon their subjects in such things, as
we hereafter shall declare. But out of the sacraments only by the virtue of
their jurisdiction, to absolve men of mortal sins, though they be subject
unto them, they can not, nor, as I think, ever Pope or Prelace took upon him
any such pre-eminence. And therefore let this be the first point of our
consideration: that the Popes Pardons or Indulgences, which he gives in
respect of his jurisdiction, which also, as most men do think, he might give
when he were once elected, before he were a priest or any other bishop in like
case, according to the compass of this regiment: let it be first noted, I
say, that such pardons, howsoever they be given out of the sacraments, do not
forgive sins that be deadly. And if any man thought before, that the Pope
might or did use to give such liberal graunts or pardons, whereby without the
sacrament of penance or consession any man might claim full remission of all
his deadly sins, let him correct the misconstruing the matter in himself,
and assuredly know, that it is not sothought of gods Church, nor so meant by
the giver, nor so expressed in any pardon.


FVLKE. Still you follow your positions without probations. The Pope dispenses
with oaths, with vows, with (...) de auco: de potestate Ec. quaest. 49. 52.
killing of men, etc. without the sacrament of penance; which things if they
were donewithout this dispensation, I think you will account to be mortal
sins, and this he does by his key of jurisdiction: therefore he may as well by
the same power absolve men of periutie, breach of vows, killing of men: or if
his key be naught in absolution, it can be no better in dispensation. Cettaine
it is that Saint Paul with the Church of Corinth, did release and absolve the
incestuous man, as largely as he had bound him. For so his words are plain,
Whatsoever you do pardon I also pardon. But you can not agree 2. Cor. 2. 10
thereto, in any case, although other men be of that mind; and Saint Paull
says as much him self. Peradventure you will rather believe Chrysostom, who
upon the former words of Saint Paul, thus writes: Ne redderet illos elatos,
quasi huius negotij authoritas penes ipsos esset, itaque fieret vt non
absoluerent hominem, (...) adigit illos ad hoc, dicens sese quoque ills
condonasse. Least he should make them to proud, as though the authority of
this matter were wholly in their power, and so it might be that they would not
absolve the man again, he drives them to this, saying that he also has
pardoned him. Again he speaks inthe person of Saint Paul. Ego iam condonaui,
qui in priore epistola condemnaueram. I have already pardoned him, which in my
former epistle had condemned him. This is Chrysostomes judgment, whereto in
any case you can not agree. The reason you add of the necessity of the
sacrament confession, and institution thereof, is nothing, except you prove
them out of the scriptures, as you never shall be able the one or the other.
That remission of sins is so proper a work to God, as it is incommunicable
to any creature, to grant the same absolutely, you say true, whether it be
with sacrament or without sacrament. For remission of sins follows not the
external administratio of the sacraments: but the sacraments as seals of his
word, follow the pleasure of God therein. Wherefore your determination of Gods
absolute power in remission of sins, as also your discourse which follows,
of Christ's humanity united to the Godhead remitting sins, is clean
contrary to your former deliberate assertions, contained in the first book,
Chapter the 1. 2. as appears by the very titles of the chapters, and in the
latter end of the 4. Chapter, where you make your syllogism, the mayor whereof
is this: They truly and properly do remit sins, upon whose sentence in
earth, the pardons of God immediately does ensue in heaven. Thus you dangle up
and down, looking only upon your purpose in hand and forgetting how your
matter should hang together, which every mean reader will find out of
himself though you do not admonishhim thereof. You return again to Saint
Paul's absolution, which although the text, and the doctors interpretation upon
the text, be most manifest, that Saint Paull as a principal party in his
excommunication, does also as principal minister restore him, yet you will
have him to be, but only an exhorter or counselor of other men, what they
should do. But the text is plain, he did not only judge him worthy, to
receive pardon at the hands of priests or Church of Corinth; but he also did
for his part, and according to that interest he had over the Churchof Corinth,
himself pardon him and that in the person or presens of Christ. But hereof you
admonish us that we shall have occasion to consider more hereafter. In the mean
time while you would make the Popes pardons seem more tolerable to ignorant
persons, you go about to persuade them, that you do not exalt the Pope so
far, but that you give to every simple priest authority, in respect of his
order, more then to the Pope, and repeat again, that the Pope can not absolve
men of mortal sin, and yet has the Pope as I have proved, taken upon him
to absolve men of mortal sin. If he did contrary to the Popish Churches
(...), let the Popish Church expostulate with him: if his meaning were
otherwise, then might be gathered by his words, then was he a shameful
dissembler, cosener, and deceiuer.


ALLEN. Notwithstanding, the power of jurisdiction sometimes joins with the
sacrament of penance and the power of orders: as when any indulgence is given
forth by the Pope, in which is expressed, that whosoever shall be partaker
thereof, must confess himself, and be contrite for his sins past, and
therewith receive the holy sacrament of the Altar, and such like, by this
pardon so joining with the sacrament of remission, or in a manner including the
same, a full forgiveness is had of all sins and pains therefore, which in that
case may be called, as it is, a plenarie remission or a pardon a poena and
culpa, from both the fault, and the pain due therefore.


FVLKE. Howsoever you join or disioyne the Popes pardons to or from the
singlesoled sacrament of popish confession, the Popes pardons for mortal
sins will prove no better then fools bables, by your own confession. For
without the sacrament of confession, you say, they are not able to forgive
deadly sins, and in the sacrament of confession you hold that deadly sins
may be forgiven without the Popes pardons: therefore either with it or without
it the Popes pardons for deadly sins, are not worth a rotten nutshell. So
that while men pay money to the Pope or his pardoning questors, for leaden
bulls, they are made leude Calves, to buy that for money at his hands, which
their Parish priests are bound to give them freely without money. The Pope
therefore in granting plenarie pardons, a poena and culpa, both from the fault
and the pain, due therefore, does nothing else but deiude the world, seeing he
can neither grant pardon for any mortal fault, as you confess, and when he
pretends to pardon such faults, he pardons no more then was pardoned
before, or which might receive pardon without his pardon.


ALLEN. There be also certain grievous crimes which every Curate or Priest
Parochian can not remit, because they be reserved to the audience of the higher
Pastors. For in the sacrament of penance there is a power iudiciarie, and
therefore can not be practiced lawfully, but upon subject persons, and causes
not exempted from their judgment, and excepted from their audience. In which
cases the persons of higher jurisdiction, to whom by right and law the
cognition of those reserved sins belong, do sometimes upon occasion given,
communicate their power to the said simple priests, and do license them to
exercise their jurisdiction upon persons and causes not properly pertaining
unto them: as when the Popes Indulgence gives the sinner leave to choose his
ghostly father, and by him that he may be assoiled even from such sins as
be reserved to the supreme power of the Church. In this matter also, the
Indulgence joins with the ordinary sacrament of penance, and the minister
receives jurisdiction by the Indulgence. to hear and assoile the Penitent of
such sins, as before were not subject to his peculiar regiment: and therefore
this is also called a pardon from sin, and the pain for sin, and a full
remission.


FVLKE. You have hitherto held hard, that neither the Pope nor any Bishop can
give pardon of any mortal sin: but by reservation of cases it appears,
that the Pope challenges this prerogative, that he only may give absolution
and pardon in these grievous crimes, that be called cases papal, and the
Bishop in cases episcopal. Now let us see how this gear hangs together. The
Pope has this prerogative in respect of his high jurisdiction, for in the
sacrament of penance every priest, by order, as we heard before, has as much
authority as he. Then if these cases be reserved to the Popes jurisdiction,
this reservation does prove, that the Pope takes upon him to pardon the most
grievous sins, by his jurisdiction only, or else he deceaueth them that
seek for absolution of them at his hands. And whereas you would cloak the
matter by saying, the Popes indulgence does grant, that the priest in
confession may assoile a man from such sins, as be reserved to the supreme
power of the Church, it is to no purpose: For the Priest in this case, is but
the popes deputy, to exercise the Popes jurisdiction (as you say) as well
upon persons as causes, not properly pertaining to him, but by the Popes
license; whereupon it follows, that the Pope may do in his own person, that
which he does by his deputy, but by his deputy he takes upon him to remit
most deadly sins: therefore the Pope takes upon him to remit deadly
sins, by his jurisdiction only. If you say, the absolution comes from
the sacrament, and not from his jurisdiction, then show us out of the
scriptures, how the Pope has authority to restrain the grace of sacraments
in respect of the person that ministers them, or else your reservation of cases
and exemption of persons, will prove no better then an Antichristian tyranny.
For if Christ have given power to every Priest to remitte all sins, as you
have often affirmed, upon the text Ioh. 20. whose sins you remit, etc. what
is he but Antichrist, exalting himself above all that is called God, which
controlleth the liberal grant of Christ, exempting both persons, and sins
from their power, without al ground or war rant of Gods word?


ALLEN. That thou be not deceived herein, understand, good Reader, that every
Priest in his taking Orders, and by Christ's grant, has full power to remit
all sins, and all men of their sins that be penitent, and yet that this
power can not be practiced by the law of nature indifferently upon all,
because this sacrament, and none other, is judicial, and therefore profitablie
can be extended no further, but to them that be of their subjection and
regiment. Wheresoever the Priest consecrateth, it is effectual: whomesoeuer he
baptizeth, he is lawfully Christianed: whomesoeuer the Bishop orders, he
stands truly ordered, and so forth, though they should not herein meddle in
other men's cures, without special license, sufferance, or necessity. But no
man can assoile any person at all, that is not subject unto him, either
ordinarily or otherwise, because it is an act of jurisdiction, and therefore
though his power of orders be in it self sufficient, yet by that only he can
not absolve any man, but in necessity, except he have withal authority over
the person, and in that case, wherein the penitent requires his sentence,
which jurisdiction he may have, either ordinarily, as upon all those that be
of his charge, or else extraordinarily, by some special grant of the
superior, as Bishop, or Pope, as we may see in the forms and course of
Indulgencies diverse times. And thus considering of the matter, you see that the
Popes pardons, as they be only proper to the act of jurisdiction, separated
from the power of priesthood, and sacramental confession, can not remit the
sins themselves, neither damnation due for their reward, though, because
license comes and proceeds by them, to the inferior Priests, to remitte
sins in all cases, they may be called, as I said, plenarie and most liberal
graces and graunts, to assoile man both from sin, and the punishment that is
due therefore.


FVLKE. You pretend as though you would render a reason, why all Priests have
not equal power over all men, and to remit all sins, and for the former you
say somewhat, though not sufficient, but for the later you say nothing at
all. First you confess that every Priest rightly ordered, has by Christ's
grant power to remit all sins, and all men of their sins that be penitent.
But this power can not be practiced, you say, by the law of nature,
indifferently upon all. Then belike Christ has granted, and they received,
an unprofitable power: for why have they power to remitte all sins, and al
men's sins, and yet may practice the same, but upon some sins, and some
men's sins only? In truth Christ has given full power to al his ministers,
according to the measure of every one of their charges. the Apostles over all the world, their successors the bishops pastors, and teachers within the
compass of their several cures: and therefore you say well, that God has so
ordered the case, that no man may intermedle in an others cure, without
license, sufferance, or necessity: the Pope then does wickedlie to exempt any
man from his laufull pastor, to whom the charge of his soul is by Christ
committed The reason you give, wherefore this power can not be practiced, upon
all, is frivolous, because this sacrament, and none other is judicial. For who
will grant you that the power of remitting sins in repentance is more
judicial then in baptism, or in the Lords supper? For the minister ought to
have a judgment whom he baptizeth and whom he admits unto the Lords
table. If the children of Turks, or Jews, be offered to baptism, without the
conversion or consent of their parents, by what warrant shall he receive them?
If Turks, Jews, or Gentiles that be of years of discretion, offer them
selves to baptism, before they be instructed in Christian belief, shall they
be baptized? If children, natural fools, and such as can not examine
themselves, notorious offenders, that have given no signs of repentance, men
known to be in malice, etc. shall present themselves to the Lords table, must
they without al judgment, or discretion be accepted or repulsed? By this
therefore it appears that there is nothing more judicial in receiving of
sinners to repentance, if that were a sacrament, then in the only true
sacraments of baptism and the Lords supper. Wherefore, there is no reason that
the Pope should restrain any man of that power, which you confess he has by
Christ's grant, over all persons of his charge, by exempting any of them, or
giving them liberty to choose their gostlie Father, according to their own
appetite, and much less, that he should reserve unto him self, the absolution
from the greatest sins, the power whereof was granted by Christ to every
Priest, as you confess, over his own parishioners, for which reservation you
bring not so much as the shadow of any reason to shroud him from the the note
of Antichristian tiranie.


ALLEN. The Popes Pardons also may wellreach so far, as to take away
venial and daily infirmites, which be of their nature punishable, but by some
temporal pain and correction, because they be remissible many ways out of
the sacrament, both here in this life, and in the next. For the merits of
Christ may be applied sufficiently to the offenders in such light manner of
trespaces, without the especial grace of a sacrament: as by saying our Lords
prayer (says Saint Augustine) and by almese, and by the holy Sacrament of
the altar, either received, or devoutly adored, by sacrifice now of the holy
Mass, much more then in old time in the sacrifices of the law, and by the
holy peace or blessings of Christ and his Apostles, and Bishops after them,
and by their Pardons. Therefore to him that is free from grievous sins, or
pardoned of the same, all these things shall be commodious toward the remission
of his lesser infirmities: but if he be in state of damnation, and out of Gods
favor, which grace must be procured only by the Sacraments of Baptism or
penance, he can not obtain any Pardon at the popes hands neither alive nor
dead, nor none was ever meant unto him.


FVLKE. Seeing venial sins may so easily be pardoned as you do show, and
by so many means, you make great fools of all them, that travel to Rome,
for a plenarie Pardon of Iubelie, or that will pay one halfepenie for any at
home, when without travel, without expenses, without danger, he may so
lightly obtain forgiveness of them. But howsoever you play, and blear men's
eyes, with venial sins, the word of truth says, that everlasting death
is Romans 6. 23.
the reward of sin, if it be not pardoned through the merits of Christ's
death, applied to us by faith. The grace of God is all one, whether it be
testified by his (...), or by a sacrament. But you would have it seen, that
Saint Augustine is an author of this distinction, of venial and mortal sins
and shows these means by which venial sins may be wiped away, without
the grace of a Sacrament: but you pervert his words, far from his meaning.
For his purpose is to show, that a man cannot be purged from his greeuose
sins by alms, except he be heartelie penitent and careful, never to commit
them again: but of smaller sins, without the which a man can not lead his
life, he cannot determine that he will forsake them, but must continually
crave Pardon for them, and avoid them, as much as he can. His words are
these. Sane cauendum, ne quisquam existimet infanda illa crimina, qualia qui
agunt, regnum Dei non possidebunt, quotidie perpetranda, and eleemosynis
quotidie redimenda. In melius quippe est vita mutanda, and per eleemosinas de
peccatis praeteritis, est propitiandus Deus, non ad hoc emendus quodam modo, vt
ea semper liceat impune committere. Nemini enim dedit laxamentum peccandi,
quamuis miserando deleatiam facta peccata, si non satisfactio congrua
negligatur. De quotidianis autem breuibus leuibusque peccatis, sine quibus haec
vita non ducitur, quotidiana oration fidelium satis facit. Eorum est enim
dicere, Pater noster qui es in coelis, Quiiam patri tali regenerati sunt, ex
aqua and Spiritu Sancto. Delet omnino haec oration minima and quotidiana
peccata. Delet and illa, a quibus vita fidelium scelerate etiam gesta, sed
poenitendo in melius mutata, discedit. Si quemadmodum veraciter dicitur,
Demitte nobis debita nostra, quoniam non desunt quae dimittantur, ita veraciter
dicatur, sicut and nos dimittimus debitorib. nostris, id est, fiat, quod
dicitur, quia ipsa eleemosyna est, veniam petenti homini ignoscere. Suerlie we
must take heed lest any man think those wicked crimer, which they that
commit them, shall not possess the kingdom of God, are daily to be
committed, and daily to be redeemed by alms. For the life must be changed
into better, and God is to be entreated through almese, for sins past, he is
not to be bought after asort, for this end, that it may be lawful to commit
them alwais without punishment. For he has given to no man license of sinning,
although by his mercy he do wipe away sins already committed, if meet
satisfaction be not neglected. But for daily, short, and light sins, without
which this life is not led, the daily prayer of the faithful does make
satisfaction. For it pertains to them to say, Our Father which art in
heaven, which are already regenerat to such a father by water and the holy
Ghost. For this prayer does altogether wipe away these least and daily
sins. It wipeth away also those, from which the life of the faithful,
having been wickedlie passed, but by repentance being changed into better,
does depart: if, as it is truly said, forgive us our debtes, because there
want not dets to be forgiven, even so it may be truly said, as we also do
forgive our debtors, that is to say, if that be done which is spoken. For that
is also alms, to give pardon to a man which desires it. First of receiving
the Sacrament of the altar, or adoring the same, of the sacrifice of the Mass,
of the Bishops blessing, and of their pardons, here is no mention. Secondly he
shows that great crimes are pardoned also by saying the Lords prayer, if
changeing of life do follow: by which it is manifest, that by satisfaction he
means the fruits of repentance, which as the offenses are greater, or
lesser, so it is meet they be showed accordingly, in small offenses.
contrition of heart and humble acknowledging of them before God is sufficient:
in great offenses, the change of life into better, must be manifest even to the
Church, and the sins repented of, must be forsaken: which in lesser offenses,
it is not possible altogether to avoid. But while you make the sacrifice of
the Mass, etc. to serve only for venial sins, you do more dishonor to
it, then your adversary would have thought you could. But confession, the
great cousonage of the world, is so precious, for all your popish purposes,
that in respect of it, you make light of all points of popery beside.


That the popes pardons properly pertain to the remission of temporal pain
due for mortal sins, remitted before in the Sacrament of penance, whereupon
the full meaning of pardons, is opened.

THE THIRD CHAP.
ALLEN. THe Popes holiness then, being disburdened by most just means from all
causes of envy rising upon the surmise or open sclaunder, that he would
forgive men's sins even before they were committed, as though he should grant
further a license, for men to commit notorius crimes, yea, being proved to be
so far from the fact, that he takes not vpon-him by his pardons, so much as
to release any mortal sin at all, and therefore, that he never arrogated so
much unto him self in these matters, in respect of his jurisdiction only, as
is justly granted to the simplest priest alive that is lawfully ordered: the
case standing then before God and all the world so clear with him, let us see
what he claims by his jurisdiction, and in what sense his Pardons do remit or
release any thing to man, seeing in matters of mortal sin, otherwise then
by ioying with the sacrament of penance, he does not intermedle with remission
at all.


ALLEN. Truly to be plain and brief, they that be the governors of Gods
Church do challenge nothing else, nor mean nothing else by their Pardons, but
the release and pardoning of such punishment as is often due after the sins
be remitted in the sacrament of Confession, that is to say, they pardon the
penance enjoined by the holy Ghostly Father, or that should have been
enjoined by the rigor of their Canons, and by the law, according to the
quantity of the sin confessed: And what less can they, being the appointed
pastors of our souls and governors of the Church, what less can they
challenge, then to forgive that punishment, or some part thereof, which the
laws did provide, whereof they were the makers or executors themselves, and
consequently to remit such punishment as might ensue for the lack of
fullfilling thereof? There is no temporal Prince, but he may by his Princely
Perogatiue pardon any several fault committed either against his own person,
or the commonwealth, that is to say, discharge the offendour, of that pain,
which by the law he should suffer. And why should we think it strange, that
those men, to whom by express words of Christ more pre-eminence is given for
their jurisdiction spiritual, then to any Prince alive is given by law or
nature for their Regiment? why should we think it strange, that they should
pardon or release the pains and penalty appointed by the Ghostly Father, or
prescribed by the law, or due to the sin it self by Gods justice, if there
were no law for the case, or order taken of the Church past?


FVLKE. The Popes pardons being not only prostrate as common harlotts, to
every man that will pay for them, but also his dispensations against the
commandment of God, which are of the same nature with his pardons, as ready
to be sold, wherebie he takes upon him to make perjury, incest, and many
other horrible crimes lawful, as in discharging subjects from their oath of
obedience to their lawful princes, in licensing the Uncle to marry his Niece,
yea the brother to marry his sister, for Augustinus de Ancona excludes no
degree from his dispensatio^, but the marriage of the parents with their own
children, his execrable holiness De potest. Eccle. quest. 53. quod libetina.
is not yet discharged, from that shamful Antichristian tyranie, which he is
justly accused to usurp: as also it has been showed plainly, that howsoever
some Canonists have restreined the force of his pardons, from remitting of
deadly sin, yet are his pardons extant to be seen, wherein he promises
full remission of all sins. In which if he delude men, he is so much the more
wicked to promise pardon of all sins, and yet is not able to remit so much by
his pardon, as a Parish Priest may do without his pardons. Wherefore your
impudency is the greater, to affirm so often, they challenge nothing else,
nor mean nothing else, but the release of penance, or punishment due. I have
before proved both by the gloss of their law, and by the very words of
their pardons, that they challenge this authority to release not only the
pain, but also the saultes. If they mean otherwise, then they write and
speak, then are they detestable dissemblers. But howsoever some Canonists to
salve their matter of shrift, have expounded them to perteine only to the
punishment due for sins, remitted in the sacrament of penance, yet their
exposition can by no means stand, with the words of many pardons. But seeing
you will needs have it so, let us see what you say to prove it. First you
ask, what less, they being appointed pastors of our souls, and governors
of the Church, can challenge, then to forgive the punishment, which the law,
whereof they were makers or executors, does provide? To this we answer, that
we neither acknowledge them to be pastors, or governors of gods church, nor if
they were, to have authority, to make laws to entangle men's consciences, and
then to streine them or loose them at their pleasures. Christ gave power to
remit or retain, to bind or loosethe penitent or unpenitent, but not to bind
the penitent to punishment, whose sins are loosed and remitted. The example of
temporal Princes pardoning or releasing the punishment of transgressors, will
not serve. For the pastors of the Church must do that which Christ has
commanded, and no more, which are so governors of the Church, that they be
not Lords and Princes thereof, but servants of the Church and of Christ. But
lest of all can any Pastor of our souls, or governor of the Church, release
any punishment due to sin it self by Gods justice, which none but God of his
mercy can do, his justice, being before answered in Christ our Savior.


ALLEN. And that it is the punishment only, which they mean to pardon by
their Indulgences, it may be evident both by that we have said before, and also
by the words of course in most Indulgences, in which lightly you see this
clause, De poenitentijs iniunct is, we assoile them from the penance of so many
days or years, as may be seen planlie in the holy Council of Lateran, and
in the decrees both of Innocentius the third and the fourth. The sin it self
is not measurable Can. 62. De penitent and remission Cap. quod autem.
by times and years, for it is a simple and indivisible act or affection of
mind or man, as our schools speak in such matters, and therefore a man can
not be assoiled from part of his sin, and bound in the other part, but he
that forgiueth the guilt and fault of sin, which the Prophet calls
iniquitatem Psalm. 31.
peccati, he releaseth no days or years, but he forgiueth the very fault it
self. Neither is there any eternal punishment, which can be eased by any
number of days, were they never so many. Take you from an infinite and
endless thing, how much you list, and it shall be eternal still. Then it is
only temporal punishment, which before God and the world is limited by
certain proportion of the wickedness committed, and of that satisfaction which
gods justice requires at the party penitent which can be released by days or
years, in part, or in whole. And therefore the Popes or Bishops Pardons only
forgive temporal punishment enjoined, or at the left due for answer of Gods
righteousness to be enjoined. Wherein also the Magistrates of the Church have
such care and consideration, that they remit not so much as any one day of
enjoined penance or deserved punishment, but by recompense of the lack of man's
satisfying, with some portion of Christ's abundant deserts applied by the use
of their keys, to the relief of such as do lack, and for their zeal and
devotion, are not worthy to receive benefit by the singular treasure of the
common wealth, to help them in their private need. But for this matter look
for more toward the end of the book.


FVLKE. This first reason is very feeble, some pardons have this clause, de
poenitentys iniunctis, of penance enjoined, therefore in all other pardons in
which is express mention, not only of penance enjoined, but also of
pardoning of sins, either al, or some part of them, the temporal punishment
only is meant to be pardoned. The second reason is as good. Sin is
vndiuisible, and so is the punishment for sin and eternal, therefore it is
only temporal punishment, which is released by days and years. But what
say you then to most full pardons of all sin and all punishments, where
there is no limitation of days nor years? what say you to the release of the
third part or the seventh part of all sins, beside many thousand years of
punishment remitted, as I have showed before in the Pardons of Alexander the
fourth confirmed by Pope Leo the tenth within these eighty years?

The third argument is, that the magistrates of the Church, remit not so much
as one day of punishment due to Gods justice for sin, but by recompensing
the want of man's satisfaction, with some portion of Christ's abundant deserts,
applied by the use of the keys, etc. But what intolerable blasphemy is this
to apply the merits of Christ but only in defaulte of man's satisfaction,
whose blood is the only purgation of our sins, whose righteousness is the
wholl propitiation for our iniquities, whose redemption by his death purchased
is eternal for all them that are sanctified? Again what an horrible
blasphemy is it, to make a merchandise of the merits of Christ our savior,
as the Pope does in the sail of his pardons? And finally, what scripture
gives any dispensation of Christ's merits unto any mortal man, and lest of
all to the Pope the man of sin? if it be lawful thus to imagine, implie,
apply, forge and feign, without al ground of the holy scriptures, religion
shall be nothing, but as it pleases men to make it, as it is plain in the
Popish synagogue.


ALLEN. And now upon the fore said declaration, let this be as it were agreed
upon, and let the adversaries well understand, this to be the meaning of the
Catholic Church, that an Indulgence or pardon is nothing else but a remission
in part or in whole of the bond of that punishment which is enjoined or
deserved, after the mortal sins be remitted, Gods justice being otherwise
for the said sins recompensed by the common treasure of Christ and his Saints
satisfaction, which is applied unto the parties use by the keis of jurisdiction
granted to such, as Christ made the Stewards of his household, the disposers
of his mysteries. For the Church of God and her Pastors, though they be
merciful and inclining to remission, rather then rigor, yet they take not
upon them, neither in the sacrament of penance to remit sin and damnation,
neither out of the sacrament to release any pain or part of punishment
enjoined, without recompense thereof by Christ's copious redemption, and the
communion of holy works, that is betwixt the head and members of this
mysticali body of Christ.


FVLKE. So often as you repeat this untruth, so often it must be told you,
that it is false, that the popes pardon by the meaning of the giver, and
receivers, is nothing else but a remission of punishment, enjoined, or deserved,
after mortal sins be remitted: when it is expressed in the same, that it is
either for all sins, at well as pains, or else for some part of the sins
as well as some part of the veins: except you will accuse the Pope of manifest
falsehoode and cosonage, to promise that which he means not to give, and
wotteth well is not in his power to give. Again, where you say, that Gods
justice is otherwise recompensed, we know his justice is thoroughly satisfied,
by the obedience and suffering of Christ, as well for all our sins, as for the
punishment due for the same, therefore Romans 3. 5.
your Popes pardons are needles where God forgiueth our sins, and justifies
us freely for Christ's sake. But where you join the satisfaction of saints,
unto the common treasure of Christ, it is exceeding blasphemous against the
sufficiency of his satisfaction, and the grace of Gods free justification: For
all have sinned, and are destitute Romans 3. 23.
of the glory of God, being freely iustisied by his grace, through the
redemption which is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation, by says in his blood. But admit all these lies and blasphemies,
hitherto aduouched, were granted, who gave the Pope authority to apply the
same by the key of jurisdiction? How prove you the key of jurisdiction, to
extend so far? For the keys of the kingdom of heaven, whatsoever Mat. 18.
John. 20.
they are, be committed to the wholl Church, and not to one person only, as
Cyprian, Augustine, Chrysostom, Jerome, and all the ancient Doctors agreablie
to the scriptures do confess. And God has made all the Pastors of the Church
stewardes of his household and dispensers of his mysteries. And if every
Pastor over his charge be a steward and dispenser of Gods mysteries, as you
seem to grant, why has he not authority to release the penance by himself
enjoined, or the punishment due for sin remitted, as well as the Bishop, or
the Pope? Why has he not the key of jurisdiction over his parish, in as large
and ample manner, as the Bishop has over his dioces, or the Pope over all men,
seeing the keys are not given to one, but to the unity, as the ancient
fathers teach? Why should the Bishop, and the Pope have two keys, and they
but one? resolve us these matters out of the holy scripture, and you shall
come somewhat nearer your purpose of pardons. As for the communion of holy
works, which is between the head and the members, if you mean thereby the
works of men joined with the satisfaction or merits of Christ, either show us
where it is taught in the scriptures, or give us le aue to deny it, until you
can prove it.


ALLEN. Perchance some Protestant will here call us back, and require proof,
that there should be any pain or tempor all correction remaining for those
persons, which hauetheir sins forgiven by God in the sacrament of Penance, or
otherwise by the only faith of the party penitent, as he may perhaps
surmise. If he list to be satisfied in this case, let him turn back and make
a short view of the works of God since the beginning, and there consider well,
whether God himself has not commonly visited his children received to
mercy, with some correction answerable in respect of his justice to the
greeuousnes of the crime forgiven. Who is so froward or so rude, but he may
well discern betwixt the sault of our first Father, and the punishment of
everlasting damnation deserved thereby? His sin was one thing, his deserved
punishment an other thing, his sin was disobedience, his punishment
correspondent to that, was everlasting death. Yet whenever one of these two
is forgiven, the other must needs be forgiven also, because he can neither be
subject to damnation, whose sin, for which damnation was ordained, is
forgiven, neither his fault be forgotten, whose everlasting punishing is
pardoned, which is the reward of sin. But now, both these being once,
through Christ remitted to Adam, as we read in the book of wisdom, who
perceives not, that he was for all that long afterward Cap. 10.
subject to temporal death and many other miseries both of this life and of
the next, being only punishments appointed by God for the full satisfying
even of those sins, which were forgiven him.


FVLKE. Out of all peradventure, we require proof not only of this point,
but of many more positions, which you have barelie affirmed, to build your
popish pardons upon them. And touching this point we do require proof, not
only that after sins and eternal pains remitted, there are temporal pains
remaining to satisfy Gods justice, but also if there were any such remaining,
by what authority you should release them. I know that often times, after
sin remitted, God sends or suffers a temporal pain to remain, but that
is not for satisfaction of his justice; but for a merciful chastisement, of
his fatherly discipline. The punishment due to Gods justice is eternal
damnation for every sin, as even the gloss upon the Extrauagant of Boneface
the eight does acknowledge. Extraua. (...) lib. 1. de poenit. and remissi. Cap.
1.
And when God does freely remit the sin, he does as freely remit the
punishment, due for the same. For what remains to be punished when the sin
is remitted? Temporal pains therefore satisfy not his justice, but admonish
his children of their ductie, and make them careful not to commit sin, which
by his chastisment they are put in mind to be displeasing unto him. The
temporal death and miseries that Adam was subject unto, through his
disobedience, remained in him and his posterity, not as a satisfaction of Gods
justice, for his sin remitted, and satisfied by Christ, but as a monument,
and example, of his justice for sin; and therefore they remain not only in
the elect, but in the reprobate: for an admonition to beware of sin, unto the
Godly; and to take excuse away from the wicked, of ignorance of Gods
punishment for sin. yet are all those punishments unto the Godie turned into
blessings, being either made his fatherly chastisments, for their amendment,
or else occasions of their eternal (...), as adversity by humbling of them,
death by delivering them into the possession of eternal life: and therefore is
blessedness pronounced both of the one and of the other. But Mat. 5. Apoc. 14.
that Adam was subject to any miseries after this life, or in this life, as
being only punishments appointed by God, for the (...) satisfying even of
those sins, which were forgiven him, we deny utterly. For the obedience of
Christ was (...) full satisfaction for the disobedience of Adam, both for him
and all Gods elect ofhis posterity. For if by the transgression of one, many
have died, much more the grace of Romans 5. 15. and caetera.
God and the free gift in grace, which is of one man Jesus Christ, has
abounded unto many. For if through the transgression of one death has reigned
by one, much more they which receive the abundance of grace, and of the gift of
righteousness, shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ. For as by the
disobedience of one man many were made sinners, so by the obidience of one man
many shall be made just. This and much more has the Apostle to prove, that
the redemption of Christ was more bountiful toward them which are justified
thorough faith, then the transgression of Adam was rigorous to their
condemnation: which could not be, if any part of Gods justice remained to be
satisfied by the punishment of the party after his sins were remitted, and
he made just by the redemption and justification of Christ. Therefore the
temporal pains, whereto Gods children are subject after their sins
remitted, are not left for the satisfiing of the justice of God. Or if you will
needs contend that they are so left, and that the Pope out of the treasure of
the Church, has authority to pardon all such punishment, or any part
thereof, let him make trial ofhis power, in such corporal punishments as God
lays upon his children, for their corrections let him by his pardon release
any man of his sickness, age, death: if he can do none of these, then either
these are no punishments due to satisfy Gods justice, or else he has no such
power as is bragged of, by dispensing of the treasure of Christ's copious
redemption, to pardon men of all their punishment due to the justice of God for
sin. For if he had such power, every sick man that receives a ple narie
pardon, a poena and culpa, should presently recover of his disease: yea I
marvel how he should die, if death be a penalty due to the justice of God for
sin, which has such a plentiful indulgence of all pains enjoined or
deserved by sin. But if he cannot release one fit of an ague, with all the
pardons, I marvel how he should release a man of all his pains of purgatory,
yea spoil all purgatory at once of all them that suffer pains therein: except
it be because he has power only over that prison, which is of his own
building, and all that come therein, but has no power at all over them upon
whom God lays any affliction, either bodily, or spirituallie.


ALLEN. Look at the Prophet David, whether God corrected him not with
temporal scourge, after he had expresselie forgiven him by the warrant of the
Prophet Nathan, his grievous 2. Reg. 12.
sins. Consider the case of all Gods elect people, how sharply they were
visited for sin, after it was in them pardoned. Exodus 32.
Mark whether Marie Moises his sister was not punished and Number. 12.
separated seven days, as it were for penance, after her brethren had procured
her pardon at Gods hands. Thus has God of respect not only to mercy, but
also partly to justice, so always pardoned, that he had consideration of
judgment and righteousness. Now whom should the Church follow in remitting of
sins, but him by whofe power and warrant she does remit sins?


FVLKE. We see that god did chastise the Prophet David and his posterititie
with a rod of man, and with a fatherly correction, but his mercy and loving
kindness, he never took from them. Neither punished them to satisfy his
justice for their sin remitted, but to make them, and other by their example,
more careful not to commit sin in time to come. The case of Gods elect
people was somewhat otherwise. Exodus 32. where, although he received to mercy
the wholl people, that they should not be destroyed from the face of the earth,
yet he might of his justice punish a number of particular persons that were
most rebellious, and authors of the defection and Idolatry. Marie the sister
of Moses, was also punished of God, first to humble her, and bring her to
repentance: and that punishment was continued on her for a few days, partly
to exercise her in earnest, and hearty repentance, partly to admonish the
people by her example, to beware of murmuring against Gods ministers, their
lawful magistrates, not in respect of any satisfaction of Gods justice, which
can receive none but a full and sufficient satisfaction, in his beloved son
Jesus Christ. Wherefore if the Church will follow God in remission of sins,
she must remit them freely, as God does in Jesus Christ forgive us: for so
Saint Paull means that men should forgive one another their trespasses, and
not to remit the fault and retain Ephesians. 4. 32.
the pain, except it be in case where men are appointed by God to execute
pains, as the Magistrates are, or to practice discipline, as the Church is, in
which case the Church may not think to satisfy Gods justice, but to seek
reformation of the offender, and to provide for the example of others.


ALLEN. Seeing God then himself after he has by his own means and absolute
power pardoned man's faults, and discharged him of the sentence of death and
damnation, had yet enjoined penance, as when he said to Adam: In the sweat of
thy brows thou shall provide for thy living: And to Eve. Thou shall in pain
bring forth thy Children: And to them both, that they should die the temporal
death, though they might escape by his mercy everlasting misery: seeing this,
we need not to doubt, but temporal punishment often remains after the
sins be remitted, and that the Church of God does imitate most conveniently
the said mercy enjoined with justice, in all her most righteous practice of
pardoning and punishing sin in Christ's behalf, by whose jurisdiction she
herein holds. But for the further proof of the matter, I have said much in
the defense of Purgatotie, and this question properly of Purgatotie, and this
question properly pertains to (...) place.


FVLKE. That temporal punishment is laid upon men often times, although their
sins be remitted, it is no question, but whether such punishment be a
satisfaction to the justice of God, or a fatherly discipline of his mercy,
that is the matter in controversy. The Church therefore in exercising the
discipline of God upon offenders, may and ought to imitate the example of god,
but then she must beware of two things, the one that she lay no other burden
of punishment upon the offenders, then the word of God will warrant:
therefore penance is not arbitrarie, as the Canonists do say, but to be
directed by the word of God. Secondly she must take heed that she release
no more punishment, then she is able to lay on. And therefore she must be
assured by the word of God, whether she can eioyne penance to be suffered in
Purgatory, before she take upon her to remit any such punishment: touching
which matter, as you have said more in the defense of Purgatory, so have I
answered sufficiently to the overthrow of Purgatory, and all that depends
thereupon.


That Christ gave by his express word authority to the pastors of Gods
Church, to bind and loose not only the sins themselves, but also the
temporal pain or penance remaining.

THE FOVRTH CHAP.
ALLEN. But now for the jurisdiction that Gods Church has in releasing the
same punishment which remains after the fault be forgiven, it stands, no
doubt, upon that high commission which Christ received of his Father, and did
communicate most amply to the Apostles, and by then to all Bishops for ever.
For the father did not only honor Christ his son, according to his
humanity, with the power of priesthood, or with other soueraignitic, for the
institutious of sacraments, or such like, but with all regiment of that body,
whereof he is the heads, as he is man. By which keye of jurisdiction he
corrected sinners with great Majesty, and pardoned them at his pleasure, not
only of sin and everlasting pain, where the penitencie of the party did
so require, but also of such correction, as the law had prescribed for sin,
or Gods justice had enjoined for the same.


FVLKE. That the Church has any jurisdiction in releasing that punishment,
which remains after the fault for given, for a satisfaction of Gods justice,
it has not hitherto been proved, nor ever shall be proved by authority of
the holy scriptures, which teach the contrary, that Christ alone has by his
one sacrifice made perfect for ever, those that are sanctified. And therefore
it is unreasonable, to seek whereupon it stands. For neither did Christ
receive any such commission, in his humanity, neither did he deliver over, any
such jurisdiction unto his Apostles, to release temporal punishment due to
Gods justice unsatisfied, by his death and passion. For by one oblation once
offered by his eternal spirit, he made perfect for ever, those that are
sanctified. Heb. 9. and 10.
And the power of Priesthood, and sovereign authority, to institute
sacraments, and to be head of his Church, he received not as man only, but as
our mediator, God and man. The Lord said unto my Lord (says David) sit thou
on my right hand, Thou art a Priest Psalm. 110.
for ever, etc. Which offices and authorities can not beseparated from his
divinity, without Nestorian impiety. Christ is head of his Church, and a Priest
for ever, as he is David's Lord, but as he is David's Lord, he is not only his
son, but his God, therefore he is head of his Church, and a priest after the
order of Melchisedeeh, not as he is man only, but as he is God and man:
neither did he pardon any man of sin and everlasting pain, whom he also
punished for the same sin with temporal pain, as a satisfaction to the
justice of God, which none could satisfy, in part or in wholl, but he only
by his obedience and suffering.


ALLEN. And this jurisdiction and power of regiment he gave to Peter
principally, when he bestowed on him the keys of heaven Mat. 10. and 18.
and upon the rest of the Apostles with him the power of binding and loosing,
which is most principally and properly meant of enioyning penance or
punishing by sharp discipline the sinners evil life, either before they
forgine his sins, or afterward. For as the place of the 20. of Saint John
properly concerns the power of pardoning, reteining or forgiving penance for
satisfaction in the sacrament by the right of Priesthood received in their
orders, though it may somewhat concern the jurisdiction of the high
Magistrates also: so the place of Saint Matthew rather pertains to the
chastisment of the wicked by the Cap. (...).
open discipline, as they have the regiment of al our affairs, then it does to
the sacramental remisstion or satisfaction enjoined. For ligare there does
signify some bond of punishment, wherewith the party is tied and charged for
his correction, and not only bond of sin, wherewith the Church binds no
man, no more then God himself does, but every man only binds himself in
his own sins. And the Church or her ministers do properly then bind, when
they punish by their jurisdiction the sins committed, not for the damnation
of them that did fall, but for their correction and amendment. And the plain
mention of excommunication, which there is expressed to be given to the
Apostles for the chastisment of such, as by more gentle admonition will not
amend nor obeie the Church, does prove that to bind in that place, namely
imports power of punishment, to be executed on the offenders, which way of
chastisment is an open exercise of discipline given to the Apostles, to be used
at their discretions for the edifiyng of Christ's Church. Therefore as to bind
there is as well an act of the proper power of jurisdiction, as it is a
function of pry sthoode, to be exercised in the sacrament of penance, so to
loose, soluere, in that place, though it may signify to remit sins in way
of sacramental confession, yet it is more aptly correspondent so the words
that went before, of binding, which was not sin, but the pain and punishment
for sin: whereby it must needs fillow, that as to bind, does fignifie to
charge that penitent person with some temporal pain, so to loose must also
mean to dissolve the band, which before was laid on him for present
correction


FVLKE. Christ gave no more jurisdiction or power of regiment, to Peter
pricipallie, when he bestowed the keys of the kingdom of heaven upon him,
then upon the rest of the Apostles, unto whom he gave the like and equal
power of binding and loosing, of opening and shutting the kingdom of heaven,
as he did to Peter. The same thing verily, says Saint Cyprien, were the rest
of the Apostles that Peter was, endued with the same fellowspip Tract. 3. de
simplicit. (...).
both of honor and of power. That the power granted in the 18. of Matthew
pertains most properly and principally to the chaistisment, or
reconcilement of open offenders, by discipline, the circumstance of place
affords no less, as the text John the 20. ratifieth the effect of their
message, in them that embrace or refuse the doctrine of the Gospel. And that
the governors of the Church, have power by excommunication to bind, and by
absolution to loose, upon good ground and cause, in both cases, you need not
half these words to prove it: for we do acknowledge and practice no less
in the Churches of Christ, where we have government, likewise that the Church
has authority for trial of the parties repentance, to enjoin some exercise
of humiliation, and to release the same, or part thereof, being satisfied with
the manifest signs of repentance and submission, it is also out of
controversy. But of your sacrament of penance Whsoeuer you shall bind etc.
whose sins you forgive
or satisfaction for sins, by either discipline established, Matthew the
eighteen, or power of remission of sins, granted in the text John the
twenty, we shall never be agreed, until you can make plain demonstration out
of the holy scriptures, that either God has instituted the one, or allows
the other which you shall never be able to do.


ALLEN. For this is a rule most certain, that all the bands, which the Church
lays upon any offender be medicinable, if the party list to take them, and
may be loosed by the same power of the Church, by which they were bound
before. And therefore ever as mention is made in scripture, of binding, or
which is all one, punishing of sins, there is also mention of the like power
of loosing: for Christ would not give power to the Church to bind or correct
sins, but much more he would have the Church resemble himself, being her
head, in mercy, and therefore gave her always power, to loose that kind of
punishment, which she by her ministers had bound or inoyned before. For these
two acts being answerable in conference and contrariety, must necessarily
follow each other, and properly to the like power and prerogative. Then the one
being given to the Apostles even out of the sacrament of penance, the other
must needs also by the like right be received.

S. Ambrose rebukes much the Nouatians, because they would have the Church
enjoin penance, but they liked not Lib. 1. de poenit. Cap. 2.
that he should mercifully release the same again, nor the penitents sins
neither. Dominus (says he) par ius soluendi esse (...) and ligandi, qui
vtrumque pari condition permisit: ergo qui soluendi ius non habet, nec ligandi
babes. Our Lord would have the right of losing and binding to be like: for
equally he gave the power of both. Therefore whosoever has not power to loose
he has no power to bind. If any man then list follow the Nouatians, he may
hold at his pleasure, that it preteineth to the Churches jurisdiction to bind
that, which she can not loose again, contrary to Christ's express grant
made unto her, first in the person of Peter, and then in the right of all the
Apostles, to whom when he had promised as well the keys of order, as
jurisdiction, he said unto them: whatsoever you shall bind in earth, it shall be
bound in heaven: and whatsoever you loose in earth, it shall be loosed in heaven:
first giving them thereby authorititie to punish, and then to pardon. And
therefore as the sacrament of penance, wherein sins be released or retained,
was grounded upon the words of Christ spoken to the Apostles after his
resurrection, whereof we talked so much in the former treatise, so the power of
giving pardon or punishing out of the sacrament, by the virtue of the
jurisdiction, as the Pope and other Bishops now do, and always have done,
is founded most fast upon this place of Saint Matthew, spoken first and
principally to Saint Peter, and then to other Apostles universally. Cap. 16.
and Cap. 18.


Now, if any list be assured by the Doctors interpretation, that the words
of our Savior of binding and loosing do directly give power to the pastors
of his Church, to punish the offenders, and release their sentence of severity
again, let them read Saint Augustines 75. Epistle, where they shall find much
of this matter, and thus amongst other things: spiritalis Ad Auxilium
Episcopum.
poena, de qua scriptum est, Quae ligaueritis in terra, erunt ligata and in
coelo, ipsas animas obligat. The spiritual punishment, whereof Christ spoke
when he said, what-soeuer you bind in earth it shall be bound in heaven, do
fast bind the souls themselves. And Saint Chrysostom disputing excellently
upon these words of binding or loosing, compares the jurisdiction of Princes
temporal unto the spiritual power herein, and makes this to excel that, as
far as heaven passes the earth, and the soul in dignity surmounteth the
body. If any King (says Chrysostom) should give unto some subject such
authority under him, that whom whosoever he would he might cast into prison,
and again release him when Tib. de sacer dot.
he list, all men would account that subject most happy. But he that has
received, not of an earthly King, but of God him self a power that passes
that other, as far as heaven is from the earth, and the soul excels the
body, I trow him every man must both wonder at, and highly reverence. Thus
far said the Doctor acknowledging, that as some by Princes grauntes may
prison or pardon the bodies: so the Priests may punish men's souls, and loose
or pardon them again. For the proof whereof, he applies fitly both the
words of Christ spoken to S. Peter, and the like afterward to all the
Apostles, concerning binding and loosing.


FVLKE. Whether all the bands of the Church be medicinable, if the party list
to take them, Doctors do dour, seeing there is a sin unto death not to be
prayed for. And S. Paul laid such a band upon Alexander the copper smith, that
he desired the Lord to requit him according to his works, which 1. John. 5. 2.
Tim. 4. Heb. 12.
could be no less then eternal damnation, without hope of true and faithful
repentance, for which Esaw found no place, though he sought the blessing with
tears. For true repentance is not a matter of men's list, but an excellent gift
of God. That case excepted, it is out of question, that the Church has power
as well to loose as to bind, what or whom soever, and God in heaven does
ratify that, which the Church, upon good cause, does on earth. And therefore
to prove this, whereof there is no doubt, there needed neither Ambrose,
Augustine, nor Chrysostmes authority to be cited, except it be to show how
prodigal you are of proof where there is no need, and how dry and barren,
where there is most necessity, unless you will have your words and sayings
go without al warrantize: as even in this section, that this power or
jurisdiction, as you call it, is given principally to Peter, that the
sacrament of penance is grounded upon Christ's words spoken to his Apostles
after his resurrection, which of the Doctors affirms? Contrariwise
Chrysostom in the place by you cited, as you your self confess, does fitly
apply the words of Christ spoken to Saint Peter, and the like to all the
Apostles, concerning binding and loosing, unto all priests alike: therefore no
principality in Peter. For these and such like matters of controversy, the
Doctors serve not your true: but you would have the ignorant suppose, that as
you can cite the Doctors full and direct for many things, whereof we do not
contend, so in all matters of contention the Doctors are full on your side. But
if any papist have but half an eye, he will or may epsy your insirmitie,
though you do never so cunningly dissemble it.


ALLEN. Again Saint Cyprian and other holy bishops of Affrike, Epist. 2. Lib.
which had enjoined long penance to certain that had fallen in time of
persecution from their faith, for flattery or fear of the world, and had
thought to have given them any Indulgences, peace or pardon (for that then
they called, dare pacem, which we now term, to give a Pardon) til the hour
of death came: Statueramus (say they) vt agerent diu plenam poenitentiam: we
had verily determined, that they should have done out all their full enjoined
penance: but now upon other great respects we do agree to give peace of
pardon to those, that have earnestly done some penance already, and lamented
bitterly their former fall. But mark well here, by what authority they
challenge this power, and what they do challenge. They challenge, pardie, power
to give penance to the offenders, and they claim by right the release thereof.
Again they clearelie take upon them, in consideration of the fault, to inloine
what they list, and how long they list, and upon like just respect by their
wisdoms, to pardon some piece of the same again, either after death, or else,
if good matter move them, long before.

But by what Scripture do they claim such jurisdiction that they may give
discipline to offenders, even without the (...) of penance, only by their
jurisdiction and right of regiment, and then by their only letters to give
them in absence peace and pardon of their enjoined penance again? Saint
Cyprian and all his honorable fellows shall answer you in the same place: for
there they give a reason of that their proper right: Quia ipsepermisit qui
legem dedit, vt ligata in (...) is etiam in coelo ligata essent, solui autem
possent illic, qui hic prius in Ecclesia soluerentur. That is to say, he does
permit us, who made this law, that whatsoever we bound on earth, should be
bound in heaven, and those things should be loosed in heaven above, which the
Church here beneath releaseth before. Let us therefore be bold also, to
answer our adversaries with the said holy Fathers, if they ask us by what
right the Pope or Bishop give pardon, or what is that he does forgive by his
pardon, let us answer for them, and for our Mother the Church, that they
pardon only the penance enjoined, or other pain due for grievous sins,
after they be remitted in the sacrament of penance. And that they may so do
by good authority, we allege Christ's own worthiness with the named holy
Fathers: whatsoever you bind in earth, it shall be bound in heaven: and if you
loose it in earth before, it shall also be released in heaven. But upon this
practice of Gods Church, I will charge them further hereafter.


FVLKE. This authority of Saint Cyprian is no more necessary, then the former
of Chrysostom; Augustine, Ambrose. For we doubt not, but the Church with the
governors thereof, have sufficient power by Christ's grant, to release such
time of penance, or part thereof, as is enjoined to offenders, to prove their
repentance, and to make satisfaction to the Church, when there appears just
cause so to do. But let us see how many untruths you do boldly aduouch,
which are besides this authority. First, that these Bishops had thought not to
have given peace to them that had fallen, till the hour of death came. But
that is not so: for they say only, they had determined, that they should
have performed the penance that was enjoined for a long time unto them, unto
the full, except danger of infirmity required to give peace at the point of
death. Their words are these: Totheir brother Cornelius Bishop of Rome.
Statueramus quidem iampridem, frater charissime, participato inuicem nobiscum
consilio, vt qui in persecutionio (...) supplantati ab aduersario and
lapsifuissent, ac sacrificiis se illicitis maculassent, agerent diu
poenitentiam plenam, and si periculum infirmitatis vrgeret, pacem sub ictu
mortis acciperent. Nec enim fas erat, aut permittebat paterna pietas, and
diuina clementia, ecclesiam pulsantibus claudi, and dolentibus and deprecantib.
speisulutaris subsidium denegari, vt de saculo recedentes sine communicatione,
aut pace domini dimitterentur, cum permiserit ipse, qui tegem dedit, vt ligata
in terris, etiam in Coelis ligata essent, solui autem possent illic, que hic
prius in Ecclesia soluerentur. Sed cum videamus (...) (...) infestationis
appropinquare coepisse, and crebris atque assiduis ostensionibus admoneamur, vt
ad cert (...) quod nobis hostis indicit armati and parati simus, plebem (...)
nobis diuina dignatione commissam exhortationibus nostris praeparemus, and
omnes omnino milites Christi, qui arma desiaerant, and praelium flagitant,
intra castra domini colligamus necessitate cogente censuimus, eis qui de
Ecclesia domini recesserunt, sed poenitentiam agere and lamentari, ac dominum
deprecari, a primo lapsus sui die non destiterunt pacem dandam esse, and eos ad
praelium quod imminet armari and instrui oportere. We had decreed indeed long
since most deer brother, by advise taken amongst our selves, that such as in
the trouble of persecution were supplanied by the adversary and fallen, and
had defiled themselves with unlawful sacrifices should do full penance a long
time, and if danger of infirmity did urge, they should receive peace at the
point of death. For it was not lawful, neither did the Fatherly piety and
clementie of God permit, that the Church should be shut up to them that knock,
and that aid of healthful hope should be denied to them that sorrowed and
prayed for it, that departing out of the world they should be sent away
without any communicaiion or the Lords peace, seeing he has permitted which
made the law, that those things that are bound in earth should also be bound
in heaven, that those things also might be loosed there, which were loosed here
in the Church. But for as much as we see, that the day of another trouble
begins to approach, and are admonished by often and daily shewings or
visions, that we should be armed and prepared unto the battle, which the
enemy does denounce unto us, we should also prepare the people by gods
voutsafing committed unto us, with our exhortations, and should gather in any
wise all the soldiers of Christ which call for armor, and desire to fight,
into the Lords camp, necessity compelling us we have thought good, that peace
is to be granted to them which have departed out of the Lords Church, but from
the day of their falling have not ceased to show repentance, and to lament,
and to entreat our Lord, and that they also ought to be armed and furnished
against the battle which is at hand. These are the words of Cyprian, and his
fellow Bishops, which you have abridged at your pleasure, if your note book
did not deceive you, to set down, that you have done, as the very words of the
epi stle. Out of which you gather, beside that I have noted before, power to
inioyne penance, and to release the same again. But where you say, they take
upon them cleerelie to inioyne what they list, and how long they list, that is
not so, but what is just and convenient, and so likewise upon just cause they
release the same, or some part thereof. Again, you slander them, in saying
they take upon the^ to pardon after death: for there is no such word or matter
in all the Epistle. They released and received them to the communion, being in
danger of death, but after death, they received no man to the communion. Nay,
they decreed, that whereas Geminius Victor, who had made Geminius Faustinus a
clergy man his executor, contrary to the decrees of their synods, there
should be no oblation made for his falling a sleep, nor any prayer frequented
in the Church in his name. So far of was it that they would pardon any man
after death, when no repentance avails. The scripture they do rightly
apply for the establishing of the discipline of excommunication and receiving
again into the fellowship of the Church such, as were fallen, upon their
repentance: as for the sacrament of penance, you say well, they exercized
discipline without it: for such a sacrament they knew not, but they claimed no
jurisdiction to receive offenders without good tokens of their repentance, as
their words be manifest. Where you say, they claimed jurisdiction by their
only letters, to give them in absence peace and pardon of their enjoined
penance, as though their letter did resemble the Popes pardons in writing, you
speak beside the book: for they do not give peace by these letters only,
but signify unto Cornelius what they thought necessary to be done, and upon
what reasons left they might be thought to light in loosing the sinews of
discipline toward so notorius offenders. Your conclusion follow eth not upon
this example, Cyprian and his fellow Bishope did upon necessary cause release
the time of penance enjoined to certain grievous offenders, and received them
to the communion upon certain persuasion of their repentance, therefore the
Pope and his popelings may give pardon of pain due for sins remitted, where
hone is due, and in the sacrament of penance, when no such sacrament can be
proved out of the scripture: neither do you rightly allege Christ's words,
as those holy Fathers did: for they alleged them for the discipline of
excommunication, and absoluing, which is necessary to be used in the Church,
but you to maintain a tirannical jurisdiction, to loose that which other men
have bound, without good cause, as they did, but for many often times, as they
did never. Therefore there is as great odds between their practice of
discipline, and these Popes pardons, as there is distance between their ages,
which is more then a thousand years.


ALLEN. And now to make up this matter for the true meaning of the said text,
which we now prove to pertain to the establishing Cap. 11. li. 2. de constable.
of the true title of giving pardons, I will recite the saying of S. Clement
him self, in time the Apostles equal, expert in their regement, and privy to
al their doings. He lively expresses the dignity of the chief pastors and
power of their government, unto which he applies the power of binding and
loosing in such sort as we have said. But hear his own words, as Carolus
Bouius has translatedthe: O Episcope, stude munditie operum excellere,
cognoscens locum tuum ac dignitatem, tanquam locum Dei obtinens, eo quod praees
omnib. Dominis, Sacerdotib. Regib. Principih. patrib. filiis, magistris, atque
subditis simul omnib. sicque in Ecclesia sede, cum sermomen facies, vt
potestatem habens iudicandi eos qui peccauerunt: quoniam vobis Episcopis dictum
est, quodcunque ligaueritis super terram, erit ligatum in coelo, and quodcunque
solueritis super terram, erit solutum in coelo. Iudica igitur (o Episcope) cum
potestate, tanquam Deus, sed poenitentes recipe. In English, O thou that art a
Bishop, study and endeavor to excel other in the beutie of good works, in
respect of thy place and dignity: and consider thou sit in Gods own
room, being promoted above al Lords, Priests, Kings, Princes, Parents,
children, Masters, servants every one. Therefore so sit in the Church, when
thou do speak, as one that has power to judge al those that have sinned.
For to you Bishops it was said: whatsoever you bind in earth, it shall be bound
in heaven, and whatsoever you shall loose in earth, it shall be loosed in heaven.
Judge then (O Bishop) with power and majesty, as God, but yet have mercy on
the penitent. Thus says S. Clement. By whose words you may preceiue, Gods
right to be in a manner conferred upon his ministers by the terms of binding
and losing, not only given for the remitting or retaining of sins in the
sacrament of penance, but also for the correcting or giving pardon, by supreme
jurisdiction, out of the said sacrament.


FVLKE. And now to make up a number and a show of antiquity, S Clements
constitution is alleged, which is neither authentical, nor any thing to the
purpose in controversy, if it were as ancient, as he whose name it bears.
For watsoeuer is said in this whole clause, if it be rightly understood, is
true of the dignity of Bishops in their spiritual authority, and power of
preaching the word, and exercising of discipline. But for that blasphe mous
conclusion that you draw out of it, Gods right to be in a manner conferred upon
his ministers by the terms of binding and loosing, with the rest that
follows, can never be gathered of these premises. Gods right remains whole
and absolute unto him self, for any power of binding or losing that he has
committed to his servants. As for the sacrament of penance, and giving pardon
by supreme jurisdiction out of the said sacrament, how can they be deduced out
of the words of this pretended Clemens?


ALLEN. Now then let Calvin, or his ancient Luther come sorth and deny all
spiritual jurisdiction of holy Bishops, touching temporal punishment, or
release of pains appointed for sinnelet them writh the plain place both of
binding and loosing, to the preaching of the ghospel, as their fashion is,
rather the^ they would grant this sovereignty to the Church of Christ: let
them say, that Christ, when he whipped out the unlawful occupiers of
marchandies in the temple, did nothing else but preach the Marci. 12.
Gospel: let them hold that this was a sermon, and not an act of jurisdiction,
when he said to diverse, thy sins be forgiven thee, or when he with power and
terror gave to Judas the soppe, by which it is thought, that he excommunicated
him and gave Lucae. 5. Joan. 13.
him up wholly to the Devil, and separated him from the company of the
Apostles, and from his Church. For then the Devil entered into him, and he went
out, as the gospel says. But (say Master Luther) was this the power of
preaching only, or an exercise of most high jurisdiction, given him of his
father everlasting, as he was he head of the Church? No, no, vain fellows,
this is no preaching which you would have only to be the Churches property,
that you might, being void of all other authority in Gods Church, compare with
his Apostles, in your prating, because your glory amongst the people stands
on your glafe tongues. Cores had a ticling tongue, and Moses tongue was tied:
yet God gave sentence on his servants side, and revenged the disobedience of
the contrary. No, no, I tellyou, if all the Bishops and Priests of the
Christian world were as rude and as simple in their preaching, as you think
your selves eloquent, yet their only jurisdiction, and Majesty of their
power, assisted by Christ perpetually, by whom it was given them, shall bear
you down, and your vain name of preaching the word. And God be thanked,
beside the right of the cause, there be in the Churchmany that are honored
with the gift of true preaching, to whom God giucth the word in deed with
great and unspeakable force and increase of the truth, and daily decaie of
your vain shade of preaching. His name be blessed for ever, that has given
such a guard to his Church, that hell gates, nor the eloquence neither of man
not Angel shall prevail against her.


FVLXE. Now then let Allen or al his ancients, and punies the papists in Rome
or Rhemes show out of either Caluines or Luthers writings any place, where
they or either of them, denied all power of binding and loosing, other, then by
preaching of the gospel: where they affirmed, that excommunication and
receiving again into the Church, was nothing but preaching of the gospel. If
Allen be not able to prove with all his accomplices, that Calvin and Luther
denied the discipline of the Church, or have not established the same in the
Churches, by them reformed, then is he an impudent slaunderer, and detestable
deceiuer, to bear simple men in hand, that they acknowledge not discipline,
either in binding or in releasing of open offenders, but preaching of the
gospel. His further storming and malicious railing, as also his vain bragging
and threatening, I pass over, as unworthy of any other answer then silence,
as bewraying sufficiently the sincerity, wisdom, and honesty of the author.
Neither will I disrusse that weighty argument, of giving the soppe to Judas,
whereby the proves the exercise of Christ's jurisdiction, as head of the
Church. Wise men may easily see what arguments he has to prove things in
question, when he has no better demonstration of a matter out of all
controversy.


The Apostles and bishops have ever, besides the preaching of the Gospel,
punished men's sinens and practiced judgment upon men's souls, both in binding
and loosing.

THE 5. CHAP.
ALLEN. CHrist then having not only the preaching of the Gospel to punish and
pardon by, but jurisdiction also to give discipline, and to release the same,
in that he was made the supreme governor of al Christian people, did
communicate both functions at once, and gave the Magistrates of the Church not
only by preaching to threaten or exhort men to virtue, or promise them release
of their sins by only faith, as men have now plained the way to heaven, but
also by force of their regiment, to give great penance, as we have proved, and
greatpardon again, as to their wisdoms, and for the Churches edifying may
seem most convenient. Of this great power of Christ communicated to his
Apostles, we have practice, as well for punishing sinners, as pardoning them:
For upon this sovereign jurisdiction it rose, that the Apostles mightelie
ministered justice upon offenders, as well by afflicting their bodies, with
enjoined long fasies, and large almoses, as by excommunicaton, and other
means. Which thing whsoeuer well weighs in the manifold examples of Gods
word, they shall not wonder, that the holy Bishops of Christ's Church may give
a pardon of penance enjoined. For by this authority did S. Peter, who first
received Act. 5.
the keys of jurisdiction and power over the Church, kill both Ananias and
Saphira his wife, which is as great a bodily punishment for sin, as may be:
By this authority did he excommunicate Simon the Sorcerer: by this power did
S. Paull offer to revenge disobedience, by this did he threaten tocome to the
faithful with a rod of discipline: By this he prescribed to 1. Cor. 4. 2.
Tim. 1. 3. Tim. 1.
Timothy, whom he consecrated Bishop, how he should hear accusations, and
behave himself in rebuking sin, and correction of diverse states. By this
power did he mightily deliver up some to Satan, and bodelie vexation: By this
power did he strike blind Elimas the witch, and released him at his pleasure
Act. 13.
again.


FVLKE. That the ministers of the Church have authority not only to preach
the word of life most comfortablie, to al penitent sinners, and most
terribly to all reproba tes and impenitent persons, but also to exercise
discipline of correction upon offenders, and to release the same upon hope and
appearance of their amendment, it is at all times and in all places by us
willingly confessed and acknowledged. Wherefore this discourse is altogether
needelesse, but that you must interlace some truth not denied, among so many
vnpropable and unreasonable propositions, that of no wise men will ever be
granted. The way to heaven is no other wise plained by us, in promising men
release of their sins by faith only, then it was by Saint Paul. Romans 4. and
before him, by David psalm. 32. That the Apostles ministered justice upon
offenders, as well by afflicting their bodies with enjoined long fastes and
large alms, as by excommunication and other means, when you prove it out of
the scriptures, we will yield unto you. We find they did excommunicate, and
that they exhorted men to fasting and alms, but that they enjoined any
prescript fastes or alms, such we find not And yet we doubt not, but they
esteemed fasting, praying, and sorowing for sins, alms, and other Godly
exercises, to be fruits of true repentance: in beholding of which they were
moved to receive again into the Church, such as for their offenses were
justly cast out. Neither did Saint Peter by the same keys of jurisdiction, as
you call them, kill Ananias and his wife, by which he did excommunicate Simon
the sorcerer, if that denuntiation of Gods judgment may be called an
excommunication. Neither did Peter properly kill Ananias, who was stryken
immediately of God for lying against the holy ghost: neither has any
successor of his authority to kill men's bodies, howsoever you would
insinuate, that your Antichrist the Pope haththe power of both the swords, to
slaie men's bodies with the one, as he murdereth their souls with his pestilent
heresies. That the Apostles delivered some to Satan to be vexed in their
bodies, it proves no ordinary 1. Cor. 5. 12.
jurisdiction of punishing men's bodies, for that it was only a miraculous
power they had, which goes not by succession unto their posterity, like as
the example of Saint Paul striking Elimas with blindness, can not be drawn to
discipline, which is practiced only upon the members of the Church, whereof
that Sorcerer was never any part: neither did Saint Paull release him at his
pleasure, but at the time appointed by God.


ALLEN. By this power have holy Bishops excommunicated mighty Emperors,
suspended many from the sacraments, disgraded diverse spiritual men from their
functions, interdicted wholl Realms, and to be short, by this power has the
Church of God prescribed a due punishment for every deadly sin, justly
respecting the greeuousnes thereof, and continuance therein. As we may see in
the penitential book of I heodotus Vide decret Iuo par. 15
and Bid, the cannons whereof be translated into the book of decrees, which
is the 15. entitled De poenitent. And namely in the most ancient Council of
Ancyre, which was holden well near 1300. years since, in the most pure time
of Christian religion, when I trow our adversaries dare not say that the faith
was corrupted. There the Priests and deacons that relented Cap. 1 etc. 2
in persecution were suspended from the executing of their several functions.
Such as supt in the temples of Idols, and sacrificed Cap. 4.
to false Gods, were charged, beside absteining from the sa craments, with 3.
years penance: those that committed brutish Cap. 15.
sins and unnatural, should do 25. years penance for adultery 7 years
penance: for women that destroyed their birth, 10. years. Cap. 20.
for murderers 7. if it be not voluntary: if it be wilful, til the endof
man's life: for superstitious southsaiers or dream readers, Cap. 21.
or sorcerers, and witches, five years. Finally for rape, 10. years Cap. 22.
were prescribed. The like were made for diverse crimes in the Cap. 23.
council of Nice. But it is enough that we know though the eternal Cap. 24.
pains deserved by dcadlie sins be forgiven with the sins themselves, and
yet there remains for the satisfying of Gods justice, some temporal scourge,
to prevent which, the Church enioyneth pain for faults remitted, that both
Gods mercy be followed in the remission of their sins, and his justice
partly answered in the punishment of the same, the which debt of deserved
pain, being not here fulfilied or released, it must in another world be
answered.


FVLKE. By power received from Christ, holy Bishops have practiced christian
discipline, in excommunicating even Emperors, and great estates, separating
from the sacraments and displasing of ecclesiastical persons from their
functions. But I never read that any holy Bishop did interdict wholl realms,
but only Antichrist of Rome. Victor of old time did take upon him to
excommunicate all the Churches of the East, for not celebrating of the feast of
Easter, as he did: but he was counter maunded and reproved by his fellow
Bishops, not only of the East, but even of the West, which agreed not with
him in that ceremony, as by Ireneus Bishop of Lions in France and other. That
the Church of great antiquity prescribed a certain time of punish meant, for
every kind of heinous sin, it was partly to reform the facility of some
Bishops, that were to easy in granting reconciliation to grievous offenders:
partly to meet with the hyporisie of many sinners, which upon hope to be
easily received, made less account to become offenders, and cast out of the
Church. Andhereof came those severe canons of the Ancyrane council, which were
soon afterward somewhat mitigated in the Nicen council, and charge given to
the Bishop, to deal more gently with them that showed great tokens of
repentance before their time of penance expired. Abomnibus vero illud praecipue
obseruetur, vt animus eorum and fructus poenitentiae attendatur. But let this
be chiefelie observed of all men, that their mind, and their fruit of
repentance be considered. Whereby they declare for what cause such time of
penance was prescribed, namely by the fruits of repentance to make trial,
whether men were truly penitent for their sins, and meet to be received
again into the congregation or no. The council of Carthage aster that
perceiving many inconveniences to arise by those certain prescript times of
penance, decreed, Vt poenitentibus secundum peccatorum differentias, episcopi
arbitrio, poenitentiae tempora decernantur. That times of repentance, by the
discretion of the Bishop, should be appointed unto them that do penance,
according to the differences of their sins. but that there remains for the
satisfying of Gods justice some temporal scourge, after eternal pains by
deadly sins deserved be forgiven with the sins themselves, we know not out
of the scriptures, but the contrary, namely that these sins being forgiven,
and Gods justice thoroughly satisfied in Christ, there remains no temporal
punishment due for the sins forgiven, but sometimes a merciful and fatherly
chastisment, which is not in any man's power to release or remit, but when it
pleases the father of his wisdom and clemency to take it away.


ALLEN. And therefore S. Augustine says of the Churches usage in prescribing
penance thus: Sed neque de ipsis criminil us quamlibet magnis remittendis in
Sancta Ecclesia, Dei desperanda est misericordia, agentibus poenitentiam
secundum modum sui cuiusque, peccati: and auia plerunque dolor alterius cordis
occultus est alteri, recte constituuntur ab iis qui Ecclesiae praesunt tempora
poenitentiae, vt fiat etiam satis Ecclesiae, in qua peccata remittuntur. Even
for sins being never so grievous and great, we may not despair of Gods
mercy, nor of reneission to be had in the Church: marie always presupposed,
that the offenders must do penance, according to the quantity and greeuousnes
of their offenses. And because often it chances, that the sorrow of man's
heart, wherein much stands, is unknown to other men, it is very reasonable
that the Church should limite their penance by her governor, to be
accomplished in certain times and appointed seasons, for the answer of the
Churches right, in which only all sins be remitted, as out of her lap
none at al be forgiven, for any benefit to the party. So says this doctor of
public penance.

And of secret satisfaction, which now is more used after confession, lest
any man should fear, that that were not sufficient to satisfy for the
remnant of debt due for mortal sins forgiven, thus says the author of that
book de Eccles. dogm. set forth with Saint Augustines name: Sed and secreta
satisfactione solui mortalia crimina non negamus: Neither we do deny, but
mortal sins may be loosed by secret satisfaction. Fear nos the word
satisfaction, as though it derogated any thing to the redemption which is in
Christ Jesus. It is here and in many places of S. Augustines works most
common, and no less used of all Catholic writers since Christ's time, who
knew right well, that the fruits of Christian penance done in the virtue and
force of Gods grace, do apply Christ's satisfaction effectually to our
benefit, and not remove the use thereof from us. But they have a faith so
solitary now a days, that it will alpne apprehend what ye list, and reach so
far into Christ's justice, that her fautors shall have no need of Christian
works, or fruitful repentance.


FVLKE. Saint Augustine says to very good purpose, but nothing to the
maintenance of your purpose, for which you allege him: namely that temporal
punishment is due to Gods justice for sin remitted, whose saying I marvel
why you do so geld, that you recite it not wholly, as he has written, but
that either you would not have men certainly know that he speaks of open
penance, done for great crimes committed, or else you have cited the place of
some other man's credit, rather then of your own reading. After he has said,
that some man may live without crime, but no man without sin, his words be
these; Sed neque deipsis criminibus quamlibet magnis remittendis in sancta
Ecclesia, Dei desperanda est misericordia, agentibus poenitentiam secundum
modum sui cuiusque peccati. In action autem poenitentiae vbitae lecrimen
commissum est, vt is qui commisit, a Christi etiam corpore separetur, no^tam
consideranda est mensura temporis, quam doloris: cor enim contritum and
humiliatum Deus non spernit. Verum quia pierunque dolor ^lterius cordis
occultus est alteri, neque in aliorum notitiam per verba vel quaecunque alia
signa procedit, cum sit coram illo cui dicitur, gemitus meus a le no^ est
absconditus, recte constituuntur ab iis qui Ecclesiae praesunt tempora
poenitentiae, vt fiat etiam satis Ecclesiae in qua remittuntur ipsa peccata,
extra eam quippe non remittuntur. Ipsa namque proprie Spiritum Sanctum pignus
accepit, sine quo non remittuntur vlla peccata, ita vt quibus dimittuntur,
consequantur vitam aeternam. But neither of those crimes, be they never so
great to be remitted in the holy Church, the mercy of God is to be dispaired
of, to them that repent according to the measure of every man's sin. But in
the doing of penance, where such a crime is committed, that he which has
committed it, is also to be separated from the body of Christ, the measure of
time is not so much to be considered, as of the sorrow for God dispiseth not a
contrite and an humbled heart. But because often times the sorrow of one man's
heart is hidden to an other and comes not into the knowledge of other men by
words, or other signs whatsoever, although it be known before him, to whom
it is said, my groaning is not hid from thee, there be rightly appointed by
them that govern the Church, times of repentance, that the Church also may be
satisfied, in which those sins are remitted: for whithout they are not
remitted. For she has properly received the pledge of the holy Ghost,
without whom no sins are remitted, so that they to whom they are remitted
do obtain eternal life. In these words Saint Augustine shows plainly
that times of penance or repentance were enjoined, not to recompense Gods
justice, but to make satisfaction to the Church; which is not to grant
remission in those cases, but upon good hope of the parties true conversion and
inward and unfeigned repentance. But as Augustine speaks here of open
satisfaction not to Gods justice, but to the Churches judgment, so you have
his authority or as good, for secret satisfaction which is now more used, lest
any man should fear that were not sufficient to satisfy for the remnant of the
debt, due for mortal sins forgiven. I know not whether to impute it to
ignorance, or impudency, but most intolerable presumption it is, to make that
author, whatsoever he was, a faulter of your popish secret satis faction, now
used to be prescribed in your secret shrifts. For this writer, as I have before
declared, aloweth no secret satisfaction for the loosing of mortal crimes, but
upon a very hard condition, namely, sed mutato prius saeculari habitu, etc.
but so that the secular habit be first changed, and the study of religion be
confessed by correction of life, and continual and perpetual sorrow, thorough
the mercy of God, but so only that he do contrary things to them, for
which he repents, and every Sundaie humby and submmissiuelie unto his death,
he receive the Eucharist, etc. This is not to say, pater noster in rememberance
of the five wounds, or to give five pence, grotes, or shillings, to five poor
men, or to fast five frydaies, or such single satisfaction, as your Popish
priests in shirst do enjoin. Touching the word satisfaction used by this
Monkish Augustine, it is never used by the right, and autentike Austine, to
grant that the sufferings, or doeings of man can satisfy the justice of god,
who is satisfied by Christ's obedience only, and by none other mean; the
virtue of whose satisfaction is communicated unto us by the holy Ghost,
whereof we are assured by faith only, but not by a solitary faith, as this
heretic does slander us, but by a faith accompanied, fruiteful, huelie,
effectual, and workeing by love, as the holy scripture teaches us,
whatsoever these blasphemous dogs bark against it.


ALLEN. Now to this end have we said all this, that the faithful may
understand perfectly, what the Pope may by right remit thorugh his Pardon and
Indulgence. For look what the officers of Gods Church may bind, that without
all doubt may they upon good consideration release again. Therefore if they
may enjoin penance for years and days, both openly out of the sacrament,
and also in private satisfaction after Confession, then may they release
certain days and years of the same penance which was prescribed before. For
loosing and binding pertain by reason, law, and Christ's own grant, as to one
act of jurisdiction, that the one being lawful, the other must needs so be
also. If the Church be of right power and authority to prescribe penance of
seven years, she has the like right to remit upon just respect, either all
those years, or some part of the same, especially having means otherwise, to
supply the lack of fatisfaction of Gods justice in the party penitent.


FVLKE. There is no faithful man can perceive by any thing that you have
said, what right the Pope has to remit by his pardon, and indulgence, that
which is enjoined by an other. It is out of doubt that the officers of the
Church upon good consideration, may release that which they bind, except for
in emissibie sins they bind with insoluble bands. And therefore they may
release days or years appointed for trial of the repentance, if the Church
can be satisfied, in shorter time. But for private satisfaction of Gods
justice, or any satisfaction of his justice, they can neither bind nor loose,
enjoin, nor release. Therefore if the Church be of power to enjoin and
prescribe penance for seven years, she is of power also to release seven
years, or part of the same: but she has no means to supply the
satisfaction of Gods justice, which is fully satisfied in Christ, whose
satisfaction is not to be disposed according to the judgment of men, but is
applied to all the elect of God, according to his will and pleasure. Now
whereas you speak of seven years penance, and the streightest Canons of
Ancyre prescribe but 25. years for the greatest crime, whereto serve so many
thousand years of Pardon? If therefore all that you have said tend to this
end, that men may understand that the Pope has power to release times of
penance enjoined, seeing no council ever enjoined a thousand years penance
nor any penance beyond the time of a man's life, in so much that the Council
of Nice decreed that they which depart out of the world, should be received
into the communion, although their time were not expired, why does the Pope
take upon him to grant an hundred thousand years of pardon at a clap, as I
have showed before out of a pardon imprinted and confirmed by Leo 10? But if
the Pope have authority to grant pardon for so many thousand years of
penance, enjoined by the right of binding and loosing, which you say by
reason, law, and grant of Christ pertain to one act of jurisdiction, that the
one being lawful, the other must needs be so also, Then may every priest
enjoin an hundred, 50. 40. 10. or 7. thousand years of penance to them that
come to shrift, as well as the Pope give pardon for so many thousand years: for
hundreds be but beggarly things to talk of, where thousand be so rife. If you
answer, that the Pope does pardon not only years of penance enjoined, but
also of years due to be enjoined; the difficulty is nothing avoided: for if
thousands of years be due, the priest may enjoin thousands of years. But
then he shall exceed all the Canons penitential, that ever were made in any
council, and yet be forced to grant pardon at the hour of death.


ALLEN. And therefore I join in argument and open reason with our adversaries
thus: To give pardon in most common and Catholic sense of that word, is to
release some part, or all the enjoined penance for sins remitted: But the
Pope, because he is the principal governor of Gods Church, may release any
penance enjoined, upon just considerations: Ergo, the Pope may lawfully give
Pardons. The Minor, wherein the adversaries may perchance give back, I prove
thus: That which was bound by the Churches or Popes authority, may be
lawfully loosed by the same authority again, because Christ himself joined
in his grant both these acts togetber, and they are proved to be proper to
one jurisdiction: But the Church by the Decrees of Bishops and Counsels has
appointed such penance, and so many years of correction for sundry faults:
therefore the same Bishops, or such as be of the like authority, when they see
occasion, may remit the penance of the said years or some part of it, by
limitation of days or seasons, as the state of the penitent requires, or the
time it self does move them.


FVLKE. These arguments I like well, for they bewraie your infirmity most of
al. And now for answer, I say, that your Mayor is false, as weil as your
Minor: for the common Popish sense of pardons is as the words of them pretend,
that is, to give pardon not only of penance enjoined, but also of sins.
Again the governors of the Church (as your Mayor should have been framed,
but that you dare not come within the compass of a lawful, syllogism) have
no power either to enjoin penance for sins remitted, or to remit penance
enjoined for sins remitted, but of time of penance enjoined for satisfaction of
the Church, as we heard lately out of Saint Augustine, when the Church may be
satisfied in shorter time. Your Minor, which you knew would not be admitted,
you take upon you to prove, but you come nothing near the matter: for this is
the point of your Minor, which we deny, that the Pope is the principal
governor of Gods Church, yea, that he is any governor of Gods Church. But if
he were a Bishop of Rome, as many were, whose successor he claims to be, he
might be allowed in his Church of Rome to bind and loose, enjoin and remit,
so far as Christian discipline will bear, but not to claim tiranie over all
Churches, as he does. Now you in your misshapen syllogism, in which you fumble
diverse matters together, to deceive the ignorant, prove that the Church and
governors thereof have power to release that which they have power to enjoin,
which is not the matter in controversy. But whether they have power to enjoin
penance for sins remitted, to answer Gods justice, or whether the Pope be a
lawful governor of the Church, these and such like be matters of
controversy, which you are never able to conclude in any lawful and true
syllogism.


ALLEN. And this argument shall be immovable, except they reject with the
Popes Pardons all manner of discipline, as well of excommunication, as other
lesser satisfactions, whereof we have allreadie spoken, as in deed to
maintain their falsehoode they must needs do, as also they shall be enforced
to reprove both the Council of Nice, all the holy Fathers, and the general
practice of the Church, and with them the express scriptures, in which the
worthy fruits of penance, sharp discipline, Math. 7. 1. Cor. 11. Heb. 13.
Mat. 16. 18. (...). Tim. 1.
judging our selves, obedience to our Prelates, binding and reteining of
sins, excommunicating and delivering up to Satan, be so often condemned. It
must needs be a miserabe doctrine of these Protestants which cannot be
vpholden but by so shameful shifts, and when we drive them into such
straites, in a matter where they think most may be said for themselves, and
lest for our defense, where shall they stand in our plain causes, in which
almost our adversaries confess us to have the vantage of antiquity, and the
pre-eminence of all (...) Counsels in the world? But surely, I think
falsehood has so little hold in all matters, that it stands only upright,
whiles the contrary is not seen, or not understood, which she seeks ever
by all means she may, to cover and keep close. For the night she loves,
and in darkness she delights. Do but open the true sense of any article by
them impugned, and it is more then half proved, and the enemies without
argument, upon the sight of truth, in a manner discomfited. So it fares with
them in our present cause, which they have long toyled and troubled in the mist
of their fantasies, and upon false interpretation discharged amongst the
simple sort, that that thing, which in this sense, as Gods Church, that has
the ruling of the matter, takes it, is so sure and so clear in it self, that
I think they shall never be hable with honesty, to speak against in any one
parcel thereof.


FVLKE. A boy that has studied Logic half a year may be ashamed to make
such syllogismes, and yet you are not ashamed to affirm before the world,
that this argument is immovable, except we reject with the Popes pardons all
manner of discipline. And though it be manifest unto the world, that we
practice all Godly discipline, which is according to the scriptures, in
requiring the worthy fruits of repentance, iudgeing of our selves, obedience
to Christian Prelates, practizing also the binding and reteining of sins,
excommunication, and delivering up to Satan, giving that reverence we ought to
the holy Council of Nice, to all holy fathers, and to the general practice
of the Church yet you blush not to write, that we shall be enforced to reprove
all these. It is not these beggarly arguments, M. Allen, that shall enforce us
to these absurdities. If you have any better stuff in store for Pardons, bring
it out for shame, or else talk no more of enforcement, except it be in shrift,
where no man can control you. The rest to the end of this Chapter, containing
nothing but general railing, and arrogant boasting, after your accustomed
manner, I pass over, as needelesse to be answered, (...) wise then it does
discover it self, in any wise man's judgment.


That there be diverse ways of temporal punishment remaining after sins be
remitted, every of which ways may be in some cases released in part, or in
wholl, by the Pardons of Popes and Bishops.

THE SIXTH CHAP.
ALLEN. ANd yet to give more light to the matter, and the greater overthrow to
falsehood, let us drive the cause forward, and weigh with our selves the wholl
state of things in this order. First that there be three ways of punishment of
man's sins after they be released in the sacrament of Penance (besides the
fruits of repentance which man charge himself withal, and besides the
punishment appointed for offenses by the civil or temporal laws, whereof I
now speak not) the first and the easiest is that penance, which is in secret
confession enjoined by our Confessor, which is lightly (as these times be)
much less then the nature of the offense, for which it was prescribed,
requires. Yet because it is taken obedientlie, and by our judges prescription,
and in a sacrament in which God always works much more grace, then he does
by the self same things without the sacrament, and because the penitent is
ready to take more if more had been prescribed, in all these respects, it
stands often, if it be any thing correspondent to the crimes for which it was
enjoined, for a full satisfaction before god, when it is accomplished.


FVLKE. In the first Chapter of this book you charged the reader to abide the
orderly method and compass of this cause. but the method you follow is
such, as becomes your cause, namely the method of deceitfulnes, which is
that you call the compass of your cause. For true method requires to
proceed from things more and better known, to things less known, as it were
to build upon a good foundation, but your manner is to assume that which is the
chief matter in controversy, and thereupon to build as it were upon an
imaginary fundation, and afterward to make a flourish in words, and a vain
(...) of confirming your foundation. As in this cause it had been most
necessary, if the compass of your cause could have borne it, to have first
proved substantiallie that there remains temporal punishment after sin
remitted to satisfy the justice of God. Then that the justice of God not
satisfied by the act of Christ's sacrifice, on the cross, may be satisfied
afterward. Thirdly the mean whereby it may be satisfied, which you call the
treasure of the Church. fourthly that dispensation thereof belongs to the
pope: and these things once proved, the way had been plainner to bring in the
Popes pardons, for proof of which to be good, you have plaide the proctour all
this while. But these matters must be daintelie touched, the compass of your
cause can not abide to have them thoroughlie handled. And therefore it is
sufficient to affirm them, for other proof you have none of them. And yet as
though you brought with you noe worsse then mathematical demonstrations, you
blow the trumpe before hand to give more light to the matter, the greater
overthrow to falsehood, to drive the cause forward, and weigh the wholl state
of things. And what say you to the purpose? forsooth, you tell us, that there
be three kinds of punishment of man's sins after they be remitted. But sir,
we believe you not, where is your demonstration? Why? Is it not sufficient
that M. Allen says so? what an vnrea sonable man are you, that will not learn
to abide the orderly method, and compass of the cause? well, seeing we must
have none other proof of your sayings let us see what you say: first, the
fruits of repentance, which man charge himself with all, are none. What
those be I know not, except it be some superstitious vows, and such like
matters: but the fruits of repentance, which God charge a man withal, be so
necessary to be brought forth, that otherwise the repentance is fained, and
thereof follows no remission. Again civil punishment is none, and yet
nothing is more like to prove that purpose. what is it then? The first and
easiest is that penance which is enjoined in secret confession. In deed that is
easy, and such as may encourage men to commit sins, for which they make so
easy satisfaction, toties, quoties. But what is the effect of this
satisfactio? It stands for a full satisfaction before God, when it is
accomplished. What alwaie? Nay often times if it be any thing correspondent to
the crimes. Then is there no certainty in this matter, but in steed of a
quietness of conscience, a torment follows upon it, if the sinner be not
assured that his penance enjoined will go for paiement or satisfaction. Well
when this easy penance is a full satisfaction, whence takes it so great
force? you answer, small works by force of the sacraments are very
effectual. But to prove this patch of Popery to be a sacrament, what day
will you take? for that which is the ground of al your disputation is denied of
us as you know. So that hitherto, but by petion of principles, you get nothing.


ALLEN. The second way of punishment is appointed by the Canons generally, for
such faults as be committed after Baptism, that is to say, by the laws of
the Church, or Decrees of Bishops and chief Magistrates thereof, and is called
Canonical satisfaction. Which is much more sparpe and grievous then the other,
that in private penance is commonly given, and a great deal more answerable
to Gods justice and the greeuousnes of the crimes committed. And so the Canons
were not only prescribed, as some judge not right of them, for open offenses,
to satisfy the Church and the offense of the people, but also even for secret
sins, as we may perceive by Saint Augustine, Tertullian, and other that have
written of penance. And this way prescribed satisfaction by the ancient
decrees of Counsels, which lightly appointed seven years of penance for
every deadelie sin, was almost a rule for such as heard secret confessions
to moderate their penance by, which they lightly gave to the penitents even
after the limitation of the said decrees and ancient Canons. Now to give so
many years or days of penance, signifies the iniunction or prescriptions of
fasts by certain weekelie thoroughout the said prefixed times, or
continualfasting from most meats every day in all those years of penance,
other then would suffice for susteining of nature, as bread and water, and such
shinne diet, which (...) body, in this fall of our strength and manners, could
now scarce bear, and with this continual mourning in outward behavior of
countenance, speech and apparel, and, which was the greatest of all,
necessary abstinence from the holy sacrament, till the said penance was
accomplished. And this great penance was in the Primitiye Church prescribed by
the Canons, not only for cautell and provision for the like sins afterward
to be committed (then when the Church had her punishment for sins, several
from the pains appointed by the civil laws for the same) but also for the
satisfiyng of gods justice for the penitents sins, the burden whereof, then
was counted (as indeed it is) so intolerable, that neither the Church spared
to enjoin great satisfaction, nor the offenders refused to receive and
accomplish the same with humility. This therefore is the second way of
punishment or prescription of penance for mortal sins remitted, or in way
to be remitted, by the penance of the party. In which kind, you may account
also the severe punishments which concern the soull most, although sometimes
they are joined unto some corporal afflictions, as excommunication,
suspension, degradation, and such like: for all these were usual in the
beginning of Christian days for correction of sin.


FVLKE. Canonical punishment, as we heard lately in the next Chapter before,
was, vt satis fait Ecclesiae, to make satisfaction to the Church, and not to
the justice of God, who accepts a contrite and an humble heart thorough the
virtue of Christ's death and passion, as a full satisfaction to his instice. You
say, the Canons were not only prescribed, as some judge not rightly of them
for open offenses to satisfy the Church, and the offense of the people, but
also even for secret sins. But how is this proved, that you say? you tell
us that we may perceive it by S. Austine, Tertullian, and others that have
written of penance. If it be as you say, why be not their sayings set down,
and we with them that judge not rightly convinced by them? At lest why be not
the places quoted, where we may perceive such a matter? belike the compass of
the cause cannot abide it, as also you sat, this fall of our strength and
manners could scarce bear such straight penance, as by the Canons is
prescribed. You join two things together of diverse natutes. If the strength
of man's body be so greatly fallen as they are not able to endure such hard
punishment, the Church should of duty initigate the rigor of those Canons, and
not send men to secke pardons for them. Whereas many a man that has needc,
lacks either money or other occasions, to purchase pardons: but if the
manners of men be so dissolute as they like not straight penance, they are more
dissolute unto sin, and so had need of the bitte of streighter penance to
keep them in, then the rain of pardons, and easy penance to let them run.
You repeat again that this penance Canonical was appointed, not only for
cautele and provision against the like sins, but also for satisfying of Gods
justice. But hereof no proof at all, but a bare affirmation.


ALLEN. The third way of punishment of temporal sin, is by Gods own hand,
as when he strikes some by sickness, (...) by temporal death, or by the pains
of Purgatory, which (...) a place of temporal satisfaction and correction of
the soul only in the next life. Thus were diverse of the Corinthians cast into
infir mites, many stricken dead, and further also punished in the next world in
the place of judgment there, not eternal, but transitory because they would
not justly judge and correct themselves. 1. Cor. 11.
And, which is much to be noted for our purpose, the Apostles also had
authority given them, to punish the offenders often by bodelie vexation, and
death sometimes, that they might thereby make true show and proof to all the
world, that they and their successors had jurisdiction over the souls of men,
whiles they made it evident by manifest signs wrought in the face of all the
world, even upon the bodies themselves, which are not so properly subject to
the governors of the Church, as the souls of the faithful be, though their
bodies to, for the souls sake, be subject to the said power. And not
withstanding the same miraculous force in correcting sinners did cease
afterward, yet the like power, ordinarily to be exercised by giving penance
and seperating from the Sacraments, remains in the Churches right still.

And here we may not think, that the killing of diverse, as well by Gods own
hand amongst the people of Israel in Moset time, Exodus 32. Number. (...). (...).
16. 1. Cor 11. Act. 5. Hier. in Comment. Ezechiells. c. 20
as of other that died of diseases, for punishment of unworthy receiving the
Sacrament in Saint Paul's daics, or sleaing of Ananias and his wife by S.
Peter's hand, many more perhapes whereof there is no talk in the text, we may
not deny, I say, that these were all killed either of God or Christ's
Apostles, to eternal damnation, but rather for their temporal correction and
the avoiding of Gods judgments to come, especially where any of them did
repent them of their fault, before their deserved death came upon them.


FVLKE. That God strikes by sickness or temporal death his children sor their
chastisment and example of others, it is very certain; but that he sends
any into purgatory or punishes for satisfaction of his justice, I must still
deny, until I see it plainly proved. Neither do I find that the Corinthians
which neglected to judge themselves in this life, were punished with any
transitory punishment in the next world. That the Apostles had authority to
aftlict men's bodies, proves not that they or their successors had
jurisdiction over men's souls. But their spiritual power is otherwise
sufficiently testified, as well in retaming sins, as in casting out of the
Church, such as teeme by gentler discipline incorrigible, Concerning all those
that have bin or be stricken with the hand of God with temporal death, we leave
the judgment to him self. If they did truly repent before their death, we
have sure testimony, that God has received them to mercy. But hereof it
follows not, that their temporal punishment was a satisfaction of Gods
justice, neither-saith Saint Hierome any such thing.


ALIEN. Now by these three diverse ways of correction for sinnesremitted no
doubt the Pardons of Gods ministers must be limited and understood, so that
whosoever gives a pardon lawfully, he must either discharge the penitent of
the punishment which his Ghostly Father enjoined him, or that the old laws
of most holy Councels charged the like offenders withal, or that God himself
enjoined sometimes in this world, but especially in the next life, where god
more exactlie and properly punishes both for sins remitted and not remitted.
If the pardon be large, it takes away the whole pain, if it be otherwise, it
determines the number of days, and releaseth not all, but part of the
penance only: that is to saic, so many days or years, as in the
Indulgence is mentioned. Whereof no man can now be ignorant, if he do but
mark, that the penance which the Pope takes upon him to remit, was also
limited by years of fasting, praying, abstinence from the Sacraments, and such
(...) as if your Confessor had given you in penance, to fast every fridaie
bread and drink only, for some notorius sins confessed unto him, then the
Pardon for twenty days, would discharge you of so many days, from your said
bond, as be named: and if it be a free and plenarie Indulgence, it shall
discharge you of the bond of all the days or years appointed, which you have
not before the receipt of the said pardon accomplished. And this is exceeding
plain for the two first kinds of punishments, which we said were adjoined for
satisfaction by the Churches laws, and by the confessors prescription. For
they stood upon daiet and years, so the remission of the same must needs
keep the like form. For which cause you shall see often expressed De
Poenitentiis iniunctis, in the Indulgence. And that form of grant and
remission was used always in gods Church. For S. Cyprian did remit a great
piece sometimes De poenitentiis De poen. iniunctis.
inunctis, of the enjoined penance, when he gave peace to such as fell in time
of persecution, long before they had fulifilled their prescribed penance: and
so did S. Paull to the Corinthian that had committed incest. And so does Nice
Council prescribe to Bishops that they should or might at the lest, Humanius
agere, deal more gently with those that denied their faith in the persecution
of Licinius, and that they might pardon Can. 11.
them before, if they saw cause, though seven years penance was prescribed
unto them. In which places, that the Church now calls a Pardon or Indulgence,
was termed sometimes, donare aliquid in persona Christi, to give or grant
something to the offender in Christ's person: and so called Saint Paull it:
sometimes it was called Dare pacem, as Saint Cyprin terms it in many places
of his works, sometimes it was called Humanius agere, To deal gently with
sinners, or to show unto them humanity, and so does Nicen and Ancyran
Counsels term it: Licebit etiam Episcopo humanius circa aliquid cogitare, It
shall be lawful for the Can. 11. Cap. 5.
Bishop to deal more courteously with them, says the holy Council.


FVLKE. First you tell us, that the pardon must discharge men, either of al, or
some part of these three kinds of punishment. Secondly you assure us, If the
pardon be large, it takes away the whole pain: then it follows that if God
punish a man for his sins, with the gout, or any other bodelie sickness, a
large pardon would take away the whole pain thereof. Surely if you would
become suter to his holiness, for a large pardon that would take away the whole
pain of bodelie sickness, you might do an acceptable deed, and be well paid
for your pains. But if the Popes pardon be not able to take away the pain of
one scabbe or flebiting, you will hardly persuade us, that it can take away
all the pain of purgatory, if it were proved that any such pain or place
were after this life. But if the pardon (say you) determine the number of
days, or years, then it releaseth but part of the penance only, as you bring
exampls of 20. days pardon: but if the pardon determine the number of years,
to an hundred thousand years, then this explication is insufficient: yet you
have an other quirke to help it afterward, by stretching it into purgatory,
your imaginary prison. But the ancient canons never enjoined so many years
penance, nor never did any Catholic Bithoppe grant pardon of so many
years. Saint Cyprian, as we heard before, with his colleagues determined to
release some part of the appointed time upon good hope of the amendment of
the parties, and great signs showed of their hearty repentance, and for
danger of present persecution at hand. Saint Paull received the incestuous
person unto the fellowship of the Church, upon his repentance. The Council of
Nice also willed the Bishops in seeing the fruits of repentance ripebefore the
time, assigned by the Canons, to deal more gently with the lapsed persons. But
all these have no resemblance with the Antichristian pardons of the Pope, which
are not granted upon like cause, nor by a person of like authority, nor to
persons of like qualites, nor to the like end, nor only of penance enjoined,
but of such as no man would enjoin, beside remission a culpa and pana, or if
not for all sins, yet for some third or seventh parteof sins, or else full
remission of all sins, beside 8000. years, and 8000. Lentes, as in the
pardon of Clement the sixth, confirmed by Leo the tenth, it is to be seen.


ALLEN. Whereby we see this pardoning of enjoined penance, is an ancient usage
and counted most holy of all the Church, whereof we make this assured ground
and foundation of our Pardons, and for the truth of them we make this argument
Saint Paul did remit enjoined penance in Christ's person: Saint Cyprian and all the Bishops of Affrike did remit penance enjoined: Nice^ Council gives license
to bishops to remit penance prescribed by the law: Therefore the Pope by their
example, and as in the person of Christ may remit enjoined penance, and there
fore may lawfuilie give a Pardon. The pain prescribed by the law he may
release, because he is the principal executer of the law: the penance appointed
by the inferior priest in confession, he may likewise remit, because that,
which is prescribed by the inferior may by good reason be, upon
considerations, altered by the superior, especially where the Magistrate has
good means to provide, that neither the common wealth suffer damage thereby,
nor the partie^ to whom it does perteine to be loosed or bound in penance,
receive any loss thereby. By like authority also does a Pardon change
sometimes a sharper and longer pain enjoined into some more gentle penance and
more fit and needeful works for the time and state then being, as his power,
that is the chief governor may be exceeding benefi ciall to the world in
such cases, which ever ought to be practiced for edifying, and never for
destruction. For it is to be considered, that the high Pastor vsualite
graunieth no release of the debt of good works, or the bond of deserved
punishment, but by prescription of some other holy work to be accomplished
before the party obtain the benefit of his remission. (...) when a penitent
has enjoined him to punish his body by continual fasting or long
peregrination, or other exceeding much temporal pain, according to the
grieuousnes of his deserts, the freedom of a Pardon of tentimes turns the
said due pains enjoined into some easier work of Christian charity, yet
being much more to the glory of god. and beneficial to the Church, as the time
stands, then the other could be. As when the Turk, or other enemies of
Christianity, do invade any Christian kingdom, it is more beneficial to put
to our helping hand in with standing his cruelty, either by resisting him in
our own person, or contributing any piece of our goods toward the same,
then any private Penance that may concern our persons. Therefore the
governors of the Church often, to move the people to such necessary denotion
gives them a release of all pain due for their sins, or at least, of the
bond of their enjoined penance only upon respect of some small furtherance in
such a good and Godly purpose.


FVLKE. We acknowledge that pardoning of ecclesiastical pu nishment, commonly
called penance, is very ancient. And being granted by them that had
authority, upon good consideration is very necessary. But it is very young and
new, that the Pope should take upon him, though he proceeded no further then
pardon of penance enjoy nedto release the penance enjoined by the governors of
other Churches, to persons whose repentance he knows not, and for other
causes, then of ancient were allowed, and especially for money. But now upon
this ancient, and accustomed practice of Gods Church, let us see what
Antichrist can claim: and that is set forth in an assured argument. Saint
Paull did remit; S. Cyprian, with the Bishops of Afrike, and the Nicene
council does allow remitting of penance prescribed; therefore the Pope by
their example may remit enjoined penance, and lawfully give a pardon. Call
you this an assured argument for pardons, where there wants one leg, and that
the better leg of the argument to stand upon? Aristotle does well admonish that
in an Enthimeme lightly the weaker part is hidden, and not expressed. For this
argument every man may lawfully deny, except you add the Mayor, that
whatsoever Saint Paull, Saint Cyprian with his fellows, and the Nicene coun
cell lawfully did, and allowed, the Pope doing as they did, may lawfully do.
But then this Mayor will be denied, and so the conclusion will not hold. For
the Pope is neither any governor, nor yet any member of the Church of Christ.
But if he were a lawful Bishop he might do within his own charge, as Saint
Paul, Saint Cyprian, and the rest with the Nicen council did and allowed to be
done. And yet if he were allowed to be a Bishop, and would grant such pardons,
as he does, to men of other Churches, and upon such occasions as he does, this
argument would not defend him, because the Minor would not follow him: for
neither Saint Paull, Saint Cyprian, nor the council of Nice granted such
pardons, to such persons, and for such causes, as he does: therefore he
follows not their example, but his own presumption. Yet let us see how this
argument is fortified. First the pain prescribed by law he may release,
because he is the principal executor of the law. But who will allow him any
such principality in the Church, that is no member of the same? Secondly he
may remit the penance enjoined by the Priest, because he is superior to all
piestes, which is nothing but a miserable begging of that which is in
controversy. The like is to be said of his changing of penance, whereby he
challenges the like authority. Although his changing of sharp pe nance into
easy payment, does bewray what is the end of such permutation: money is
intended, whatsoever is pretended. Vrbanus the 2. in the council of
Claremounte, exhorting men of al nations to the war of Jerusalem, began that
release of penance, for serving in that cause, which his successors afterward
have used, as a gaie and gainful pretense, when they were disposed to enrich
their coffers, and mantaine their private quarrels.


ALLEN. The like they do also often, to set forward other works of charity,
to the benefit of Gods people, as for the relieuing of Hospitals, of Churches,
of high ways, and such like. Sometimes again, they extend their power, which
Christ gave them, to edify his Church. and increase religion and devotion in
the people, as when thy give pardon for so many days to such as shall receive
the blessed Sacrament, fast and pray, that heresy may cease in the Church,
that the enemies of Christianity may not prevail, that infidels, Jews, and
heretics may be converted, and Schismatikes knit themselves obedientlie to
the fellowship of Chistes fold. So does the Pope for the increase of zealous
devotion and advancing Gods honor, give days of remission or full pardon, to
such as shall usually have meditations of Christ's passion and death by
certain holy prayers appointed, or by visiting places in which there be seen
some lively sieppes, memories, and express tokens of Christ miraculous
works, or his Saints. Thus to help up the dullness of praying and serving
God in our days he gives grace and pardon to such as shall freauent the
Churches at the times of their dedication, or on certain principal Feasts,
there either to be confessed and receive the (...) sacrament, or else to join
in prayer and devotion with other the faithful people that thither at those
days have principal recourse. Hereof we have example not only in the story
of the institution of the solemn. Feast of Corpus Christi, but also in the
great general council holden at Laterane. For this cause also, and the like
maintenance Can. 62.
of holy prayer, by which the Church of God most stands, has he mercifully
and with singular wisdom, given a pardon of certain days or years to such as
should devoutly occupy such beads, books, or prayers: in all which things
orderly given, and reverently received, I see not what can be reprehended of
any, but such as are offended with all works and ways of mercy, charity,
and devotion. The power and jurisdiction is proved lawful, the causes, why he
should exercise his authority herein, be very urgent, and Gods honor with
the peoples commodite exceeding well respected: all things here do edify, and
nothing at all destroy: all things do stand by good reason, nothing can be
reproved either with rea son or good religion.


FVLKE. You tell us, what the Pope does; but neither by what authoritic of the
holy scriptures, nor by what example of the holy ancient Church. He could
never sit in the Temple of God, boasting himself to be God, except he had
some religious color, to blind the eyes of the world, which submits unto
his antichiristan power. And yet all the world knows, that money obtained,
for hospitalles, Churches, beads, books, and such baggage, all the pardons in
a manner that have been granted. As for the pretense of setting forward the
works of charity, fasting, praing, etc. is not only hypocritical, but also
wicked. For neither men must be hired to the works of charity, and other
Christian exercises, by pardon of their punishments; but exhorted and charged
for the love of God, and upon their duties neither should a sale be made of
that which ought to be freely granted, if the Church had such authority. For
freely (says he) you have received, therefore freely you ought to give.
Therefore, though you cannot see in this filthy nundination, what is to be
reprehended, we can see nothing that can be defended, where neither the power
is proved lawful, nor the causes reasonable, nor the end godly, whatsoever is
pretended: nor means by the word of God or example of the Pimitiue Church
allowable.


That not only the penance enjoined in the sacrament, otherwise by canonical
correction, but also such pain as God him self provides for sin, may be
released by the Popes Pardons, and that Purgatory pains may especially be
prevented by the same remissions.

THE 7. CHAP.
ALLEN. But now because some may by course of our matter, look that I should
declare, whether the Popes Pardons may release any whit of that pain, which
God himself puts the penttent unto, after his sins be forgiven; I must
somewhat stand hereupon, the cause is weighty, and much misliked of our
adversaries, and some other perchance to, that see not so far into the matter
as they should do, before they give any judgment thereof, That the
governors of the Church, should remit Canonical correction, and priuse
satisfaction, with the bond of penance, either enjoined, or else which by the
laws spiritual might be enjoined, many will confess. But that their power
should reach to the remitting of that pain, which Gods hand has laid upon
the offender of temporal correction, that they understand not. Truly, for
this they must be instructed, first, that the temporal punishment, which God
takes on sinners that be penitent, though it stands by the law of nature,
and was practiced of the laws of nature, and was practiced of God himself
before any man's laws were made for puuishment of sins, yet now it rises
prin cipallie, upon lack of punishing of our selves, or the accomplishing of
such penance, as the Church of God prescribes. For if the Church punish her
childrens faults by sharp discipline, doubtless it satisficeth Gods
righteousness, and he will not punish bis in id ipsum, twice for one fault: or
if man earnestly and sufficiently judge himself, God has promised by S.
Paul, that he will not judge him also, that is to say, that he will not
correct him with more heavy discipline of this life or the life to come, for
that signifies this word iudicare, as the Apostle himself does interpret it.
Then it follows, that the bond of any temporal punishment to be inflicted
by God himself does not now bind man otherwise, then for the lack of
necessary discipline to be taken in this life, and therefore that Purgatory
binds no man, but in respect of satisfying Gods justice, which was not
answered here before, either by our selves, or by the Churches correction and
enjoined penance.


FVLKE. The cause you confess to be weighty that the governors of the Church
should release that pain, which Gods hand has laid upon the offender, for his
temporal correction, and therefore you must stand upon it: but as long as you
stand you bring neither authority of scripture, testimony of antiquity,
reasonable argument, or sensible experience. For first the ground of al your
disputation is utterly false; that God punishes for sins remitted, to
satisfy his justice. And therefore though I grant your first consideration
(which is, that God punishes us for sin the more, because we punish not our
selves) yet I may not grant your conclusion, the argument whereof is nothing,
but your asseueration: if the Church punish her childrens faults by sharp
discipline, doubtless it satisfies Gods righteousness. For no punishing, or
suffering of punishment can satisfy Gods justice, or any part thereof, but
the punishment suffered by Christ, who was beaten for our faults and stricken
for our offenses: and therefore his suffering is a full satisfaction for our
unrighteousness. Neither does Saint Paull speak of any discipline in the life
to come, when he exhorts us to judge ourselves: but shows that the
punishment, or judgment, which God executes in this world upon his children,
is a cha stisment, that we be not condemned with the world, as they that
neither by doctrine, nor by punishment are brought to repentance. your next
conclusion is, that the bond of any temporal punishment to be inflicted by
God him self, does not bind man, but for lack of necessary discipline, to be
taken in this life. But this conclusion you your self do afterward deny, when
you affirm, that bodelie punishment comes upon men for many other causes,
then for correction for sin only, or a purgation of a man's life past.
Finally, if purgatory do bind no man, but in respect of satisfying gods
justice, so long as it is certain, that Gods justice is satisfied toward al
his elect, in the death and obedience of Christ, it is out of doubt that
purgacorie has nothing to do with any of Gods elect, to whom Christ is given
of his father to be wisdom, righteousness, holiness, and redemption, that as it
is written, he that rejoices, may rejoice in the Lord.


ALLEN. Consider secondly that he thatfully is discharged of the bond of
satisfaction in this life, whether it be just accomplishing of his due and
deserved penance, or by remission of Gods Church and answering otherwise his
lack therein, the same person must of necessity be also charged of Purgatory,
and alpaine in this life which else God could have enjoined for sin, because
this debt of Purgatory rose unto the penitent for the answer of Gods justice,
and lack of payment in this life, the which being discharged to the honor of
God, and the relief of the party, there remains no bond of pain to come.
For debt is discharged properly either by remitting it freely, or by payment
justly. and I speak rather of (...), then of other painer enjoined by God in
this life, because that is ever appointed to man, only as a recompense of
Gods justice, and as due correction for sin remitted, when of all other
pains in this world, whether it be sickness or death, no man can assuredly
say, that this or that bodelie punishment came upon any man as a correction
for his sins only, or as a purgation of his life past. For sometimes
suchthings follow the necessary of our corrupted nature, sometimes they be for
our proof and exercise, and sometimes for other causes. But those kinds of
punishments which God lays upon man only for correction and satisfying for
his sins, never fall upon him after he be either judged by his own tears, or
the Churches sufficient satisfaction enjoined, or else upon reasonable cause
remitted. The like afflictions may continue in any person, after the bond of
them be removed, or may be given afterward: but for the satisfaction of his
own sins, or any debt proceeding thereof, they be not, because the debt is
discharged: in so much, that I dare be bold to say, if any man were sick by
Gods appointment, for that cause only, to satisfy for his sins remitted
before in the sacrament, that he should straight recover upon the discharge of
the debt which he did owe to God for his justice, if that into mitie were for
no other cause but that only, as it may be for many mo, whereof no man can
casilie judge.


FVLKE. He that is fully discharged of the bond of satisfaction, in this life,
by free remission of his sins, through the satisfaction of Jesus Christ, must
needs be dischar ged of Purgatory, except you will say, that accomplishing
of penance, and remission of the Church is of more force, then the suffering of
Christ, and the remission of God. For debt, as you say truly, is discharged
properly, either by remitting it freely, or by payment justly. But God
sorgiueth our sins freely, and Christ has paid the redemption for them
justly, as all the scriptures do testify. Therefore there remains no bond
of pain to come. But now you render a reason, why you speak of purgatory,
rather then of other pains enjoined by God in this life. And that is this;
that purgatory is never suffered, but sor satisfying for sin only: where
other pains of this life may be for other causes. Mark how this gear
hangs together. First you have no show of proof, that there remains any
pain due to satisfy Gods justice for sins remitted, but the afflictions of
this life: and now you confess, that they may be, and often are for other
causes. How prove you then, that ever they be for this pretended cause,
namely for satisfying of Gods justice for sins remitted? Well, let that
pass. Seeing the afflictions of this life were brought to prove that there be
three diverse ways of temporal punishment remaining after sins be remitted,
every of which ways may in some cases be released in part, or in wholl, by
the Popes pardons, how happens it, that we can have no experience of the
Popes pardonsin releasing any man of the temporal afflictions of this life, as
sickness, imprisonment, etc, You answer that these bodily afflictions may be
for other causes, and so fly quite from your hold; yet that you may stand in
a corner, and pelt your enemies, you turn again and say. that you dare be bold
to say, if any man were sick by gods appoint meant, for that cause only, etc.
that he should straight way recover upon the discharging of that debt which he
did owe to gods justice: but a pardon will discharge that debt: therefore a
pardon will make him recover. This I confess, is boldly said of you, But where is
the experience: show one man that ever recovered by the Popes pardon among so
many 1000. sick persons, as have received the Popes pardon: was never none sick
by gods appointment, for satisfying of his justice only? But admit he were
sick for other causes, as welll as for that, should not the popes pardon at the
least take away some part of his sickness, namely so much as was laid upon him
for that cause only? Let the Pope, if he will make trial of his power to the
confusion of his abuersaries, grant a general pardon to all Papists, as he
may easily do, and then let it be tried whether any one shall straight
recover of his bodelie sickness, or other affliction, or how many shall be
eased in their bodily or wordly affliction. Provided always that we have no
counter fait crankes, that shall step up sodenlie recovered of that disease,
whereof they were never sick. But if you dare be bold to say, that the Popes
pardon can cause any man to recover straight upon the recept of it, you must
also be bold to say that the popes pardon can work miracles: for no man can
suddenly recover of any disease which is not come to the period, without
miracle, if the natural cause thereof be not first taken away. But alas who
does not see your miserable startinghole, if that infirmity were for none
other cause, but that only, as it may be for many mo, whereof no man can
easily judge. A wretched clout to hide your infirmity, where no one example
among so many thousand as are sick in the world, can be showed. So that
purgatory pains, and the release of them, are grounded upon temporal
afflictions, whereof noe man can judge, for what cause they are, no man can
show one example of the release of them by pardons.


ALLEN. And therefore, not only Christ himself, as I shall declare
hereafter, but Aaron also healed in the old law the infirmities of thousands,
which came upon them only for temporal punishment of sins. And in the
sacrament of extreme unction the Apostle Saint James affirms, that our Lord
shall upon the priests prayer lift up the penitent, or ease him of his
sickness, whichhe meant only or chiefly of that sickness, which comes upon
the party by Gods hand, as a punishment of those sins, which be remissible
in the sacrament for such like means. As Saint Chysostome shows also a
passiing power in lib. 3. desacerdot.
the ministers of God, Church, saying, That they may keep man's soul from
perishing, and may charge him with more easy pain even at his passing hence,
besides that they may ease his bodelie infirmity also by their holy prayers
in the act of extreme unction: in this sense speaks he thereof,


FVLKE. Said I that no man can show one example of the release of bodily
afflictions? Master Allen shows here examples of thowsands, healed not only
by Christ, but by Aaron also, of infirmities, that came upon them for temporal
punishment of sins, as he will declare hereafter. But I reply, what miracles
Christ or Aaron wrought in his name, they be no examples of the Popes pardons,
by which if he can prove that any man receaueth recovery of his sickness, it
is somewhat to the purpose. The llke I say of anointing with oil, by which
the elders of the primitive, and Apostolic Church endued with the miraculous
gift of healing, cured many of their bodily infirmities: but that any
extreme unction restores any man to health, or ever did, I utterly deny;
and therefore we will not dispute of what sickness they heal them. Neither does
Chrysostom say, that the Ministers of Gods Church have such a passing power,
that they may ease bodily infirmity by their holy prayers, in the act of
extreme unction, neither has his words any sense thereof: and therefore you
deal fraudulently, to tell us of the sense, when you rehearse not the words.
Plain dealing becomes an honest cause: but when neither words nor sense can
help you, you must feign a sense, which can not be proved of the words:
which are these, De sacerdotio lib. 3. cap. 6. preferring the ministers of the
Church before bodelie parents, by so much as the life to come excels this
life for they truly do beget unto this life, but these unto that to come. And
they truly can not so much as deliver them from bodylie death, nor drive
away sickness that falls upon them: but these have often saved the soul that
was stck and ready to perish, causing some to have a gentler punishment,
suffering some not to fall from the beginning, and helping them not only by
teaching and admonishing, but also by prayers. For not only when they
regenerate us, but after ward they have power to forgive sins. It any man
sick among you? says he, let him call for, etc. Where the text of Saint James
is alleged only to prove that they have power to obtain forgiveness of
sins by prayer, and neither for healing of bodylie sickness, nor for extreme
unction. The ceremony whereof, with the miracle, whereunto it was annexed, was
ceased long before Saint Chrysostomes time.


ALLEN. But, as I said, because no man can well judge, when man is afflicted
only for temporal discipline or satisfaction, or when far other purposes to
us unknown, the Church of God that uses high wisdom and moderation in all
things, medleth not directly in pardoning by her jurisdiction, with any such
bodily afflictions as god charge man with alin this life, which may be to
the forsaken as a beginning of their eternal damnation, as Saint Augustine
says, as well as a temporal correction, and therefore not effectually
remissible in the Church. But the bond of Purgatory, that, I say, in the
Church may be released, and is released, at every time that man worthily
receives a full and plenarie remission of all penance enjoined, and due to be
enjoined by the law of the Churches decrees. I do not speak now, of the
delivery of any person from the pains of purgatory, which already is
actuallie there, or for the Churches power in releasing of their painet, after
they be in the course of Gods judgment for the same: I am not so far yet:
but I speak of the discharge of the bond thereof, or some portion of the same,
now before the party do pass hence, which is a great deal more proper to the
Churches power, and more easy to be brought to pass, then when the penitents
soul is already in judge meant there, to which place, the Churches jurisdiction
(as some suppose) does not extend. If the simple understand me not, let him
mark my meaning by an example: The pains of hell can not, neither by God, nor
man, ordinarily be helpen or released, after man be in the same: but the debt
of Hell which is due for every mortal sin, is discharged allwaies at our
repentance, in so much that the priest in the sacrament of penance, with the
sin ever remitteth the bond of Hell, and preuenteth Gods judgment in the
same. So if Purgatory could not at al belong to the jurisdiction of the Church,
nor (...) person therein, yet in the life of the party some piece of the debt
thereof, oral may be released before hand, whiles the party is in the power of
the Church and her discipline: ad so it must needs be at every time that the
Church pardons the party of all satisfaction, or anic portion there of
recompensing the same by application of Christ's satisfaction and his saints.
For the bond of Purgatory rises, as I have said, upon some satisfaction and
penance to be fulfilled or done in this life, the which (...) bue either by our
pains accomplished to the satisfying of Gods righteausnes, or o therwise
pardoned, there is no debt or bond of purgatory at all, the which is so
cancelled by thy Church our Mother, that it can not be required of God our
father.


FVLKE. The Popish Church (...) more sabtillie, if she take not upon her at
all, either directly, or indirectlie, to heal bodily sickness by pardons, not
because men can not judge so well for what cause they are laid upon the
diseased, but because she knows right well that though she may in the dark
bregg of such a matter, yet has she in deed no such power, nor authority,
neither in the fortaken or reprobate, nor in any of Gods elect. But the bond
of Purgatory, where of there is neither argument, nor experience, she may be
bold to deal with all at her pleasure, either in preventing, or releasing:
Wherein I marvel you make the matter so deintie, seeing it is holden on (...)
side, that the Pope has authority by his pardon, (...) only to release some
out of the pains of purgatory, but ^
also to spoil all Purgatory, and to leave it (...). Your example, of the
pains of hell, that can not neither by God, nor man be helped, or released,
has an instance in your own school, of the Emperor Traiane eased of hell
pains at the prayer of Saint Gregory, if the tole be true. Beside Augustinus
de Ancona disputes earnestly, that the Pope has power in hell, to mitigate
quest. 34.
or release the pains of the damned, or at the lest of some of them, and that
the Church prays for that end. Wherefore you agree not with your fellows,
nor with the Popish Church, which prays for the dead, vt liberentur de ore
Leonis, and de profundo lacu: that they be delivered from the mouth of the
Lion, and from the deep lake. But be it as you say, yet your argument of the
similitude of hell and Purgatory is of no force, because we know certainly by
the scriptures, that there is hell: but Purgatory we find not in the holy
scriptures, as Saint Augustine says of any third place. But by the scripture
Cont. Pelag hypognost. lib. 5.
we find, the end wherefore Purgatory is imagined, to be forged, false, and
blasphemous against the sacrifice of Christ his death and satisfaction, which
was once perfectly performed by himself, and not committed to the application
of any other man. Heb. 9. and 10



ALLEN. And this moved always the Church of God diligently to provide of her
tender mercy toward her loving Children, that they should never depart out of
this life in any debt of penance, knowing well, that the residue not satisfied
here, should be required at their hands before God in the next life. And
therefore though many years of penance were prescribed to all such as did
notorious crimes, yet there was made ever lightly a prouiso, that at the hour
of their extremity they should have peace and pardon, and the Churches
blessing in the holy sacrament, and so depart free from bond of the Churches
discipline, and as far as in her lay, might be also discharged of the
temporal scourge in the next life, as no doubt they were, if their remained no
other impediment in themselves. Can. 12. Lib. 3. Epist. 17.
So does Nice Council most mercifully provide, and so does Ciprian and other
fathers of the Primitive Church, that saw in their high wisdom, the temporal
pain to come, much to hang on the parties satisfaction, and the bond of the
Churches enjoined penance. And even at this day provision is also made, that
no penance be given, but upon condition of his recovery, to any man that lies
at the extremity of death, lest he depart hence, Ligatus, bound, as Saint
Augustine terms Epist. 180.
it, whereby the debt of his enjoined satisfaction, might be required in
Purgatory. And nothing in the world proves more the Churches doctrine of
purgatory and Pardons, then does the continual concord and most agreeable
practice of these holy acts of binding and loosing used in her government.


FVLKE. The ancient Church in deed not acknowledging that she had any
authority to release any punishment to be suffered after this life, determined
always the times of Canonical penance with the end of men's lives, as I have
showed before, and now you do acknowledge no less. But if the Church had power
after men were dead, to release them of any pains, she needed not to have
been so careful in that point, as she was willing to comfort the penitent
offenders at their depar ture: as for the cancelling of all debt, due for the
satisfying of gods righteousness, which you did ascribe unto the Church, was the
proper office of our savior Christ, who performed that most necessary work
to our eternal benefit, once for all, when he did put out the handwriting that
was Col. 2. 15.
against us in decrees, and utterly abolished it, nayling it to his cross.
Finally if nothing in the world proves more the Popish Churches doctrine of
Purgatory and pardons, then the continual practice of binding and loosing,
justly used in government, as you do constantly affirm, it will easily
appear, that nothing in the world can prove at all your blaspemous heresies,
of Purgatory, and pardons, seeing the right use of that power can be none
other, then according to the authority granted by our savior Christ of
binding and loosing: but neither purgatory, nor pardon out of that authority
in any lawful form of argument can ever be concluded, howsoever in loose
talk, or scribbling, ignorant men may be carried away with the flow of words
where there is no pitho argument.


How the practice of pardons of these late hundred veares, differs from the
usage of the primitive Church, and in what sense such great numbers of years
and days be remitted by the Popes pardons.

THE 8. CHAP.
ALLEN. But here we must note some diversity in giving Pardons, and
preventing Purgatory pains, betwixt the primitive Church of old, and ours of
these latter hundred years, which did most justly rise upon the alteration
of meant manners and state of things. For in the primitive Church enjoined
penance was so large for every mortal crime, that it might seem very
answerable unto the nature of the fault. And doubtless it may not otherwise
be thought, but the spirit of God did limitate satisfaction by the Canons, as
agreeable in all points to the debt of sins forgiven, which God required for
answer. And therefore when they gave a Pardon of the enjoined penance, there
could be no great doubt, but the penitent being in zeal and devotion
qualified thereunto, was therewith fully pardoned of Purgatory, and the bond
of all pains to come in the next life.

But now of days when penance and large satisfaction (our nature declining
ever to the worsse, and devotion continually decaying) is not enjoined
according to the old Canons, and but a small sign thereof, remaining only
in secret satisfction, which is not of it self in this exceeding flow of sin
any thing agreeable to the faults committed: in this case, to remit only the
enjoined penance, were not enough commonly to prevent Purgatory pains, or to
discharge the penitent of all satisfactory correction to come. Whereby the
Church by instigation of Gods spirit deals so much more mercifully now then
before, because the people had never so much need, to hang on pardon, as when
their sins be greatest, and their recompense lest. Nevertheless, such is the
frowardnes of our time, that they had rather take away penance contemptuously,
then have it released by the power of god lawfully. For the great infirmity
of this world was the manifold (...) used, and yet the meekenes of the Church,
which by the motion of God she applies her self unto, for the distress of
these days, and for the sinners sake, is yet most of sinners now commonly
contemned, and of very many, that have full great need thereof, as mere
folly laughed at. Yet the Church for her childrens relief bestows mercy
still, and a great deal less it is offended on that side, then the other, as
no doubt the holy ghost guiding her affairs, she stands upright on both
sides.


FVIKE. You do not amiss, to note a diversity between the practice of the
ancient primitive Church, from the late Popish Church, touching the Popes
pardons, and purgatory: for the most ancient primitive Church, knew neither
the one nor the other. But you will have the difference to arise most justly
upon the alteration of men's manners, and state of thing's. Touching the state
of things, it is so large a term, that I know not what you mean thereby. And
I marvel what state of things that should be, that should bring in a new
religion into the church of Christ, as this of Popes pardons, and purgatory
is. But the alteration of men's manners, if it require another form of
discipline, the change of manners from better to worsse, requires a discipline
to be changed from milder, to sharper, and not as your Popish Church pretends
to have done, from sharper, to mil der, and from milder to none at all. For
Canonical penance and satisfaction, you have changed to arbitrary penance and
satisfaction, which you confess to be but a sign of the Canonical, and nothing
agreeable to the faults committed. And of the same arbitrarie satisfaction,
with all the deserts thereof, you have set the release to sale, in your popes
Pardons; which in effect is nothing else, but to sell a lisentiousnes of sin,
when you have taken away all fear of punishment therefroe: eternal by
shrift, and temporal by pardons, and pelting commutations, without exacting
true repentance, and the true fruits thereof, which appear in amendment of
life. But to follow your vain, you say the penance enjoined in the primitive
Church, was so large, that it might seem very answerable to the nature of the
fault. It is true, that as the faults were greater, so the discipline was
harder for satisfying of the Churches judgment: in accepting the offenders
repentance, and reconciliation to the Church. But there was no meaning to
satisfy the justice of god, unsatisfied in the sacrifice of Christ's death,
howsoever you make it a doubtless case, as also you use to do every thing, by
bold and stout asseueration, which you are not able to prove by any sound or
probable argument. Well, if it were, as you say, there was no use of pardons
in the primitive Church, nor fear of purgatory pains, which is a true
conclusion, although it be brought in upon false principles. But now, you say,
the Church by instigation of Gods spirit, grants many great Pardons,
because the people in respect of their great sins, and small or no penance
and satisfaction for them, had never so much need to hang on pardon. In deed
the greater men's sins be, the more need they have that grace and mercy
should abound for the release of them: but then they must have recourse to the
fountain of mercy and only ground, where grace grows, even the God of all
consolation reconciled in Jesus Christ, unto all them that truly repent of
their sins, and purpose unfeignedly to lead a new life agreeable to his laws,
and commandments. But whereas the popish Church taking away in a manner all
sorrow for sione, and fear of punishment, by offering satisfaction of pardons,
opens a wide field unto all wickedness, and beside teaches men to depend upon
the pardon of a man, who commonly sells the same for advantage, and
disposes it at his pleasure, it is out of doubt she does this by the
instigation of the Devil, and not by the spirit of God. For the spirit of God
is the spirit of truth, of pureness and of holiness, giving no license,
encouragement, or consent to continue in sin, as the doctrine of pardons does
most manifestly; the blasphemy of which is more to be detested, then the
folly to be laughed at, of al them, that be zealous of Christ's glory, and
salvation of his people.


ALLEN. She seeing therefore, that remission of the enjoined penance could not
discharge us of the bond of the transitory pain to come, and being sure that
it is no les lawful to remit the pains due by the canons, is enjoined
effectually, by the canons, she gives now (...) not only de (...) penitentus,
but also, de iniun (...), of such penance as by the nature of the fault before
god, or the decrees of Counsels should or had wont to be enjoined. For there
is no man that has in penance prescribed either of fasting or praying or such
like a 1000. or more years, and yet it is known, that many such pardons are,
and have been given long, Neither could the (...) of Purgatory wholly be
discharged now, as it was of old by the pardons of the primitive Church, in
which only there was remission of the penance appointed (because al penance
thought reedful was then appointed) except there were releasing also sometimes
of all the penance, or a great piece of the penance that shouldby law and reason
have been enjoined.


FVLKE. The man of sin, supreme head of the synagogue of Satan upon earth,
seeing that his glory, power, and profit arises principally by the increase
of the peoples sins, has first taken away al bridles of canonical repentance,
and ancient discipline, and secondly given pardon, not only of penance
enjoined, which is nothing in effect, as you confess, but also of penance to be
enjoined, whereby he has set the sinner out of fear of al discipline, and so
at liberty to commit what wickedness he will, without punishment. Whereby it
appears how true it is that you said, that the pope was slaundered by them
that said, that for money you may obtain of the Pope a free pardon before
hand of any grievous sins that you commit afterward, when you now do
acknowledge that he gives pardons not only de iniunct is poenitentiis, but
also de iniungendis, of penance to be enjoined, which you extend further by
interpreting it of penance, that should or ought to be enjoined, though it be
not enjoined at all. So that it is all one in effect whether a man have a
pardon before hand of any greeues sin, or whether he has a pardon aforehand
of all punishment due for the same, or a pardon of course as they term it, for
his money, after he has committed the sin.


ALLEN. And this is the Churches meaning, in giving somanie days and years,
as be often times expressed in pardons, in titles of prayers, or use of
certain sanctified creatures, made holy by Gods word and prayer. Of which,
because we see not the original, and because by unlawful practice of Printers
or writters, the grauntes of diverse Bishops for multiplication of the years,
may be joined together, against the meaning of the giuers there may be some
forged, and not authentical, yet we will not stand in that point, because it
is certain, that such be indeed granted diverse times, by them that have
lawful authority in the Church. The undoubted sense whereof, though every man
may easelie understand by the premises, yet fully to open the case which is
now so common in most men's mouths, and not well considered of many; Look
how many days or years a man may deserve to be punished in this life, if
his sins were to the vttermoste taxed, and the appointed penance of the
Church fullfilled, so many years may the governors of the Church remit, and
forgive by a Pardon. But many a man may, and God knows, often times does
commit so many (...) offenses, continue so long in sin, live so wantonlie
and so carelessly, in all manner of wicked (...) even to his lives end
alalmoste, that being converted by Christer grace, and so departing hence in
his favor, as it often through much mercy falls, he must needs be in
exceeding great debt for so long a life so evil spent. And, I think, if you
call him to account for all his common and daily offenses, for all his days
vnthriftilie wasted, for every of his idle words, for every of his vain
thoughts, for so many occasions of good works omitted, which he ought to
have done, for often fellowship in other men's misdeedes besides his own, all
this willriseto a great debt in a men's case that never required in all his time
effectually, to have his debtes forgiven him, and therefore he must needs
stand much bound, even for his venial trespasses: which, though they deserve
not of their nature damnation eternal, yet being not remitted, they bind man
to transitory punishment, according to the number, time, and weight of them.

But now if you sit on the audit of the greater matters of this man's
conscience, where every of his sins deserved by the Churches limitation, for
correction only, after they be remitted, necre hand seven years penance, and
some many more, where he has done nothing else all his evil and long time, but
heaped sin upon sin, where infinite sacrilege boldly has bin committed,
where his flesh was never satisfied of most unlawful lusts, where his mind
was ever full of greedy gain, where his hands or heart were allwaies imbrued
with innocent blood, were no part of his mind or body has been free from
what iniquity you can name; in all this corrupt case of many a man's life,
where no good works (that I may use Saint Chrysostomes words) are found, by
which there may be any hope of release, where there is abundance of all
sins without any satisfaction in this lamentable state of a life so evil
spent, how many years penance (if it were possible for the party to live so
long) were he by the Churches judgment, by the weight of his wickedness, or
by Christ's justice, to be chardged with all? Surely if his life were not
only a thousand years (for so long almost aid some of the old Fathersliue)
but if it were ten thousand years, he could not fatisfiefor so much temporal
pain and bebt of sins, as reason law, and Gods justice would, and well might
charge him withal, though the great debt of everlasting damnation by Christ's
grace, were mercifully remitted in the Priests absolution at his confession
before. Threfore, whether the party live or die, he is in debt for such
penance, if rigor were showed, as so great sinner deserved. And if he lived
ten thousand years, he were bound in his life time, and in his body, to
accomplish as he might, the due penance for his deserts: and if he die
straight upon his repentance, he is not less bound by suffering pain and
punishment in the next world to fulfill the same. For gods justice leeseth no
right, because man leeseth his life.


FVLKE. As privy as you make your self to the Churches meaning, the popish
Church could have no good meaning in granting pardon for so many thousand
years, yea for so many hundredth thousand years, which the Church of Christ,
for a thousand years after Christ's ascension, never heard of Some part of the
fault is laid upon printers, and writers, which for lucre have increased the
numbers; but in the end the greater numbers are coufeised, for otherwise the
bulls of lead, as dumme as they be, would cry out against you. But whereas
these years be expressed in pardons, in titles of prayers, or use of certain
creatures, the last of these are said to be sanctified, and made holy by Gods
word and prayer. Why Sir? All the creatures of God are sanctified, in the
lawful use of them, by the word of God and by prayers, as the Apostle
teaches us, to which no such pardon is annexed. Who is he then that despising
the holiness given by God to all his creatures, in the ordinary use of them,
takes upon him to add agreater holiness to certain creatures, to apply them
to another use, and join not only holiness unto them; but also remission of
sins, and of pain due for sins to the use of them, for which he has no
word of God to warrant him, and therefore can have no prayer to help him?
surely this can be none other, then he that exalts himself above God, which
can make Gods creatures more holy then God has made them. But now for this
number of years, whereof you make your Audit at your pleasure, valuing men's
offenses in a heavy balla^ce to make your popes pardons seem more probable,
and saleable, your account nevertheless will fall short of many thousand years,
by your former reckoning. You confessed in the beginning of this Chapter, that
the satisfaction limited by the Canons was agreeable in all points to the debt
of sins forgiven, which God required for answer of his justice. Further you
must remember, that the Canons did limit times of penance, not only for an
act of sin, but also for customable continuance in such sins, as you may
see in the decrees of Iuo quoted by you before, and in the Ancyran Council.
Now if you will feign a man to be such a monster, as that he have committed all
these sins, for which the Canons do limit times, and have continued in them
also accustomablie, yet by those Canons he could not deserve so many thousand
years of penance as the Pope grants of pardon. Nay if you make your Audit
of the times limited sor all offenses, adding all the days, years, and Lents
prescribed in the Canons together, you shall not find the su^me of one
thousand years of penance due to be enjoined, if a man had committed al those
sins. Whereof it follows, that so many 1000 years as have bin ordinarily
granted by the Popes pardons, can have no such meaning, as your dream of
Audit and account surmiseth, and so it remains, that these numbers of years
were multiplied only to set a greater price of the pardons, and so to rob
both the purses of the people, and deceive their souls. For the old Canons
never appointed any time of penance for any time, exceeding the time of a
man's life: but 7. years 14. years, 24. years, etc, or to the end of a man's
life at the most, and always the party to be received at his end, though he
had not accomplished his time perfixed. It is not the time appointed by the old
canons therefore, that can excuse so many thousand years of pardon for pain
to be suffered in purgatory, seeing you acknowledge the time by them limited,
to be limited by the spirit of god, as agreeable in all points to the debt of
sins forgiven, which God requirerth for answer of his justice. But blessed be
god, who has taken sufficient satisfaction to answer his justice in the
obedience and suffering of Jesus Christ, which is our justice, in whom seeing
we are made the iustiee of God, we neither fear Allens Audit for purgatory,
nor desire the Popes mercy for pardon.


ALLEN. Neither is it necessary for the due payment of that great debt of so
many years, that the pain of purgatory should endure so long, or so many
years, as had been necessary for the accomplishing of his penance in this
life. For the might, the force,, the hougenes, the excess, and the nature of
the pain in the next world, is so fearful and so great, as Saint Augustine
often notes, that a great deal less time sufferance of the same, is
answerable to much more in the world and this Super psalm. 37.
present life. For what comparation is there berwixt a days fasting here, and
a days punishment in purgatory? better it were surely to suffer a hundred
years such penance as the Church prescribes in this mortal life, that has
in it much worldly ease, and comfort for the release of the enjoined pain,
then to abide one day or wecke in so grievous a torment, as the holy Doctors
and all the Church holds Purgatory to be. Therefore to forgive such a
grievous sinner in the latter end of his life received to mercy, as we have
now spoken of, a thousand or two thousand years of penance, is as much in
effect and nature of the terms, as to remit and release him of so much
punishment, or the debt and bond of so much punishment in purgatory, as is
proportional and correspondent to so many days or years Origin in Number. limp.
Hom. 11.
of penance, as the penitent in this life was bound unto by the Canons of the
Church, or the just inioyning of his Ghostly Father. For the Pardons measure
the matter, not by the limits of Purgatory, the bonds, borders, or way of
limitation, whereof the Church knows not, but by the years and times of
penance prescribed to sinners by the holy Canons, upon the bond whereof, Gods
justice temporal in the next world, does, as I have proved, much depend. To
be short then and plain, to give a pardon of a 10001. or 2000. years or more,
if the grant goes so, is as much to say, as to forgive so much punishment as
might be answerable for so great penance, not fullfilled in this life. As if I
were behind with the Church and indebted to God hard before my death of a
hundredth days fasting, in which case, I cannot recompense, if my Bishop
then, or the chief head of all the Eccle siasticall Hierachie do forgive me
twenty of the said days, then my punishment shall be so much less in
Purgatory, not by twenty days, I say, of Purgatory pains, but by as much
as in force of satisfaction there, is answerable to twenty days fast here. So
that, the Church measuring her mercies, by the years of penance deserved by
the law in this life, or else where, takes effect, not only in this life,
where there cannot be so many days in our short time, but especially in
preventing Purgatory pains, where there may well be punishment answerable in
a very short time, to all the days prescribed by the measures of the law,
and discipline of our present days in the world.


FVLKE. If the fire of Purgatory be so much hotter, then this elementall fire,
as this is hotter then a fire painted on a wall, as some of your own Poets
have fained, you may add this imaginary proportion, of greatness of pain
against length of time. And who can let you to imagine what you list? seeing
you require to be credited upon your bare word, without authority of
scripture, or witness of the ancient Doctors. But the holy Doctors, you say,
and all the Church holds purgatory to be so grievous a torment, and Saint
Augustine notes it often, namely in Psalm. 37. Verily Saint Austen in that
place says, that the fire, by which some that build straw, hay, etc. upon
the fundation Christ, shall be more grievous, then any thing that any man can
suffer in this life, but else where he can say nothing of certainty of the
fire of Purgatory, whether any such fire after this life be, or no, as de
fide and operibus, c. 6. de oct. dulcit. qu. 1. as I have showed more at large
in confutatio^ of your book of purgatory. You quote Origin also, but I know
not how, nor what to find by your quotation: but certain it is, that Origin
knew not the Popes purgatory; although he allegorize of a certain purgatory,
which neither the papists themselves do allow and it teaches the heresy
wherewith he is charged, that the devils and all wicked persons at length
shallbe saved. To conclude, the old canons granting remission to euerte man
that is prevented by death at his last end, had no meaning of any recompense
of years, and days in Purgatory, as without all proof or authority you do
so confidentlie affirm.


ALLEN. And yet I talk not now of taking or delivering anle man out of
Purgatory, so much sooner as so many days release does import, when he is in
it already, but I mean (as I often say for the simples sake) of him, that is
yet alive, and in the Churches jurisdiction, and therefore may have by the
keys of the Church a pardon of his dets, either all, or part, to prevent the
pains of Purgatory, or discharge the debt thereof, before that terrible day
come, when it shall be actuallie required. And in this sense undoubtedly are the
great number of years and days to be taken, which be exceeding necessary to
procure mercy in these evil times, wherein we may behold the pitifulwaste of
Christian works every where, and little penance to be done, no not of the
better sort of Christan people. As for the other disobedient children, that
every way laugh their mother to scorn, whether she use sextritie of
discipline, or lenity in remission, they have no part, neither of the Churches
blessing, nor of the holy works of Saints, nor of Gods own peace and pardon.
Our Lord give them the grace of repentance, that they may have a taste, either
of the Churcher discipline, or of her mercy and lensty.


FVLKE. You talk and mean that men should make haste while they are alive, to
take their pardons, whereof perhapes you are a proctor, or petty merchant
under the Pope, not regarding so much, what the Popes jurisdiction is over
poor souls in Purgatory, as how to get money out of living men's purses, for
pardons and dispensations, to mantaine you in your traitorous popery. Your
complaint of little penance done, is vain and hypocritical, seeing you your
self, by mantaining of pardons, are occasion that none at all need to be done
of them that have money to pay for them. God open the eyes of the simple, if it
be his will, to see your treachery, and either give you true repentance, orels
that which your treasons, heresies, and hypocrisy have long ago deserved.


It is proved as well by sundry examples of the old law, as by Christ's one
often fact and his Apostles, that enjoined or deserved punishment may be
released by the governors of the Church in their pardons.

THE 9. CHAP.
ALLEN. Some may here marvel perchance, that such power should be given to
mortal men, as to remit such great portion of penance, as by justice ought to
be enjoined, or such a number of years, as are appointed for satisfaction and
correction of former misdeeds, thereby to remove from the party the heavy
hand of god prepared for judgment, who would not wonder much hereat, if they
considered that the debt of hell pains and eternity of punishment, which
incomparably exceeds many thousand years, might by the Priests office,
and always is in the due execution of the sacrament of penance, fully removed
from the party penitent. And where mercy puts away deserved damnation,
there may much less force of grace turn away the punishment of Purgatory,
being not transitory, and equivalent only to the penance of a number of
years prescribed. In which case, if the Church of God should have no
pre-eminence now after the incarnation of Christ, since which time the waiet of
mercy toward mankind must needs be much enlarged, our state and government
should be much inferior to the regiment and to the priesthood of the old law,
which truly did in all things, but as a shadow and figure, resemble the Majesty
of our Churches prcheminence, especially there, where mercy and grace were to
be showed, which came by Christ Jesus.

Behold then some sleppe of this most excellent power given to our chief
Priests, in the persons of Moses and Aaron, who are noted in the book of
Exodus and Numbers meruelouslie to have procured Gods mercy, and sometimes by
force of sacrifice, prayer, and singular zeal, to hauereleased some great
portion of the pains and punishment which God himself by his own mouth and
determination had laid upon the people. With what marvelous confidence of his
office, and pity of the afflicted sort, did one of them cry out unto god to
hold his hand, and pardon the people, after they had deserved se great
punishment for worspiping the golden Idol of the Calfe in the wilderness? Lord
( says Moses) this people has committed an horrible sin, and they have
erected golden Gods. Forgive them this sin, Lord, or else if thou will not,
dash me out of thy book to, which thou have written. This governor and this
priest, prayed not after a common sort for pardon of the peoples punishment,
but he claims it wish confidence, and in a manner requires it as by his
jurisdiction and office. Such was the force of prayer and priesthood, before
Christ's spiritual souer aignitie was honored in the world, otherwise then in
a figure. And yet, god in a manner, was at that point with them then, that he
would pardon and punish at their pleasures. For when the sin was exceeding
grievous, he makes as it were means to Moses, that he should not stay him,
nor his anger, from punishing of the offenders, Let me alone Moses ( says our
Lord) and suffer me to be angry. Ibid.



FVLKE. Men may justly marvel, that you professing method, do set the Cart
before the horse, and frame of your building, the roof, before the foundation:
but if they consider that this way you take is of more force to confound a
simple wit, then to teach a matter plainly, they may cease to marvel; and
acknowledge that the compass of your cause, whereof you speak in the
beginning, will abide none other order. But to the matter and argument of this
Chapter it has bin answered before, that in the discipline of the Church, the
governors thereof have power upon good consideration, and trial of the
offenders repentance, and not otherwise, at their pleasure to release enjoined
time of repentance, which was enjoined for none other end so much, as to bring
the party to repentanes and thereof to assure, or satisfy the Church. But as
the discipline of the Church militant, serves for the only time of her
warfare in this life, so the governors of the Church have no authority either
to inioyne, or to release, out of the compass of this life. And therefore this
power of binding and loosing upon earth, cannot be extended to any purgatory
pains, or rather pickpurse, after this life, and consequently it can be no
shadow to cover the filthy and blasohemous nundination and chaffering of the
Popes pardons, for thousands and hundredth thousands of years. What authority
the ministers of the Church have in remitting sins, has been handled
sufficiently before. They are Gods messengers, to declare his forgiveness to
them that truly repent, and so they are to release the band of discipline in
open offenders, where the fruits of repentance do appear. Your argument,
that the priesthood in the new law is of more power to purchase mercy, then in
the old law, to prove that the Popes pardons extend unto purgatory, is
very far fett. For the priest hood of our savior Christ, has succeeded to
the priesthood of the law, as the body to the figure or shadow thereof. But
purchasing of mercy pertains not to the ministers of the Church, but
preaching and declaring of Gods mercy: wherein they excel the preaching
office of the priests of the law, in more large, plain, and clear
demonstration thereof, in Christ exhibited, borne, suffered, raised from dead,
and ascended into heaven, not in the matter of mercy, or the only mean
meritorius to obtain it, which is Jesus Christ. As for the discipline of the
Church now, is not unlike to the discipline then, neither is there any cause
in respect of Christ exhibited, that it should be any Iooser now, then it was
then. For the grace of God which brings salvation to all men has appeered,
instructing us that we should utterly deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
live soberlie, justly, and godly in this Tit. 2. 11. etc.
world waiting for the blessed hope, and glorious appearing, of the great god,
and our savior Jesus Chist, which has given himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniouity, and purge us a peculiar people unto himself,
zealous of good works. Thus the holy Ghost describes the end and effect of the
mercy of God in Christ exhibited, chargeing Titus to speak and exhort to
these things, to reprehend with alearnestnes, and suffer no man to contemn
him. There is no cause therefore why the sinnews of discipline in the Church of
Christ, should be loosened, or rather cut in sunder by the Podes pardons,
which takes upon him to release all time of repentance appointed by the
governors of the Church, under pretense of greater mercy showed by Christ,
then was showed in the old law. But Maises and Aaron, you say, procured
mercy and pardon for the people, and then you bring in the example of paid no
breined for worshipping the golden Image of a calse, where Aaron him selse was
so deep in, that he was no meet person to make intercession for others. But
in the example you prove not any power or jurisdiction of priesthood, which
does ser forth only the effect of the prayer of the faithful, as Saint James
suth of Helias, that he was a man and yet obtained great things by his prayer.
Neither does Moses pray with confidence of his priest lie office, which he had
not: for Aaron was priest, both by the law of nature, as the elder, and
afterward by Gods especial appointment, but Moses prays upon confidence of
Gods promises, which were these, that the people should be brought into the
land of Chanaon, and that Christ should come of the tribe of Judah, which could
not have had their effect, if all the people had been destroyed, though a
great nation had been made of Moses. He strengthens his faith also, by two
other reasons in his prayer, the one of the glory of God, which should be
blasphemed by the Egyptiens, if the people were destroyed in the wilderness, the
other of the benefits of God already bestowed upon the people, which should
be in vain, if the people should thus sodenlie be consumed. But of claiming
it with confidence of his priesthood, and requiring it, as by his jurisdiction
and office, there is no mention. For what jurisdiction or office could he have
to control God in his judgments? And therefore it is a horrible blasphemous
saying, that God in a manner was at that point with them, that he would pardon
and punish at their pleasures. Where your meaning is yet more biasphemous, that
God should much rather he at that point now, to pardon and punish, at the Popes
pleasure, which is nothing else, but to exalte Antichrist above God, when his
justice and mercy should depend upon that devil incarnates pleasure. Yet for
reason to excuse this blasphemy, you say, that God makes as it were means
to Moses, that he should not stay him, nor his anger from punishing of the
offenders: Let me alone Moses (says our Lord) and suffer me to be angry. But
who is so meanly exercised in the scriptures, that he does not acknowledge,
that this speech of God, as a thousand more in the scriptures, is uttered after
the affection and infirmity of man, whereof God is most free, yet
condescending to the weakness of man's understanding, often uses so to speak?
Of which phrases of speech, who so shall conclude as you do, may infer an
hundred horrible heresies, and more. The true sense therefore of those words
is, that the people indeed had deserved to be destroyed, but that he had
otherwise determined at the prayer of Moses, and for those causes, which his
spirit instructed Moses to utter, whom by this speech he provoke and
stirs up to pretty for the people, he was purposed to pardon and spare them,
not that he ever was of mind to submitt his justice and mercy to men's
pleasure, in such sort as he should be driven to make means to men, that he
might execute his judgments, and show his mercy, both which he does
according to his own most free will, most excellent wisdom, and incomparable
glory.


ALLEN. So when his sister Marie was punished by a leprosy for envying at her
brothers authority, he cried unto our Lord and Number. 12.
said: Lord God heal her again of this disease, and of his mercy so he did,
inioyning only unto her seven days separation. Aaron also procured pardon
for the people by the Number. 16.
like force of his prayer, and prieslhood, when by sedition the people had
highly offended God: yea he did as it were limitte and moderate Gods appointed
punishment, that his wrath should extend no farther, but to the deslruction of
a certain number. For when God said unto Moses and Aaron, depait you hence
from amongst this people, for even now will I consume them. Upon which word
straight the destruction began and grew very sore, a flame of fire pitifully
consuming them. But Aaron out of hand with his incense, ran to that part
where the plague of Gods ire wasted most, and there censed up toward heaven,
and carnestlie requested for the people, and so placing him even just betwixt
those that were slain, and the residue that were alive, the wrath and
indignation of God ceased.


FVLKE. Moses by his prayer obtained of God that he did heal his sister of her
Ieprosie, Ergo the Pope by his pardons may release men of the punishment laid
on them by God. when in his pardons he uses not humble prayers, but stands
upon his power and jurisdiction, upon the power of Peter and Paul, and in pain
of their indignation, beside Gods wrath, and sometimes most presumptuouslie
commands the angels to execute his pleasure. But whereas God enjoined to
Marie seven days separation, you should have made your argument somewhat more
probable, if you could have showed out of the scripture, that Moses by his
pontifical jurisdiction, released those days, or any part of them. The
example of Aarons intercession, as he was the high priest, showed the effect of
Christ's priesthood, of whom he was a figure, whose perfect sacrifice
represented in the incense, was a sweet savor of reconciliation unto God, for
the preservation not only of the Israelites, but of all Gods elect both from
temporal and eternal destruction. This example of Aarons incense therefore is
as far differing from the Popes pardons, as Aarons office differs from
Antichrists presumption.


ALLEN. But it were to long to make rehersall of all such punishments as God
has afflicted his people with all for sin, and yet has been either wholly
put of, or much thereof abated by these priests even of the old law, when
they had no warrant, promise, nor commission in sacrament or otherwise, either
to bind or loose, as by jurisdiction, or any otherwise, but by their prayers:
where ours of the new law and testament have expresselie received a full power
and commission concerning the same. Therefore now in the new law and in the
days of grace, where mercy and judgment be met together, truth and peace be
joined, we shall find express examples of justice and judgment on the one
side, and grace and mercy on the other, Psalm. 84.
not only in the government of Popes and Bishops, but in Christ's own
regiment and his holy Apostles, from whom to our priests, all this power
prooceedeth. In them then, of whom heresy and falshoode do stand in awe,
let us see whether any examples may be found of pardoning the pain due for
sin. The seven devils possession of one woman's body, was no small punishment
for sin: yet when it pleased Christ, he both forgave her the sin, and
discharged her of that horrible punishment for the same: and she had a graund
pardon and a plenarie Indulgence, because she loved much. Yea a woman thae had
committed adultery, and therefore by the law subject to Lucae. 7, and 8
death, was pardoned by Christ, not only of her sin and damnation, but of
that penalty which by Gods law she was subject Ion. 8.
unto for the same sin, whereby he declared that he had full power, not only
to remit sins, but also to give pardon for any temporal punishment provided
by law for sin. Where are they, woman, that do accuse thee? quoth Christ:
Here is none here, said she, Lord. If none have condemned thee, go thy way
therefore, and sin no more. And this is the 8. of Saint John's Gospel.


FVLKE. If the Priests of the old law had no warrant, promise, or commission,
to bind, or loose, any way, but by their prayers, for as much as the duty of
prayer is not proper to priests, but common to al faithful persons, you can
prove no shadow of the power of Priests in releasing Gods punishment by their
putting of or abating such punishment by prayer only. Although you say
untruly, that they had no warrant of binding and loosing in sacrament, or
otherwise. For they had power and commission to separate the clean from the
unclean, to exclude from the participation of the Sacraments and sacrifices,
to cast out of the sinagogue, and to receive again. But thereof I will not
dispute at this time. That is a greater matter, you speak of, that Christ
himself gave a pardon. Who doubreth but that Christ had fullnes of power, to
pardon according to his divine pleasure. If the Pope may do whatsoever Christ
did, let him cast out Devils, cleanse the Lepers, raise the dead, yea let him
make another world. But where you say, that the adulteres, John. 8. was
pardoned by Christ of the temporal penalty, that she was subject unto by
Gods law for her sin, that was stoning to death, you speak beside the
Gospel, for there is no one word to prove it, but rather Christ shows that
he had not to do with civil punishments, as when he refused to divide the
inheritance between the brethren, and discovers the hypocrisy of the
Pharisees, who when they had no authority to execute any offendour by death,
being restreined by the Roman laws and power, come to tempt him, that either
he should give sentence of her, against the law of God, or else seem cruel in
pronouncing sentence of death against her, whose life the civil authority did
spare. What is here like the Popes pardons? or what has any pardon of Christ
like to the Popes pardons?


ALLEN. Which example I allege the rather, because Saint Augustine noreth it
as a strange power and jurisdiction, that should remit the punishment enjoined
by the law it self for a public Epist. 54.
crime, where the person was taken with the manner. Yea he applies it to the
Priests, and Bishops, and proves, that it becomes them at the lest to make
intercession to the temporal officers, by occasion, for the release of
offenders, even where they be subject unto the appointed punishment of the
laws. Wherein, he says, that though they cannot by their authority command
their release, yet that it behooves the Civil Magistrates to release the
pain, where they do make request. For which cause Macedonius a Magistrate had
challenged Saint Augustine, or rather asked him the question, why Bishops did
so much intermedle in the temporal judgment for procuring pardon to
offenders, in so much that they would not take it well, if they obtained not
the remission of the parties punishment, for whom they made intercession. To
whom Saint Augustine answers trimelie and largely: where amongst other
things he says, Ipse Dommus intercessit, ne lapidaretur adultera, and eo modo
nobis commendautt intercessionis officium. Our Lord himself made intercession
for the woman taken in adultery, and by that fact commended unto us the office
of intercession. And Saint Augustine excommunicated County Bonifacius, that he
took from the Church an offendour, and put him to execution, Epist. 187.
when he came to the Church for mercy and pardon. So prone has Gods Church
ever been to remit the pain for sin deserved, not only where she had full
authority to pardon at her pleasure, but even there where it could not
otherwise be had, but by intercession to other men who had to do therewith.


FVLKE. You quote Saint Augustines epist. 54 ad Macedonium, as though he should
note it a strange power and iurisction, that should remit the punishment
enjoined by the law it self for a public crime But there is no such note of
any such strange power and jurisdiction in all that Epistle. In deed he
supposes that this duty of intercession for offenders, is commended to the
Ecclesiastical persons by this example, and that Magistrates are to be moved
with pity, to pardon offenders at their request. But he speaks not of any
power or jurisdiction in this intercession, but of humble petition. Our Lord
him self, says he, was a mean among men, that the adulteres should not be
stoned, and by that means commended to us the duty of intercession, saving
that he did it by terrifying, that we do by petition. For he was the Lord, and
we are his servants, yet he so terrifyed, that we all ought to fear. For
which of us is without sin? which when he had said to them, by whom the
sinner was offered to be punished, that he which knew himself to be without
sin should first cast a stone at her, their cruelty fell down by trembling
of their conscience. For then they slipping away out of that congregation,
left the poor wretch alone to him that is merciful. Let the piety of
Christians give place to this sentence, to which the impiety of the Jews gave
place: let the humility of them that are obedient give place to that, to which
the pride of persecutors gave place: let the confession of the faithful yield to
that, whereto yielded the dissembling of the tempter. What have we here for
this strange jurisdiction? or for the Popes pardons in this example, or in the
example of Saint Augustine excommunicating or suspending of Bonifacius for
violating the privilege of the Church in taking away a man worthy to die,
that fled thither for succor, when he did not execute, as you say, but
restored him unhurt to life, as appearerh by his answer. The pronnesse of
Ecclesiastical persons unto mercy and pity, may be gathered by this example,
but no argument to prove the Popes pardons to be good, that I say not, it may
be doubted whether such clemency stands with Gods justice, that commands
the murderer to be drawn even from his altar and to be executed. And
Augustine himself in his Epistle of intercession commends the punishing
mercy, and con demneth Exodus 21. 14.
the pardoning cruelty: beside that, we must live according to laws, and not
according to examples. Macedo. 54.



ALLEN. Again Christ delivered in the fifth of Saint John, one that had been
feeble eight and thirty years long for a punishment of his sins: and that
he might understand, that, that sickness came unto him for correction of his
former offenses, he said unto him after in the temple: Lo, thou art made wholl,
look thou sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. Neither is it
unlike, but the party had his sins remitted long before Christ healed him of
his corporal infirmity, by the sacrifices of the law, and by ordinary means
of that time, through the faith in Christ Jesus. Whereby you may perceive, that
our high Bishop Christ has given pardon to many, not only of their sins
and ever lasting damnation, but also of the temporal pain and punishment,
either prescribed by the law, or enjoined by Gods own appointment. Then we
need not wonder, that the Churches officer, holding by his right both the
title to pardon and to punish, should be by his example so prone to mercy,
which of the two is always most commended in spiritual regiment.


FVLKE. Christ healed many that suffered punishment of bodelie diseases for
their sins, to show that he was appointed of god to be the heavenly physician
to heal the diseases of our souls by pardoning our sins. But that the
party whereof you speak, had his sins remitted long before Christ healed
him of his corprall infirmity by sacrifices of the law, and ordinary means
of that time, through the faith in Christ Jesus, though you say, it is like,
yet it is very unlike. For he had laien eight and thirty years in the portch
of Siloam, waighting for the miraculous manner of healing, that God showed at
certain times upon them that first entered aster the water of the poole was
moved. All which time it is not like, that he could be partaker of the
sacrifices, or ordinary means, by which remission of sins thorough faith in
Jesus Christ was testified to the participants of those means. But rather, as
his own words sound, it is like he was only attentive to the usual mean
which God showed to attein health of body thereby, not caring for true
repentance, and conversion to god, yet it appears he had small taste of
spiritual doctrine, when he knew not of whom he received the benefit of
health, and so was vnthankesull unto him for it. But what is concluded out of
this example? that the officers of the Church in spiritual regiment, ought to
be prone to mercy. Many examples prove that more directly: but that the
officers of the Church have power to punish and pardon as Christ had, this
example proves not.


ALLEN. Nevertheless we mean not, that the priest has always such power as
Christ had in remoouing of bodelie sickness, not only because they know not
when it is the deserved pain for sin, as he did, but also because, as Saint
Augustine says, Remissio in Ecclesia magis fit propter futurum iudicium:
Pardoning in the Church has more respect to the judgment of the next world:
he means by the temporal judgment, and for that he alleges out of Saint
Paull, that the judgment, which he wills us to prevent by punishing our
selves, is the correction of such as God loves, lest, they be damned with the
world, which cannot signify the everlasting judgment. We mean not then,
that the Pardons of the Ecclesiastical Magistrates should perteine to the
releasing of bodelie pains duly deserved for sin, or for other causes
appointed, because Christ so did not unto all, but unto some, as it pleased his
wisdom: but this we say, that as he of his mercy took away and released
the sinners of certain temporal afflictions, as well appointed by the law of
Moses, as enjoined by Gods own hand, and so gave a Pardon of that which both
Moses and his own Father appointed: even so may the Apostles and their
successors, pardon any man, that is worthy of that benefit, of some part
or all such penance, as their own law prescribed, or the justice of God, upon
the bond of their decrees, and the debt of the sinners, has in the next life
prepared. Although, as I have once noted before, not only the Apostles
miraculouslie, but also Gods Priests daily do heal in the sacrament of
extreme unction and prayers, not only sins, but the penitent of their
sickness and infirmity, where the disease especially came of sin, as I suppose,
or otherwise, when it is expedient to the party, and glorious to Gods name.


FVLKE. You were bold to say before, that if any man were sick by Gods
appointment, for that cause only to satisfy for his sins remitted, that he
should straight recover by the Popes pardon, which is to grant him such power
as Christ had in remoouing ofbodelie sickness suffered for the cause above
specified. That the priest wants this power, because he knows not when
bodelie sickness is the deserved pain for sin (as though there were any
pain that were not deserved for sin) it is no reason. For an empirike
heals by virtue of his medicines oftentimes, though he know not the cause of
the sickness, and so should the priest by laying to his plaster, if he had any
such: but none ever recovered suddenly by the Popes pardon, or the priests
power, therefore it is a fained for gerie that they have any such power of
healing bodelie diseases. It is a better reason that you allege out of Saint
Augustine, that remission of sins in the Church respects the judgment to
come, but that he speaks there of any temporal judgment after this life, you
are not able to prove. Neither does the citing of the text of Saint Paull. I.
Cor. II. help you, which he cites to prove. that temporal pains are laid
upon men, in this life, to them whose sins are done away, that they should
not be reserved to the end, as his words are plain in that wholl Chapter.
Magis enim propter futurum iudicium fit remissio peccatorum. In hac autem vita,
etc. For remission of sins ie made rather for the judgment to come. For in
this life it prevails so much which is written: a heavy yoke upon the sons
of Adam, from the day of their coming forth of their mothers womb, unto the
day of their burial into the mother of all: thus we see even little children
after the lauer of regeneration, to be tormented with the affliction of diverse
evils: that we may understand, that all which is dove by the healthful
sacraments. does pertain rather to the hope of good things to come, then to
reteining or obteining things present. Many evils also seem to forgiven
here, and to be revenged with no punishments, but the pains of them are
reseruea until afterward. For not in vain is that called properly the day
of judgment, when the judge of the quick and the dead shall come. As on the
contrary side, some things are revenged here, and yet if they be remitted,
verily in the world to come they shall not hurt. Wherefore of certain
temporal pains, which are laid upon sinners in this life, in them whose
sins are done away, that they should not be reserved unto the end, the
Apostle says: for if we judged our selves, we should not be judged of the
Lord, but when we are judged of the Lord, we are chastened, that we should not
be damned with this world. Thus it is plain by Saint Augustines judgment,
that Saint Paull speaks of temporal pains, laid upon sinners in this
life, to bring them to repentance, not of temporal judgment to be exercised
after this life. But you mean not that Popes, or Bishops pardons, should
always take away bodelie sickness, because Christ did not so unto ai. Nay
rather because they are not able to heal a sore finger in any one man. For
Christ healed as many as he would: if the Pope have Christ's power, why should
he not as well heal whom he will? Your similitude, that as Christ took away
temporal pains, so may Popes and priests, holds not: for there is great
odds between Christ, and his servants. he did what he would, they may do no
more then he has given chem power and charge. And for releasing of times of
repentance, appointed to satisfy the Church, they may by power given from him:
but for the releasing of debt to be paid in the world to come, he gave them
neither authority, nor commandment. That the priest does daily heal in your
sacrament of aneling, it is an impudent lie. For first, they anoint none in
their daily practice, but such as are in despair of life: of whom if any
recover by the wilof God, it is sacrilege to impure it to the power of the
priests anointing, who hauenot the gift of healing, as the elders of the
Apostles Church had, whom S. James wills to be sent for, to heal the
diseased.


ALLEN. But in Saint Paull we have invincible proof of the authority and
jurisdiction of Bishops and princivali pastcurs, touching as well the power of
enjoined pename and satisfaction for sins committed, as the lawful power of
pardoning the same which before was enjoined, and so in one fact of the Apostle
a clear practice of binding and loosing. He first bound him by excommunication
that had so greeuouslie offended, and to show what a terrible torment this
kind of panishment is, and how much it is to be dred, he makes it evident by
a slraunge corporal vexation, that all Chrillian men might conceive the
misery of those persons which be excommunicated hereafter, when the external
sign and miraculous torment should cease in the Church. I wili report the
matter fully: There was amongst the 1. Cor. 5.
Corinthians one of reputation, that kept unlawfully his fathers wife, the
which being known to their Apostle Saint Paul, who then was absent srom them,
and being accounted of him, as in deed it was, an exceeding grievous fact and
notorious, he gave in charge to the Church of Corinth, to take the person that
had so offended, as excommunicated, that is to say, to be separated from the
sacraments, the service, and common fellowship of Saints. But see with what a
majesty and might of operation, with what force of words, and authority of
his calling, with what a kind of punishment Christ's officer here corrects
the offender. Thus runs his determinate sentence, on the offender, that all
the world may take heed and wonder at the Churches authority, and condemn
the vain voices of them that do restrain the power of Gods ministers only
to the preaching of the Gospel. I being absent in body, but present in
spirit, have already given judgment, as well as if I were present, that the
person, that has thus wickedlie wrought, should be delivered vpto Satan, in
the virtue of our Lord Christ Jesus, you there being gathered with my spirit
in the name of our said Lord Christ Jesus, and all for the vexation of his
flesh, that his soull may be safe in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. This in
effect, is the Apostles sentence on that incestuous person, whereby he was
temporallie tormented by the force of Saint Paul's power of binding sinners,
given by Christ, and exercised no otherwise, as you may see, but in Christ's
virtue and holy name. Where it may be noted for a strange (...) of man's word,
that the devil himse fe should be thereby appointed to torment a sinners body,
not as he would, but as far as the divine Magistrate shall limit him. Diabolus
enim, quia ad hoc paratus est, vt auerses a Deo (...) in potestatem, audita In
1. cap. 1. ad Tim.
sententia, corripit eos. The (...) (says Saint Ambrose) who is always ready
to take them to his power, that are turned from God, sireight as soon as he
hears the sentence pronounced upon sinners, he does afflict and correct them.
As it may also appear by our Saviors words in the Gospel, of a woman that
had spiritum infirmitatis, the spirit of infirmity, whom the devil had
eighteen years together fast bound in sickness for Luc. 13.
her sins, to whom also Christ gave a pardon by imposition of his holy
hands. Where we may have an other example of his mercy, in loosing the
temporal band and punishment appointed for sin.

But let us turn to Saint Paul's patient, whom we left by the key of the
Apostles jurisdiction so fast locked and bound for his wickedness, and let us
consider whether by the sime jurisdiction, he may not receive pardon and be
loosed, by which he was bound and punished before: Yea let us not doubt but it
stood in Pauis pleasure, to padon the man sooner or later. as he thought most
convenient for the Churches edifying, and the parties profit, and therefore
might have tied him for twenty years together either in Satan's bonds, or
other enjoined penance, or conirarie, if he had thought expedient, might have
loosed him within one hour, and so have given him so many days of pardon as
he list, and meant to recompense by Christ's satisfaction and the communion of
Saints, in which, the lackes of certain may be supplied by the abundance of
others. Thus Saint Paul meaning to pardon the penitent, gives the Church of
Corinth to understand his pleasure touching the said sinner, that there 2.
Cor. 2.
stood in the bands of penance, upon his former sentence. Lot his (...) and
check given him of many, be enough. And now rather, it were expedient that you
did forgive him and comfort him, lest perhapps, he be drowned (...) (...) with
excessive sorrow. Therefore (...) (...), renew and confirm your love toward
(...) (...) move you in this matter to prove, (...) (...) you be obedien in
all things. And where you (...), there do I forgive also. In deed as for me,
(...) (...), it is for your sake, and in the person of (...), that we be not
circumuented of the devil, whose meaning (in such matters) I well understand.
That you (...) did the Apostle punish, and thus did he remie again, (...) the
moderation of the Churchs discipline in his (...), so far as his jurisdiction
did extend amongst Christ's people, whose obedience in all such matters be
claimed, as you may perceive by his own words, yet not without great respect
and consideration of the offenders case, and especial care of the Churches
edifying. For full (...) Saint Augustine said: In action autem poenitentioe,
vbi tale crimen commissum est, vt Cap. 65. Enchir.
is qui commisit a Christi etiam corpore separetur, non tam consideranda est
mensura temporis, quam doloris: In the docing of penance, where the sin is
such that, it deserves excommunication, there is not so much respect to be had
of the time, as of his sorowfullnes that committed the fact.


FVLKE. So long as you will gather nothing but the exercise of Christian
discipline, in binding and loosing, excommunicating and absoluing, inioyning of
Canonical (...), and pardoning of the sin, out of this example of Saint
Paul, you have an invincible proof of the authority or jurisdiction of the
governors of the Church of Christ, against which we will never contend. But
when you will urge more then the text will aford, you can gain no victory at
our hands. As first, that the deuist was is aopointed to torment the sinners
body, it is not proved by this text. And Saint Ambrose, whom you cite upon
Timothic, speaking of the punishments of Hymineus and Alexander, who perhapes
were tormented for their blasphemy, does not so think upon this very text,
but expounds this delivery unto Satan to the destruction of the flesh, to be
his casting out of the Church, which is the kingdom of god, into the power of
Satan, as one that had deserved destruction both of body and soul, that his
carnal lust might be over come or mortified: which Saint Augustine expounds
also in like manner, and more plainly. Quidergo agebal Apostelus? nisi vt per
interitum carnis (...) spiritual, (...), vt sieve aliqua poena (...) corporali,
sicut Ananias and vxer (...) ante pedes Apostole Petri ceciderunt: sieve per
(...), quoniam Satana traditus erat, interimeret in se sceleratam carnis
concupisientiam quia ipse (...) dicit, (...) membra vestia quae sunt super
terram, inter quae and for nicationem commemorat. Et iterum, Si enim Cont.
Epist. (...). c. 3. lib. 1.
(...) carnem vixeritis, moriemini, etc. For what did the Apostle? but that by
destruction of the flesh, he might provide for his spiritual health: that
whether by some temporal pain or death, as Ananias and his wife fell down
before the Apostle Peter's seet, or whether by repentance, because he was
delivered to Satan, he might kill in himself the wicked concupiscence of the
flesh. For he says also, Mortify your members which are upon earth, among
which he rehearses fornication. And again, for if ye shall live according to
the flesh, ye shall die. By this you may see, the opinion of corporal torment
in this discipline of S. Paul, is not necessary. Again where you say, it
stood in Paul's pleasure, to pardon the man, sooner, or later, and he gives the
Corinthians to understand his pleasure touching the said sinner, you would
perswad the ignorant, that the gouerners of the Church vere bound to no law,
or rule in these matters, but might do what pleased them. Although in the
former you mittigate the matter, by adding, as he thought most convenient, for
the Churches edisying, and the parties profit, which is well said, if by his
thought you mean a sound and right judgment. For the matter is not left to
every man: thinking, more then to their pleasure, but to a Godly and
necessary consideration. And therefore it stood not in Paulles pleasure to
pardon the man, sooner then he saw in him the fruits of repentance, nor
later, then he had certain intelligence thereof. Neither might he have tied
him for twenty years, but upon condition to release him immediately upon his
true repentance, neither have loosed him within an hour, except within the
space of that hour he had sufficient arguments of his repentance, and
satisfaction of the Churches offense and judgment. The reasons that he
alleges, why he judged him now to be pardoned. do show no less, lest he be
swallowed up by too much sorrow, lest we be intercepted by Satan. It was not
lawful for the Apostle, to suffer the penitent to be overcome with too much
sorrow, not the Church to be circumuented by Satan. Therefore it was not
lawful for him to have differred his loosing any longer. As for the
recompencing by Christ's satisfaction and the communion of Saints, which is the
blasphemous dispensation of the imaginary treasure of the popish Church, is
not mentioned in this text, nor in any text of the bible, nor in any ancient
Father, but was lathe devised, to set a gloss upon the popes pardons, and
practizes in purgatory. In the end you say well, both, that the Apostle had
great respect of the offenders case, and care of the Churches edifying, which
proves, that without neglecting that consideration and care, he might not
sooner or later have loosed him, nor tied him, otherwise then he did. And the
saying of Augustine does prove well, that the prescript times of penance,
limited before his age, were not so convenient, as the liberty of time, where
in the parties repentance might be judged best, as it was in the Apostles.


That the Church of God means not to make all men partakers of the pardons
which would seem to be rel eued thereby, but such only, as be of sit
disposition therefore, and how they ought to be qualified, that must be
partakers thereof.

THE 10. CHAP.
ALLEN. IT is here necessary therefore that we should advertise al men, that
the Popes and Bishops of holy Church, though they have not only by
Christ's express word, but also by the warrant of the Apostles, and practice
of their predecessors, authority to bind and loose, yet cuerse of their
Pardons or releasing of penance, not always to be beneficiali to every one
that shall claim benefit thereby, either in the world present, or the next.
For the holy sacraments themselves do not at all times attain to that effect
in man, for which they were instituted by Christ, through the unworthiness of
the party that should receive them. Therefore to make the Pardons beneficial,
at there must be good consideration and respect in the giver, so the receiver
must, by especial love, zeal, and devotion, be made fit and apt to be par
taker of so singular a treasure.

The giver of the Pardons, because he is man, may have sinester respect to the
parties person, whom he seeks to pleasure, either for kindred, for
frindship, for fear, for riches, for honor, and such like: and they which
required them, may for slouthfullnes, because they lost not do penance for
their sins, or for delicateness whiles they refuse to abstain from things
that be pleasant, for recompense of their pleasures past: in these and such
other cases, some Popes may give by the abuse of their keys and authority, or
by error, proceeding on false suggestion, a pardon, as the penitent may also
receive in the face of man. But let them assure themselves that so be
affected, that God himself, who cannot be deluded, nor by sinester affection
carried from just judgment, will not here confirm the sentence of his servant,
who was in this matter either himself to blame, without cause to bestow so
precious a pearl of Gods mercy, or else the party unfit, that required to be
partaker of that grace, whereof, before God he is proved unworthy. Though the
pre-eminence be never so great, yet as (...) the keie of order may err through
the fault of one party in remitting sins in the sacrament, as the keic of
jurisdiction may err, in pardoning the enjoined penance out of the sac (...).
Therefore it is not good for (...) man to leave his (...) (...) vndore, or to
omie such necessary works of (...) (...), at whereby he shalrather be
unworthie to be partaker of a (...).


FVLKE. If the poopish Church have another meaning, then the Pope, the head in
meaning is divided from the body. The Popes meaning is (...) by his words,
which he uses in his Pardons. If the Pope also have a contrary meaning to his
words, what is he then but an impupent dissembler, which (...) great things,
and deceives them that pay for them, which suppose, that their ware is as good
as it seems to be? But by your determination, the matter is altogether
mistaken. Your first reason to prove that pardons are not always beneficial
to the receivers, is, that the sacraments have not always their effect,
thorough the unworthiness of the receivers. But if the receiver be disposed
according to the conditions expressed in the pardon, he is capable of it by the
judgment of the canonists. Your second reason, is the sinister respect, or
error that may be in the giver. But it is not right, that the receiver being a
capable person, especially having paid for his ware, should leese his benefit
thorough the default of the giver, if he be such a one as has authority to
give. That slouthfulnes or delicatnes should exclude a man from the benefit of
his pardon, that is in state of grace, as they term it, I suppose you are not
able to prove by any grounds of popery. The gloss upon the Bull of Iubileie
first granted by Pope Boniface 8. says, that the Pope declared
consistorially, that penances enjoined before, are also taken away by
commutation of the satisfactotic work in this pardon prescribed, and that
vows also, except the vow of Jerusalem, are taken away by this paidon, not
only those vows which were enjoined for commutation of penance, as for
satisfaction of sins, but also those vows that have no such respect, as if a
man being in danger of the sea, or in siknes, do vow to go to S. Ieames. So
that if a man will perform such penance or vows it is but a work of
supererogation. But if the Pope may so easily err in occupying of his key of
jurisdiction as here you pretend, no man can have confidence in any pardon, or
dispensation of the Pope, because he can not be assured, whether the keie did
err in that pardon or jurisdiction: likewise seeing the key of order may so
easily go awrie, what trust may a poor Papist have, that his sins be
forgiven him, that must hang upon the hitting or missing of tow so uncertain
keys?


ALLEN. Christ our Lord pardoned Mary Magdelen of many sins, and by all
likelihood forgave her all the pain due for her greeuaus offenses, both
eternal and temporal. Marie she was wonderfully well framed and apt to
receive such a singular benefit, for she loved exceeding much, and therefore
much was forgiven her. She washed Christ's feet with her Luc. 7.
tears, and with her hear of her head she wiped them again. She honored
Christ's body with ointment of price toward his burial, with other such
express tokens of passing love of our Lord, which did win her a pardon of so
many sins. For of love it is written, Charitas operit multitudinem
peccatorum, Charity covers a number of faults. And yet 1. Pet. 4.
after all this large remission, if we believe histories of the Church, she
ceased not all her life to do passing penance.


FVLKE. It is certain that Christ pardoned the sinful woman, whereof Saint
Luke speaks, as well of Luc. 7. 48.
all pain, as of all sin. And she was wonderfully well framed to receive his
pardon by the grace of God, by which she was endewed with faith, as he
himself acknowledges, saying unto her, thy faith has saved thee. And this
her faith was not idle, but wrought thorough love, which she acknowledged,
ought to be the greater, as she had received the greater mercy, and so gave
forth great tokens thereof. But her love was not cause of her pardon, or
forgiveness of her sins: but because many sins were forgiven her, therefore
she loved much, as she had greater cause, for he to whom little is forgiven,
ioueth little, as it is manifest by the parable of the two debtors. Neither does
charity cover many sins, by winning a pardon for them, but as S. Peter cites
the proverb, out of Solomon, who declares that it is the effect of love to
hide our neighbors Prou. 10.
faults, where hatred contrariwise breeds contention and exprobration of
men's sins. Of penance done by Marie Magdelen no ancient authentical florie
does testify, and if it did, it were hard to prove, that this sinful woman
was Marie Magdelen.


ALLEN. Indeed if we speak exactlie, a Pardon does not so much remit to the
penitent any good work, either freely done, or charged unto us by others
appointmrnt, as it does release the bond or debt of penance: that where before
I was of necessity bound to satisfaction for penance of my sins, I may now
after the debt be remitted, pay my penance freely, that I may not appear
unworthy of other men's relief, whiles I refuse not to work also my self as
a poor member in the wholl mystical body of Christ, in the knot whereof his
mercy comes unto me. And if it then so fall out, that I by reason of sickness
or short life, can not fulfill my penance, I shall then departing hence, be
free by the grace of Christ, granted me in the Indulgence, and so be wholly
free of such debt, as I else should have supplied in purgatory, in my soul.
Let no man therefore, do less penance for any pardons sake, if his ability
serve thereunto, which is never given to hinder the fruits of good works and
repentance. But where there is before God and our consciences just cause, why
we can not fulfill such necessary and requisite satisfaction, as is enjoined
or deserved, there we may be in assured hope, that God will confirm the
sentence of his servants Otherwise, as Saint Cyprian says, if any man not
thus qualified, seek deceitfullie for a peace or pardon, he deceives himself
and Gods priest to, who sees the faces outwardly of the penitents, but the
hearts of them God only beholds, and accordieg to the behavior Lib. 1.
Epist, 2. and l. 4 Ep. 2.
of their minds and meanings shall judge them in the next world, and amend
in their punishment the sentence of his priests.


FVLKE. If you spoke exactlie before, any good work that is enjoined as a
penance, and satisfaction for sin, is released by a pardon. And the Popes
declaration, which I did lately set down, out of the gloss, affirms no
less upon his pardon. But now to cover the shameful abuse of the Popes
pardons, you extenuate the force and validity of them almost as much, as else
where you magnified them. Canonical penance, which you said, ought to be a
rule of secret and shrift penance, binds no man longer then his life. For the
Canons grant a pardon of course at the hour of Conc. Nicen. Can. 12.
death, even to them that were excommunicated: whereof it follows, that if
the Popes pardon release not penance in this life, it is good sor nothing. As
for cases of necessity, are dispensed with all by God himself, without the
Popes or any mortal man's pardon. For no enjoined penance can be of greater
band, then the rest of the sabbath, which yet for necessity may be broken, as
our Savior shows, by the example of David, eating the show bread, which
otherwise, Mat. 12.
then in the case of necessity, had been sacrilege for him to do. Saint
Cyprian speaks of hypocrites, which counterfaiting repentance, desired to be
received into the Church, from which they were justly excluded, which if they
deceived the Church by fained repentance, yet should not they escape the
judgment of God. He speaks not of receiving the Popes pardons, Iubeleies,
dispensations, absolutions, and such like baggage.


ALLEN. God, Church, though she be much inclined to mercy, yet she cries
not with the flatterers and false preachers of the world, peace, where there
is no peace And of our mother the Church it may well be verified, that Saint
Augustine spoke Enchir. c. 70
of God himself in the like case. Nemini dedit laxamentum peccandi (says he)
quamuis miserando deleat iam facta peccata, si non satisfactio congrua
negligatur. She has given no man a frreedome to sin, though by mercy she
remitteth sins already past, if competent satisfaction be not neglected. So
that a Pardon can not well be beneficial to any man that neglects penance,
or without all cause omitteth his (...) in fulfilling the same, though it be
exceeding commodious and profitable to him that lacks time and space to
satisfy, where of good will and devout intent he is ready thereunto.

Therefore I would advertise all such, as have a Pardon or Indulgence upon just
and true suggestion obtained, for release of their enjoined penance, or other
deserved pain, and thereupon omit to do their said satisfaction, that they
help the lack thereof otherwise, where their ability is the better. As if
they can not through feebleres, or other notorious perceiving of harm thereby
fast for satisfaction of their sins, then let them supply that by more
liberal alms, and charitable relief of such as be in necessity. For that
kind of charity Christ (...) charge to the Pharisees for the purging of their
sins, (...) signifiesh the recompense of the residue of their pain, and
necessary clensing of the remnants of their faults and (...) (...) the
remission of the same. For alms will not purge deadly sin, and the very
iniquity thereof, as Saint Augustine well noted in the place last out of him
alleged. Of the pain temporal then Christ said, give alms, and all is
clear with you. But if you can not that way for lack and insufficiency, then
be earnest in prayer, and continually cry out in Pater noster, forgive us our
debtes, dimitte nobis debitae nostra: and by the Orison not only venial
sins, but also the temporal debt that remains for deadly crimes, aster
they be remitted and repented for, be forgiven.

In this case also, it is very good to help both by counsel and travel to
turn the wicked sinners from their evil ways, and to call Heretics and
Schismatikes home to Gods Church and Christ's faith. For of that work it is
written, that it covers a multitude of sins. Again, to be daily and
devout at the blessed sacrifice of the Mass, there with zeal and love to
embrace with Marie Magdalene the holy body of our savior, and often to
receive the same with Zacheus into our house and temple of our body, in the
holy sacrament: This most excellent act of religion does wonderfully
diminish the deserved pain for sin, and make us fit to receive
fruitfullie, the Pardons given by the Magistrates spiritual in the person of
Christ. Or if this, in these dismal days, may not be had, yet learn at the
least, as well to lameut the lack of it, as to be sorrowful and conirite for
thy sins: for earnest unfeigned tears proceeding of love and devotion have
purchased many one a pardon. Peter wept bitterly, and loved hartelie, and
therefore he was restored to grace and mercy, and after Christ had punished,
as in way of penance, his three denials, with a triple demand of his love, as
though he had doubted of his heart toward him, as Saint Hilarie, Saint Cyrill,
and other do inscrpret it, he not only gave him a pardon of all that was
past, but made him his substitute in earth and chief pastor of all his flock.


FVLKE. If a pardon can not take away penance, then you recant that you
defended before so egerlie. If the debt of penance may be taken away by the
Popes pardon, as you told us often before, he can not justly be said to
neglect penance, which does not perform it, because that is pardoned, which he
was content to have performed, if he had not been pardoned. If he be charged
for omitting his duty that performs not his pardoned penance; then were he
as good to have no pardon at all. If a pardon serve only for them that lack
time, and space to satisfy, then no man can have benefit of a pardon in this
life. Beside the pardons are false, that promise to all men, that go on such
voyage, or pilgrimage, or say such a prayer, or pray on such beads, or give
to such a building or hospital, full remission a poena and culpa, or so many
years or lents of pardon de penitentiis iniunctis and iniungendis, of penance
enjoined, or to be enjoined. Beware therefore left while you urge so earnesthe
the necessity of penance to be performed, you fight against Popes pardons,
which you took upon you to maintain. And whereas you take upon you by your
advertisement, as it were to inioyne or commute penance, where the Pope has
pardoned the sin, you do in effect make frust rate the Popes pardon: as the
gloss upon the bull of Pope Boneface 8. does show, where he says. That the
Pope declared consistorialiter, that his penitentiarie ought to inioyne nothing
more, then is enjoined in his pardon: for ets (as he said) the pardons should
be made frustrate. And whereas you presume to prescribe, the change of one
penance into another, the Pope does that always in his pardon, or else it is
not of force, as the same gloss teaches, that there must 4. things (...) as
principal, to make a pardon effectual. Authority in the graunter, capacity
in the receiver, godliness in the end, and profitablenes in the work. Now this
work into which the Pope changes all penanceremitted, though it be never so
small, yet being profitable to the honor of God, or the exaltation of faith,
is sufficient without any other supply, because in a pardon (says he) not
the quantity, but the kind of the work is considered, by reason that a
pardon principally respects grace, and not merit, or else it should not be
called a pardon. For which cause also they that dwelled at Rome, and visited
the Churches in Rome, appointed by the Popes pardon, had as great Indulgence,
as they that came with great cost and travel out of the furthest parts of
Scotland, or Ireland. If this that the gloss writes be current popery, then
does your advertisement differ from the judgment of the Popish Charch, and of
the Pope himself. But whereas you affirm, that Christ gave the Pharistes in
charge, to purge their sins by alms, and that almespurgeth ventall sins,
you speak more then the text allows. For Christ teaches not the Pharisees
to purge any sins with alms, but after he has rebuked their hypoctisie,
that were careful to make clean the outside of the cup or platter, when the
inward part of their heart was full of rauine and wickedness, he prescribes
them the contrary practice, to purge the inward man by repentance, and to
testify the same by alms, which is contrary to rapine, and spoiling, and
then all the creatures of God should be clean unto them, although they used no
such superstitious washing with water. And if it be as you say, that not only
venial sins, but also the temporal debt that remains for deadly crimes,
after they be remitted, be forgiven, by saying the Pater noster: who is so
foolish to pay any money for a pardon, or what means the Pope to make such
a brag of his pardons, which can remiit no more, then every man may obtain
at home, by saying his Pater noster? As for hearing of Mass, and taking their
rightes, if it be no more worth, but to make men fit to receive fruitfullie the
Popes pardon, they be little worth, sceing the pardon it self, as in all this
chapter you labor to prove, is but of small profit, and the Pater nosier
saying, is as good as any pardon. Finally where Saint Hilarie, and Saint
Cyrill say, that Christ caused Peter to wipe away the blot of his treble
denying, with a treble confession: neither of them both say, that Christ made
him his substitute on earth, and chief pastor of all his flock, otherwise then
he made every one of the other Apostles.


ALLEN. If it stand thus therefore with the party penitent, then the Popes
pardon shall undoubtedly be beneficial unto him, and otherwise either not at
all, or else nothing so much as they seem so sound. For although it be an old
saying, quod indulgentie tantum valent, quantum sonant, that Indulgencies be of
as great force and valor, as the form of their words do import, yet that is
not otherwise to be understood, then there, where there may seem just cause
of grant to the giuers, and not evil disposition in the receivers. For as
Adrianus that once Adrianus.
was Pope himself reasons: If the magistrates of the Church may not without
just cause give dispensation concerning vows, oaths, fastes, marriages, or such
like, nor dispose the temporal treasures of the Church without reasonable
cause; then may not surely the Bishops be lavish of the treasure of Gods
house, which is much more precious, whereof there can be no man partaker, that
is an unprofitable member of the body.


FVLKE. If the party penitent be so qualified, as he need not the Popes
pardon, then it shall undoubtedly be beneficial to him. But the Pope will not
have the power of his pardons to be so much extenuated, nor his liberality
restrained to so few persons, nor to so narrow a case. And that old saying,
Indulgentiae tantum valent, quantum sonant: pardons be of as great valor, as
the form of the words do import, shall be taken for a good principle in the
Popes consistory, when you with your new prouisoes, shall be taken for a
curious and a dangerous Papist. The gloss upon the first pardon of Iubelie,
granted by Pope Boneface the 8. determines idoneitie, or capacity in the
receiver, that he be a member of the Church, and purged from the fault. Oportet
quod capax indulgentiae sit purgatus a culpa, quod sit in contritione: ille
ergo est habilis indulgentiam recipere, qui est vere penitens and confessus, It
behooves that he which is capable, or meet to receive a pardon, be purged from
fault, which is brought to pass in contrition: he therefore is able to receive
a pardon, which is truclie penitent and confessed. The like says Depot.
eccles. qu. 3.
Augustinus de Ancona. Ex part recipientis requiritur quod habeat fidem in
intellectu, quia non nist homini Christtano indulgentia potest dari, qui
firmiter credat Papam posse dare, and se posserecipere, and habeat charitatem
in affectu vt sit vere contritus and confessus. Of the part of him that
receives ae pardon, it is required that he have faith in understanding,
because a pardon cannot be given, but to a Christian man, which steadfastlie
believes, that the Pope is able to give, and he able to receive, and that he
have charity in affection, that he be truly contrite and confessed. More
then this, beside the fulfilling of the cause, for which the pardon was
granted, he does not require. In so much that he allows, that a man may
receive a pardon for his father and mother, whether they be living or dead, if
the Pope do so apply his pardon, that he which will go over the sea, or to
S. James in his fathers, or mothers name, shall inioie it for them, and the
receiver does perform as much for them. The just cause of grant in the
giuers, is determined by the gloss aforesaid, to be the honor of God, and the
exaltation of faith, by such profitable works, as are expressed and required
in the pardons, as pilgrimage, saying of such a prayer, giving to such a
fraternity, etc. in which not the quantity, but the kind of the work is to
be considered: so that for a very small work marvelous large pardon may be
granted, if it please the Pope; to whom the dispensation of the treasure of
the Church is principally committed (for Bishops, which are able to give, but
forty days out of that treasure, are but petty baylies) whom if you will
accuse for lauishing the treasure, in granting of over large pardons, you
break the Canon law, which tells you, that you must not call him to an
account for his doings.


ALLEN. Nevertheless the causes of giving indulgencies may be more or less
reasonable, according to the state and variety of things, which to the
wisdom of Gods Vicar in earth is best seen, whom Christ so rules in that
case, that he may be most beneficial to his holy household: in so much, that
it is not to be doubted, but in these days and in this great contempt of
devout and religious exercises, the moving only of the people, to prayer, to
holy peregrinations, to the obedience of the Church, may be a sufficient
cause, why there should be to prayers said upon books, beads, or sanctified
creatures, for such purpose annexed great remission. For look what things be
most condemned of heretics, those things must Christian men be induced to
reverence with most singular zeal and religion. Neither can there be any
thing in the world so necessary for us christian men of these times, that be
so void of good works, as by devotion and entire zeal to join with our
elders, that in the holy communion of Saints, we may be partakers of their
virtuous deeds. And that is the very end of all the Popes Pardons, to make
us, in our lake of satisfaction for our sins, fellows and coparteners of the
abundance that was in Christ first, and then by him in our holy brethren
departed before us.


FVLKE. Throughout this chapter hitherto, you have disputed against the power
of the Pope, and the force of his pardons: now it is time for you, to coie him
again and to raise up his pardons, which you have pressed down so low. Now
the wisdom of Gods vicar is sufficient to judge the causes of giving
indulgences, and Christ so rules him in that case, that he may be most
beneficial to his household, in so much that it is not to be doubted, but in
these days the Popes large pardons, for little works, may be of great force.
Then belike your former discourse serves not for these days, that men must
fulfill their penance if they may, notwithstanding any pardon; that a pardon
does not remit any good work enjoined in penance, that if a man lack power to
fulfill this penance, he must supply it with other works counteruailable, or
else the Popes pardons shall not be beneficial to them at all, or nothing so
much as they seem to sound. But why say you, that in these days, Christ
rules his Vicar in this case, that he may be most beneficial to his holy
household? Has not Christ as great care of his holy household the Church, in all
times, and in all cases, as in these days, and in this case? Yes verily. But
Christ has not always, and in all cases, ruled the Pope, as it might be most
beneficial to his Church: for then his key of jurisdiction should never have
erred, nor his life been wicked, to the great hurt, and shame of his Church,
that I speak not of his criors in doctrine, which you will not grant, as you
do the other. Therefore it follows that the Pope is not Christ's vicar in
earth, appointed for the most benefit of his Church. Your principle, that
things which heretics do hate, must be most reverenced, is false. For
nothing is to be esteemed more, then the nature of the thing requires, whether
it be loved or hated of heretics. The Anabaptists hate the wearing of armor:
it follows not therefore that the wearing of armor should be counted a
religious thing, or more reverenced, then as a lawful usage, and sometimes
necessary among Christians. The very end of the Popes pardons, is well known
to be the maintenance of the Popes pride, and covetousness: the pretended end is
wicked, and blasphemous, derogating from the sacrifice of Christ's death, which
is a full satisfaction, and purging of all our sins: the participation whereof
is through faith wrought in our hearts, by the spirit of God: and not by the
Popes application, or coupling of any Saints merits, with the only, and
omnisufficient sacrifice of Christ.


ALLEN. Upon all which it is very plain, that every man can not
beneficiallie receive the fruit of a Pardon, this at least being requisite in
every man, that lists to attain benefit thereby, that he be in state of
grace, and in earnest intent to continue in the knot of Christ his Church, with
love and liking of the holy works of his Christian brethren, and
accomplishing at least, that small work, which commonly now is joined to the
Pardon, for increase of Christian devotion. The continuance of which devotion,
that more and more decaieth, makes the Pardons to be more common at this day
and of late years, then they were in the primitive Church, when most men in
the spring of Christian religion and fervor of faith, sought to satisfy
exactlie the debt of the penance, or else, which was a common case then,
recompensed it by Martyrdom? though S. Gregory the first of that name more
then nine hundred year Vide chor na Pandadalion Lutherani.
since, in the ordering of the slations at Rome, is known to have given
Pardons for years or days, in like form as now is used. And clear it is,
that the thing it self being found lamfull, and no Protestant alive can ever
be able to show me the first vser thereof, much less that it was ever
controlled by any man that ever was counted Catholic, it may be measured
according to the necessity of the time, and so, as the Church may be most
edified.


FVLK I. The qualification that you now prescribe, differs not a little from
that severity of your former exacting of penance, or at the least a
counterpoise thereof, to make pardons beneficial. That the decale of devotion
should make pardons more common in these latter times, there is no reason, but
rather that pardons should cause devotion to decaie. For the nature of men is,
to be best affected to that, which is most easily obtained, and where there
is hope of impunitie, to be less careful in offending. But you would have
pardons seem to be as old as Gregory the first, by authority of Pantaleon,
a Lutheran: who could not know what Gregory did, but by relation of other
stories: why do you not therefore cite some ancient credible story, that
justifies as much of Gregory? For Pantaleon does not aduouch what Gregory
did, but what the late popish writers ascribe unto him. But though it be not
ancient to grant such pardons, yet you say, it is clear, that the thing
itself is lawful, although of this clearenes you have as yet made no
demonstration. You say further, that no Protestant is able to show you the
first vser thereof. If that were true, yet thereby pardons are neither proved
ancient, nor lawful. But what if Gregory were named, (For I will not name
Boneface the eight, seeing you make challenge of Gregory) whom can you show,
that used to grant such pardons, before him. Although in truth you are not
able to prove that Gregory granted such pardons, oranie Pope after him, for
400. years. Your third assertion, that these manner of pardons were never
controlled by any man that ever was accounted Catholic, is a sophistical
caption, and petition of the principle. For many are true Catholics, that are
not so accounted, and the Pope with his papists challenge to be accounted the
only Catholics, which of all other are the greatest heretics.


ALLEN. And thanks be given to God, the effect of the love of Indulgences, and
the contrary issue of the contempt thereof. do well prove the Churches good
meaning therein. For if you view both parties well, you shall perceive more
profitable devotion, more Christian charity, more furtherance of common
wealths causes, in that side that fears pains for their sins, with the
Prophet David, even after they be remitted, and therefore seek for all means
most humbly by man's ministry to receive mercy: in one year you shall see
in these devout persons more fruits of repentance, then in a wholl old man's
life can be found in all the other side, that contemptuously disdain or
scornfullie deride the most profitable usage both of penance and pardons in
Gods Church. Therefore in so great proof of the benefit that proceeds Vide
tit. de poenitent. and remis.
from this kind of remissions (for so Alexander the third above four
hundereth years since termed Pardons used then to be given in dedication of
Churches) and upon most assured grounds, that it well agrees both with Gods
word, and practice of the primitive Church, and never condemned of any, but
of such as be themselves worthily condemned of other great heresies and errors,
the Magisirates will show mercy still in Christ's behalf, and all the holy
Bishops succeeding lawfully the Apostles of Christ, will give peace and
benediction Math. 10.
to such as humbly ask it at their hands, and if the parties be worthy,
their peace by Christ's promise shall rest upon them: if they either contemn
it, or be unworthy of it, then no harm done, it will return to the giuers
again.


FVLKE. Although this argument of the effects, especialie when they are
assigned to a wrong cause, is no sufficient proof of the lawfullnes of a
thing, where an event is taken instead of an effect, yet do we utterly deny
this assumpt, that more profitable deuotion' more Christian charity, more
furtherance of common wealths is in them that hold of pardons, then in them
that upon true confidence of Christ's satisfaction do despise them. Let the
experience of the six years of Kings Edwards reign, and the five and twenty
years of her Majesty's most Godly and prosperous royal government, make
trial, and decide the controversy, in the erection of of hospitalls,
providing for the poor, setting up of schools, and amplifying of the
universities, relieuing of strangers, redeeming of captives, and such other
works of Christian charity, and fruits of repentance: in which although it
must be confessed to our shame, that we have been more slack, then our holy
profession requires, yet will we give over the advantage offered of one year,
against fourscore and ten, which is an old man's age, and join issue upon
equal time, of Queen Mary's reign, or any other time of Popery since
pardons have been in price. Provided, that the maintenance of superstition and
Idolatry, in which the world has always been mad, be not accounted a
Christian work, or fruit of repentance. Ad hereunto, that such works as have
been done by ours, proceeded of a free love to God, and thankefullnes for his
mercy, not of a servile fear, or covetous desire of reward, wherein me^ show
the love of themselves, more the^ the love of god. That Alexander the 3. who
was somewhat above 400. years ago, calls pardons used to be given in
dedicatio^ of churches remissions, it proves no more the fulness of the^, then
that it is not lawful for the pope to tread upon the Emperors neck, as the
said Alexander did upon the Emperor Frederike, before the gate of S. Marks
church at Venice. But by the same rescript or de cretal epistle of Alexander
the third, in which mention is made of remissions, it appears, that such
pardons were then but new come up, because the Archbishop of Canterbury could
not resolve himself, neither by his own learning, nor by the clergy of all
Englands judgment, how far they did extend, and therefore was feign to send
to the Pope of Rome for the resolution. It is in the decretals of Gregory in
the title by you named, cap 4. inscribed, Arch: episcopo (...) (...). Quod
autem consisluisti, vtrum remissiones quae siunt in dedicationibus Ecclesiarum,
aut conferentium ad (...) (...), aliis prosint, quam his qui remittentib.
subsunt, hoc volumus tuam fraternitatem senere quod cum a non suo indice (...)
nullus raleat, vel absolui, remissiones predict as illis prodesse (...) modo
(...), quib. vt prosint propris indices spiritualiter vel specialiter
indulsirunt. To the Archbishop of Canterbury: Whereas thou did ask me
counsel, whether remissions which be granted in the dedication of Churches, or
to them that confer to the building of bridges, do profit any other, then them
which are under their jurisdiction that do remit, this we will thy
brotherhoode to hold: that where is none can be bound or absolved, but of his
owneiudge, we think that the foresaid remissions do profit them only, to
whom that they might profit, their own judges have spirituallie or specially
granted. Also the gloss upon this decretall, the author whereof lived after
the Later an Council, says: that it was an old complaint, and yet in his
days very doubtful, to what purpose these remissions or pardons were
profitable: remissiones ad quid valiant, vetus est querela, adhuc tamen satis
dubia: and rehearses four several opinions concerning the validity of them.
Some say they avail only toward God, but not toward the church. Secondly,
other say that they avail toward the Church, but not toward God. Thirdly,
other say that as they are given, they avail both toward God, and toward the
Church. And the fourth says that they avail onclie to the remission of that
penance, which is negligentlie omitted. To which the gloss adds his opinson,
agreeing fully with none of them all, nor with the later Canonists. Among
which opinions you have patched up your wavering sentence of the validity. or
inualidity of pardons in this Chapter. This diversity of opinions among the
Papists themselves argues, that the doctrine of pardons was very raw, and not
halse digested in those days. The agreeablenes thereof with the word of God,
and the practice of the primitive Church, when it shallbe showed, we shall
think better of them, in the mean time you must bring better proof out of
the scriptures for them, then you do for Popish Bishops blessing, out of the
10. of Saint Matthew, or else we shall have little cause to esteem them more
then it


ALLEN. Truly, that holypeace which Christ gave to his Apostles at his
coming into them, at his departure from them, and else as (...) enters upon
any holy action, signified nothing else but an Joan. 20.
agreement and peace of man's soull with God, and did no doubt purge them from
their daily infirmities, which we call venial sins, and the bond of all
pain, as it may be thought, due for the same, that in the presense of Gods
majesty sin might cease, and the parties appear clean before his face, that
had nospot of sin in himself at all, as by the said peace yet given to the
worthy receivers by holy Bishopps ministry, some like effect does surely
ensue. I use this term of peace, when I speak of pardons, not because they
are preciselie meant in the action of giving peace, common to Christ and his
Apostles, but because I see the old fathers lightly call that peace, which we
now call pardoning: and perchance they did allude to that which Christ willed
his Disciples to bestow on every householde for a kind of blessing. Which no
doubt was some great benefit, and so great, that our Master signified unto
Math. 10.
them, that many should be unworthy of it, and that the fruit thereof, should
redound to themselves. Which caused both Bishops of old (for Saint Augustine
makes mention thereof) De ciui. De i li. 23. Gap. 8.
to give their blessings, and every man humbly to require the same on their
knees, whereby surely some spiritual grace was received, and remission either
of venial trespaces, or pain due unto for^mer sins, given. Let apish
Camites here mock and mow at their Mother, as they customablie do, whiles the
obedient children, the discreet and devout of Gods Church think it an high
point of wisdom, only to consider the marvelous direction of our fathers
ways, in the doctrine of discipline, and awe of Gods relgion.


FVLKE. That peace which Christ gave to his Apostles, was the quietness of
conscience reconciled to god, and discharged of all sins, and the pain due
to satisfy gods righteousness for them, and the same peace did Christ send his
Apostles to offer, preach, and wish to all them that would receive it, which if
they refused, became unprofitable to them. But the Popish Bishops blessing,
which consists in shaking his fingers, and murmering some words, perhapps
not understood of the people, whom they never teach, what the peace of
conscience means, is no better then a vilde mockery of the peace that Christ
gave, and willed his Apostles to offer where they became. Whereas you allege
Saint Augustine for the antiquity of the Bishops blessing, it is a frivolous
matter. For he makes no other mention, but that after earnest praierhad bin
made for patience and constancy of faith in one that was the next day with
danger of his life to be cut for a fistula, both by the party himself, a
Bishop, and many other Godly persons then present, that they arose from
prayer, and accepta ab episcopo benedictione, discessimus, and having received
blessing of the Bishop, we departed. How can the superstitious blessing of
Popish Bishops be resembled to this, but only in the name of blessing? For
here is no requiring of it on knees, nor any opinion of remission of sins by
it, but only a Christian salutation, or farewell by prayer mentioned, which
all Godly Bishops and elders do in our Church use even at this day,
specially in dimission of a Godly congregation gathered to hear the
preaching, to prayer, or participation of the sacraments, or such holy
purposes: which all Christians do esteem as it becomes them without making
an Idol of the minister, or trusting in the ceremony, confirming their faith
in God by the praior and blessing of his servants in his name, in whom is all
their hope, trust, and joy reposed.


That the Bishops being the highest ministers of Gods Church, and namely the
Pope, as the principal of the rest, may only lawfully give Pardons, and in
what sense the souls depatted may be releiued by the same.

THE 11. CHAP.
ALLEN. OF the necessary disposition of them that should effectually receive
benefit by the pardons of the Church, and of the right intent of them that
should give the same, we have already sufficiently spoken. And now perchance
some may think it necessary, that it should be opened briefly, in whom this
authority of releasing the pains enjoined for sin does principally
consist. Whereof I shall with better will bestow a few words, because we shall
have occasion thereby to open the common sense of a wholl Council both learned
and godly, touching the matter of Pardons, in the judgment whereof, assuredly
proceeding from the holy ghost, we may with safety take our rest.

Of the lawful minister therefore of these remissions, the scripture in
precise terms prescribes nothing, though the power of binding and loosing,
whereupon the matter stands, is proved properly to be an act of the keie,
namely of jurisdiction and external regiment, which agrees not to the simple
Priests, having no further jurisdiction, but in the secret court of man's
conscience. Whereupon, as also by the usage of all ages, and by the prescription
of the law, it is proved, that Bishops only or such as have their authority
for the execution of their office, may lawfully give remission of
satisfactions appointed for sins remitted. Neither were it convenient, that
the release of deserved penance should be had of every inferior priest, lest
the discipline of the church should so become contemptible, the release thereof
being made common to so many.

And it is the high providence of God, that the way to remit (...) allie
sins, which is of necessary to our salvation should be near us in every
place, and by the common ministers of the Church at al times to be obtained,
where the remission of the Churches discipline being more necessary to be
fulfilled, and never or very seldom necessary to be wholly released, should
not be so easily obtained, but hardly had at the hands of a sex, and them of
excellent authority and reverence in Gods Church.


FVLKE. Throughout this book he thereto you have joined the Bishops with the
Pope, in granting of indulgencies, as though their power in pardoning had
been somewhat proportionable unto his. But now you begin to shake them of,
and it will appear plainly, that hitherto you have concealed, how little a
piece of pardoning power is allotted to bishops, and infinite authority left
with the Pope: wherem either the popish council of Laterane, too much abased
the bishops, or else the Pope too much has advanced his practice. But in the
argument of the Chapter you do well and honestly confess that the scripture
prescribes nothing of the lawful ministers of these remissions: and by the
same reason you should confess, that the scripture prescribes nothing of such
kind of remissions. For God never grants any power or authority, but he
appoints also who shall be the laufull exercisers, and executors of the same.
And if simple priests, as you call them, have authority to inioyne penance,
which is to bind by the plain words of Christ, they have authority also to
remit, which is to loose. But the jurisdiction, and external regimens of the
Church (you say) agrees not to them which have no further jurisdiction, but
in the secret court of man's conscience. Let that be as you say, yet it were
reason that as far as their jurisdiction extends, they should remitte and
loose in the secret Court of man's conscience, where they did bind, although
they gave no public pardons. Neither can the usage of any ancient time be
alleged against this that I say, nor the prescriptions of the ancient
Canons, which were made and practiced of public penance openly enjoined, in
which the inferior priests were prohibited to reconcile or remit without the
knowledge of the Bishop. But as there was no penance priuatlie enjoined by
Priests, so there was no prohibition that it should not priuatlie be remitted
of them, by whom it was appointed. The reasons that you allege of the
inconvenience of releasing of penance by every inferior Priest, are of no
valewe: for the discipline of the Church should be no more contemptible in
releasing of tempor all penance, then in releasing of eternal (...), which
power you allow to every hedge Priest. Again the punishment of so many
thousand years in purgatory, should not with such difficulty be obtained, if
either cruelty or couetuousnes in the Pope did not prohibit. Where you say,
the Church discipline is never or seldom to be wholly released, you reprove
the Popes often Iubilies, and daily plenarie Pardons, granted of course to
any man that will buy them.


ALLEN. And not only that, but also the nature of the act of pardoning, does
wholly challenge this function of the higher Magistrates of Christ's common
wealth. For it stands not only upon the remission of debt, but also upon
recompense of reparing again the band thereof, by the common treasure of the
whole household of the faithful, which can not be by reason despensed and
bestowed upon any man that lacked, by any, but such as are principal
stewardes and rulers of some whole portion of the said family, as Bishops
lawfully succeeding the Apostles are known in this case to have received the
keys of Christ's kingdom, and the dispensing of his holy mysteries, and
therefore may instly dispose the treasure of Christ and his Saints
satisfactions to the benefit of the faithful, in whose lardge cures, it can no
otherwise be thought, but there be the merits of diverse holy and blessed men
laid up in store before God, for the relief of their brethren, which may be
disposed at the Blshoppes wisdom, to such namely as be of his own charge and
regiment. But of particular parishes, it cannot be certain, that there should
always be some sufficiency of abundant satisfactions, to remain without
decaie, for the continual bestowing upon some of the said small circuit, and
that is it, which the school divines say, In particulari Ecolesta merita non
sunt indeficientia: merits of Saints be not vnspendable in particular
Churches.

But the communion of Saints being the general benefit of the wholl common
wealth of Christ's Church, continues for ever by the abundance of many holy
works, which may satisfy for other men's sins, according to the disposition
of such as be the governors and guiders of our souls, that the overplus and
abundance of one sort, may ever relieve the lackes of an other sort, as S.
Paull speaks in the like matter.


FVLKE. The next argument to prove that priests cannot pardon, is, because
the disposition of the treasure, out of which the payment goes, by reason
pertains to none, but to such as are principal stewardes, and rulers of some
wholl portion of the family, as bishops, etc. But are not priests also
stewards, and rulers of their own parishes, which are also wholl portions of
the family, and consist of many parts? Why may they not then be dispensers
of that unknown treasure you speak of? You answer that in the large cures of
bishops, it cannot otherwise be thought but there be the merits of diverse
holy and blessed men laid up in store to be bestowed by the Bishop, to such as
be of his own regiment: but merits of Saints be not vnspendable in particular
Churches. Mark this reason well: for hereof it follows, that the super
abundance of Christ's satisfaction, which you make to be the ground of this
imaginary treasure, is not of force of it self, without the help of the
merits of saints. Secondly the communion of Saints, whereupon you would
ground another part of this treasure of satisfaction, being limited by
diocesses, and not by parishes, leeseth the nature of a communion, which
extends it self unto al, unto whom it is common. For if the merit of Christ
were sufficient to ground a pardon upon, the priest in his parish, being a
steward of Christ's satisfaction, might grant a pardon: but because he lacks
perhapes the merits of Saints, he may not presume so much upon Christ's
satisfaction alone. Again, if the merits of Saints were founded upon the
communion of saints, why should not the merits of the saints of the wholl
diocese, yea of the whole world, be available, and appliable to every man of
every parish, by the particular gouerner and guider of the souls of that
parish? so well hang to gether these blasphemous dreams of Saints merits and
Christ's satisfaction separated from the act of his passion, claimed to be at
the Popes, and prelates disposition.

The abundance of one releiuing the lack of another, whereof Saint Paull
speaks, is no communication of merits, nor any thing like unto it: but a
participation of the gifts of God in this life. As for merits of Saints, what
should we speak of the^, or whence should they have them, when mercy is their
crown, as Saint Ambrose says? Finally, howsoever you abase the dignity and
authority of inferrior ministers in granting of pardon, the ancient Church
admitted them to reconcile in the absence of the Bishop, or in case of
necessity, as diverse Cannons do show. Wherefore if this power of pardoning
were any such a thing as the ancient discipline, the popish Priests should
not be wholly excluded from it.


ALLEN. And yet the Bishops themselue, have not in this case so full power and
prorogatiue, being but rulers of portiones of Christ's Church as he has whom
Christ appointed to be his own Vicare through his whole dominion. For as
Christ tht head of the whole body is anointed far more plentifully, then
all his brethren, so doubtless he that occupies his seat of judgment
throughout the whole earth, to whom not only the affairs of all private men,
but also the confirmation and government of all his brethren Bishops, of what
dignity so ever they be does belong: Upon whom Christ has laid the
foundation of his Church, and to whom he severally gave the keys of heaven
with most ample authority both to loose and bind, feed and govern all the
sheep of his fold: It is this man, no doubt, that has the full treasure of
the holy communion of Saints to bestow, with marvelous authority over man's
soul, with wonderful might in binding, and exceeding grace and mercy in
loosing. This is the man of whom Saint Bernard says: alluding to Joseph's
pre-eminence in Pharos Ad Eugenium.
house, constituit eum Dominum Domus suae, and Principem omnis possessionis
suae: He has made this man the Lord of all his house, and the Prince of his
wholl possession. This man therefore representing Christ's own person through
the wholl Church, and having the cure and regiment of every one of Christ's
sheep, may most lawfully, donare aliquid in persona Christi, show mercy to
any man in Christ's behalf, 2, Cor. 2.
none being exempted from his jurisdiction, nor any of the churches treasure
restreinea from his disposition.


FVLKE. The Pope grants to the Bishops as it pleases him, a shadow of this
power of pardoning, reserving the rest to himself, for his own advantage, and
pre ferment. The reasons here alleged to prove that no Bishop has so great
pre-eminence in pardoning as the Pope, are all petitions of principles: which
as they are here barelie affirmed; so it shall be sufficient for me flatly to
deny them, as that the Pope is Christ's Vicar, head of the Church, occupies
Christ's seat of judgment, has the foundation of the Church laid upon him,
has the keys of heaven severally, and so of all the rest. Neither is S.
Bernard a late writer sufficient to give the Pope the steuardship of Gods
house, as Joseph had of Potiphar the Egiptian, and therefore he has no more
power to pardon, then any other Bishop, admitting he were Bishop of Rome, and
not Antichrist, which has no power at al, but usurped tyranny over Gods house.


ALLEN But because I cannot ground this my meaning better, then upon a general
Council, I will report the decree of the most holy assembly holden at
Lateran more then three hundredth years since, under Innocentius the third by
which not only this doctrine of Pardons is approved, but also the
superfluttie thereof, and such disorder as was therein through covetousness of
evil persons, or lack of authoritte in the giuers, is Can. 62.
corrected, with a declaration who be the only lawful ministers in such
remissions of enjoined penance. Thus goes the decree: Quia per indiseretas
indulgentias atque superfluas, quai quidam Ecclessarum Praelati facere non
verentur, and claues Ecclesiae contemnuntur, and poeniientialis satisfactio
eneruatur: decernimus, vt cum dedicatur Basilica, non extendatur indulgentia
extra annum, sieve ab vno solo, sieve a pluribus Episcopis dedicetur: ac deinde
in anniuersario dedicationis tempore, quadraginta dies de iniunctis
poenitentiis, indultaremissio non excedat. and intra hunc quoque dierum
numerum, indulgentiarum literas praecipim is moderari, quae pro quibuslibet
causis aliquoties concedantur, cum Romanus Pontisex (qui plenitudinem obtinet
potestatis) hoc in talibus moderamen consueuerit obseruare. That is to say:
Because the keys of the Church be contemned, and sacramental satisfaction is
much weakened by certain indiscreete and superfluous Indulgences, the which
certain Prelates of the Churches are over bold to bestow: we decree, that
hereafter at the dedication of any Chapel no pardon be given more then for one
year whether it be dedicated by one bishop or more, and the that there be
noremissions afterward in the yearly celebrating of the said dedications,
more then of forty days of enjoined penance. The like also to be observed in
all other common instruments, by which for other good causes and holy purposes
pardons shall be given, seeing the Bishop of Rome himself, who has the
fullnes of power herein, uses customably so to moderate the letters of pardons
that proceed from him.

By which holy Council you may perceive, not only that the Bishops of
Gods Church may give pardons, but that the Bishop of Romesright is much more
ample in this case, then theirs can be: and especially how careful the Church
ever has been, to purge all corruption of doctrine or usage, crept into the
world thorough the disorder of man's misbehauiour, and how wicked the endeavors
of some evil disposed persons be, who cease not vnhonestlie to attribute that
to the Church of Christ, which she has ever sought to redress in the evil
manners of them that have disgraced the doctrine of truth, and made
contemtible the most profitable practice of holy things, by their misuse of
the same.


FVLKE. Seeing you can ground your meaning no better, as you your self
confess, then upon this popish Lateran Council; all indifferent readers may
see, how weak, and lately laid ground, and foundation it has. To omit your
translation of Basilica, for a Chapel, which rather signifies a Cathedral
or Princely Church, I will consider what you gather out of this Council.
First that Bishops may pardon. nay rather that Bishops then did pardon.
Secondly that the Bishop of Romes right is more ample: nay rather that every
Bishop of old did grant larger pardons, then the Pope used to grant, who
used not to pass one year in dedication, and 40 days in all other occasions.
For according to that moderation the Bishop of Rome did use, all other Bishops
are restreined to that measure. By which it appears, that even in that time
which was little more then three hundredth years ago, the large pardons of so
many thousand years were neither known nor thought needful. For if they had,
it had been great injury to drive men of all parts of the world, to seek
for that at Rome, which they might have had near hand of their own Bishops.
Thirdly you would have us consider the care of the Church in purging of
corruptions. But rather by the sequel we may gather, that this was nothing
else, but the ambition and covetousness of the Pope, upon whose sleeue the
Council was pinned to bereue other Bishops of their accustomablie practiced
power, all the world of their benefit, and to rake unto himself all the
profit that might come by pardons: as for the shameful corruptions of pardons
and pardoners, has been an hundred times worsse since that time, then ever it
can be proved that it was before.


ALLEN. But he that list fully to see, how little the Catholic Church likes
the abuse of wicked men in these matters, and yet how severely she accurseth
all the contemners of this holy function in the right use thereof, let him
read the Decree of the last general Council touching as well the use of
holy pardons, Consilium Triden. Sess. vlt.
as the earnest consideration had of reforming all disorder there in, and he
shall fully be satisfied in this article, if he have learned so much, as to
give over the prejudice of all private opinion, to the common judgment of Gods
Church. Being now thus far in our matter, that it is well known the Bishops
of Gods Church principally to have this binding and loosing by the keie of
their jurisdiction to be exercised in the open court of the Church, and that
the power of the Bishop of Rome, not only by special privileges given by
Christ, but also by law and prescription of all antiquities, passes in this
point, as in all other government, the terms or several limits of all his
brethren, it shall not be needful to dispute, whether the keie of
jurisdiction only separated from the keie of order proper to priesthood, be
sufficient to give remission of enjoined penance by. Commonly it is holden,
that as excommunication, and other like acts of jurisdiction, may be exercised
by the Bishops Legates or Substitutes being no priests, or by themselves being
elected Bishops, and yet neither consecrated nor ordered: even so many
Indulgences be also profitablie granted. Whereof I will not now talk, because
it is not much material, seeing commonly they be not granted otherwise but
of Bishops, neither so often of other as of the Pope, and never any otherwise,
but by his or other Bishops authority by whomesoeuer the function is executed


FVLKE. The Council of Trent, unto which you send us, is as much the common
judgment of Gods Church, as the Pope is the head thereof: who when he is
accused not only to be an horrible heretic, but also to be Antichrist
himself, will stand to the determination of no Council, but such as he
himself shall allow. The gross and impudent cosenage of pardons being
discovered to all the world more then 40. years before, the Pope Pius. 4. not
able to justify before his own papists that have but mother wit, gives
leave to those 100. thing pages of Tient, to restrain the immoderate largnes
of them, which few or none does esteem, and to stay the sale of them which none
will voutchsafe to buy. O goodly reformation: O great care of the popish
Church; which being challenged for the abuse of pardons can not find time to
redress them in more then 40. years, and in more then 2. years consultation
in popish Council. Touching the other question it is not worth the deciding,
whether the keie of ivrisdiction separated from the keie of order can do any
thing, seeing both those keys in the popish Church are false, and counterfeit,
having no power to open the kingdom of heaven, or to shut it.


ALLEN. But this I know will be required rather at my hands, the course of the
matter giving occasion thereunto, how far the limits of the Popes
jurisdiction, who has the sovereignty herein, does extend, and whether the
benefit of any Pardon may perteine to any person that is already appointed
to suffer in his soul the pains of the next life, and is at this present in
the course of Gods correction in Purgatory: and finally, whether, the grant
of an Indulgence may release them there of some piece, or all their pains, as
it might have done whiles they were in this present life.

To all this I answer briefly, that the Pope may do it lawfully, whereof
there can be no more doubt, then there is of the other, of which we have made
the plain argument already, though in the way and means of applying the
Churches remission or the Saints satisfaction unto them, there may be some
diversity, not such as may any thing hinder the truth of the cause, which of
all catholic men is most certainly agreed upon, but such as may stir up
man's industry in the moderat search of Gods truth and mysteries. For the
souls departed and being assured to be saved, must needs be of the same body
mystical and fellowship of Saints, that the faithful be of alive: and
therefore, they may according to their aptnes more or less be profited by the
holy works and satisfaction of their head and fellow members, because in every
lawful Pardon there is made by the keys of jurisdiction and application of
Christ's holy merits and his Saints, in that respect as they be satisfactorie,
to the use of their inferior members, that do lack that wherein the other
do abound. Whereupon it stands with plain reason and meaning of Gods word,
touching binding and loosing, that the souls in Purgatory should sometimes be
partakers of this blessing no less then other that be yet alive. For the
denial of which catholic assertion Leo the tenth accursed and condemned
Luther by his letters patentes, as ever since his memory has been condemned
most worthily of all good men continuing in Bulla co^dem. Luth.
in the unity of Christ's Church.


FVLKE. A question meet to be handled by the popes proctor for purgatory,
seeing in purgatory the Popes prison is all his jurisdiction. For it is meet
that he should bear rule over his own creature. But in heaven no man has
authority but God: because it is the seat of his majesty, and the reward of
his blessed, and beloved in his son Christ Jesus, who has opened the same
to all faithful. and shut up the same from all unbelievers; of whose will and
pleasure he has commanded his servants, the true ministers of his Church to
be interpreters unto the world. The question you assoile, as you do all other
of popery, that whatsoever the Pope, and popish Church has once allowed, must
needs be good, although it have no warrant out of the word of God, nor
testimony of the ancient Church. First you say therefore, that the Pope may
lawfully grant pardons to them that be in Purgatory, whereof, you say,
there canbe no more doubt, then there can be of the other. In deed they be
both of like certainty, saving that for this later question, it must first be
proved, whether there be any purgatory, before it be demanded whether the
Popes pardons extend to purgatory. Saint Augustine somewhile doubted whether
there were any such place, and says it may be doubted of, and perhapes be
found, perhapes never be found: other while he utterly denies any Ench. ad
laur. cap. 69. Cont. pel. hy pognost. l. 5.
third place, because he finds it not in the scriptures, neither shall the
pope be able ever to find such fictions in the scriptures. The like I say of
his power of application of the merits of Christ, or his Saints, or that the
saints have any merits for themselves, much less for other men. Wherefore it
stands neither upon reason, nor upon any meaning of Gods word, whereof there
can no words be showed, including or importing any such meaning, that the
Popes pardons should reach to the release of purgatory pains, if any such
were, which cannot release the lest pain that any man suffers upon the
earth. That Leo the tenth did excommunicat Luther, it proves no more the Popes
doctrine to be true, then that Caiphas condemned Christ, proves Caiphas to
have bin an honest man.


ALLEN Marie whether the Indulgences take place so often upon the dead, as upon
the live, that is not so well known, because the persons departed be not in
case to make themselves more apt to take benefit thereby, then they were at
their departure hence: And therefore if they were not with singular zeal and
devotion so qualified in the end of their life, they cannot now any whit
abetter their own case, or otherwise dispose themselves to attain the fruit of
those singular remissions. And more then that, no Indulgence, is lightly
granted, but upon the fullfilling of some appointed work of piety, and the
departed not having always in this life such friends as will accomplish
competently the work prescribed by the Pardon, nor himself now in case to do
the same, he often misseth the benefit of the Churches remission which else he
might have had by the meaning of the giver. Whereupon it seems to some to be
no surer, how far the departed may be relieved by the keys of the Church then
it is of other holy suffragies and good works either of priests or private
persons, all which do assuredly relieve them that be in Purgatory, but
without any limitation of benefit, which wholly is unknown to the living,
without special revelation, in what state they stand.


FVLKE. Two causes you assign why it is not known, whether indulgences take
place, so often upon the dead as upon the living The first, because the souls
there can take no benefit of pardons, but according to the merits of their
life. But this reason is confuted by authority of the gloss, upon the first
bull of Jubilee, which says that pardons respect grace, and not merit; which
if it be true, not the merits of the receiver, but the power and will of the
giver were to be observed. The second reason is, that pardons lightly require
some work to be fulfilled. But that work is never so laborious, as the pains
already by them sustained in purgatory, if we believe you, which if it will
not serve for a recompense, or commutation of penance, you will hardly
persuade men, that saying of such a prayer, giving of such an alms, visiting
such an Idol, should be sufficient to make the Popes pardon available. But it
is a pitiful case that poor souls in purgatory, which lack nothing for
their release but such a trifling work to be performed for them and have no
friend in this life, that will accomplish it for them, should lie still
broiling in the frying pan and be so little regarded of the Pope, that he will
not appoint that his clergy at the least of their charity should take pains
for them, although they have no penie for their Pater noster. That some among
you think the profit of pardons, is no surer, then of other suffrages and
works to them in purgatory, which are available, but you know not how much;
first it shows the certainty of your faith, which leans upon such helps,
as you know not whereto they will serve you. Secondly it shows that you are
not agreed among your selves of such articles as you thrust upon other men to
be credited. And thirdly, that every one among you being not resolved of the
Popes keys of jurisdiction, some think that the Pope has arrogan the abused
his keys, when he has taken upon him to dzale further in purgatory, then
they are persuaded he has authority. For certain it is, the Pope has
pretended by his pardons not only to release souls out of purgatory, but
also to give other men power to release three or four a piece whom they will
choose.


ALLEN. And therefore upon this consiacration, the learned divines do teach,
that the Pope does, and lawfully may apply unto the souls departed, by his
keys, some part of the Churches treasure, which consists of Christ's
satisfaction and other his Saints, by which they departed, as they have need
and be in competent terms to receive benefit by the merits of their head or
fellows, may be released from some part of their pains: but yet they will
not charge any man with necessity of belceuing, that the Pope or Church
should use mere jurisdiction over them, that be in an other world. To be
plain for the peoples understanding, the meaning is, that in a pardon there
are two things: the one is a sentence of absolution definitelie pronounced
upon any person penitent: the second is the recompense of the debt of sin
remitted by the said absolution through the application of the Churches
treasure by the power of the officiers keys. Both these two jointly can never
be exercised upon any person not subject, though the one may. Absolution can
not properly be given nor fruitfullie, to any man not subject to the giuers
regiment, but the application of the treasure may be made by the keys to
procure mercy for them that be not under their power, but that is not by
proper jurisdiction but by aid of request made by just offers why the party
should be received unto mercy. In this sense then the Pope absolueth no man
departed absolutely. But only offers in the person of Christ for the
relief of him that is in Purgatory to God his mighti judge there the abundant
price of Christ's passion and the satisfaction of Saints: And no doubt for his
reverence and representing Christ's, person, he is more often heard then any
private man offering only his own alms and prayer for the soul departed.
And for that cause, in this sense the Popes pardon works only per modum
suffragij, as by aid of suit, and not by regiment or jurisdiction, which many
suppose does not extend past the compass of this world, and therefore that he
cannot exercise the act of binding or loosing which be proper to his power and
government over any in the next life, though to make suit for them before God
he may apply some portion of Christ's copious redemption, and Saints
satisfaction, by the use of his keys, which there make forcible intercession,
though they cannot give iudiciarie absolution.


FVLKE. If the Pope have not mere jurisdiction in Purgatory, how could
Clement grant the release of souls to be at other men's arbitrament, by his
pardon. Again how could he be able to spoil all purgatory, which is affirmed
to be possible to his absolute power. But for plainer understanding, of this
mystery of iniquity, and abominable blasphemy: you consider two things in
a pardon, the absolution, and the application: which later (you say) may be
made for them, that be not under their power: whereof it will follow, that all
Bishops having the dispensation of the treasure committed unto them, as well
as the Pope, may grant pardons to them, that be none of their jurisdiction,
which by application may be profitable to them, though they be not by
absolution. But what is, this application? You answer, it is not by regiment,
but by aid of suit. A gross devise, to turn a pardon or remission, into a
suit or request for a pardon; when in the pardon, there is no words of prayer
or request, but of concession and grant. But by this pardon (you say) the
Pope offers to God the price of Christ's passion, and the satisfaction of
Saints. Then have we a new oblation never before heard of, proper to the Pope
in granting of pardons. Or if it be a prerogative of the Pope, that he may be
said to pray, when he does grant or command, and offer a bargen ofre
compence, where he can do no more but entreat the judge to accept it, (no
pass over all other blasphemies contained in this chaffer with god) I demand
why the Popes prayer should be heard rather then the prayer of other Bishops
and priests. You answer, no doubt for his reverence, blasphemouslie applying
to the Pope, that which according to the volgar translation is alleged to be
the cause, why Christ was heard of his father, You (...) (...), because he
represents Christ's person. Why? how far is Christ from Gods presence, that
he has need to be represented by the Pope. The scripture indeed does often
allow that the minister of Christ does represent the person of Christ unto men,
because his person is not visible, nor his humanity present unto them. But
that any mortal man should represent the person of Christ before God, and by
the virtue of that representation apply the merits of Christ, otherwise then
he applied by his passion, it is strange and intolerable blasphemy, and such
as none but a limme of Antichrist would utter. As also it is horrible to hear,
that the Popes keys in porgatorie should make forcible intercession, where
they can not give iudiciarie absolution. Before we had but two keys, the one
of order, the other of jurisdiction. Now comes in the third keie of suffrage,
by application, which is rather a picklock, then a keie, because it makes a
forcible entry, where the key has no lawful Jurisdiction.


ALLEN. And all this, that the folly os many men so much wondereth at, is
nothing else but to set before God the Father, the death of his own Son, and
his grace in all Saints, for to procure mercy for their poor breethren in
misery in the next life: as the like is done with great piety in many other
holy acts of religion continually practiced in the Church for the mutual
help one of another. And in deed, the Church has used these many years to
put this clause in such Indulgencies as did in unie part concern the departed
(per modum suffragy) as Sixtus the fourth, Innocentius the eight, and now of
late both Pius the fourth and the fifte, and all other lightly in the like
grauntes. Whereby it is plain that we are not charged by the Church further to
believe, then that the Pope may assuredly release the departed of some part
of their pains, or all, by the way of suffrage and suit, as other holy
works of Christianity applied unto them by their brethren alive, may do.
For it were no reason, that private persons should as it were communicate and
send unto them their fastes alms, and prayers for the release of their pain,
and he that represents Christ's person, should not in Christ's name and the
wholl Churches, apply unto them some part of the common wealths treasure, to
sue for their delivery and help to satisfy for them in their lacks. This
therefore they call a Pardon, per modum suffragy, as by way of aid of request.
Which doctrine is most true in it self, and agreeable to the practice of the
Church and form of Indulgences always used, and may assuredly relieve such
as departed hence in grace and zeal of Gods house, which I count disposition
enough in the party, and have friendship in the world of such as for their
sakes will be content to accomplish the appointed work of the Pardon.


FVLKE. So long as you may be allowed to say, what you list, without proof,
you may say all this is nothing else, but to set before God, etc. or what you
will beside. The clause you speak of, per modu^ suffragy, has not bin added
of many years seeing Sixtus the fourth the first that added it, lived not 100.
years before you did wright of this mat ter. The cause of this addition, was a
certain book set forth by one Petrus Oxoniensis doctor of divinity in the
university of Salmantica in Spain containing diverse conclusions contrary to
the Popish Churchs doctrine, which by the Archbishop of Toledo, Alphonsus
Cirillus were committed to be disputed and discussed, in a congregation of 52.
doctors in divinity and Canon law. The first of which conclusions was, that
deadly sins, as touching the fault, and the punishment of the other world,
are put away by only co^trition of the heart, without order unto the keys. The
fifth, that penite^ts are not to be absolved before their penance enjoined be
performed. The sixth, that the Pope can not pardon any man alive, the pain of
purgatory. The discussing of these conclusions, caused Pope Sixtus, and the
rest to devise this new clause and interpretation of their pardons, per modum
suffragii, whereas before, there was neither any such words, nor meaning in
their pardons, but the contrary to be gathered very plainly: that the pope
had jurisdiction in purgatory: in so much that Augustinus de Ancona, which
lived before this time, doubts not to conclude, that the Pope by his absolute
De potestate Eccles. quest. 32.
jurisdiction, may spotle all purgatory of all those persons, which are
subject to his jurisdiction: which are all, except they that lack merit
conditional, and such as may do for them those things, for which pardons are
ordained to avail: and except them that lack merit sacramental, which are
saved immediately by the grace of God, which is not bound unto the sacraments.
But it were no reason (you say) that private persons should communicate and
send to the souls in purgatory, there fasts, alms, and prayer, for the
release of their pain, and he that represents Christ's person, should not
apply some part of the common treasure for their delivery, etc. I answer we
acknowledge no such communication, sending or lending by private persons, for
any such purpose or to any such effect into Purgatory. But if that were
granted, yet were it no reason, that the Pope, where he has no authority,
should by any color do more then a private man, of the same worthiness or
merit. And when the Pope is a wicked man of life, as you will not deny but
many have been, what should his suit or suffrage prevail? whereas, if he were
twice as great in office, as you feign him to be, yet where his office
extends not, he should by suit prevail no more then private men of such
behavior. That this pardon, per modum suffragij, is agreeable to the practice
of the Church, and form of pardons always used, you say, without proof, but
I have proved the contrary before. That you require in the party to be
benefited, by this new kind of pardons, not only that he departed hence in
grace and zeal of the Church but also friendship in the world, of such as will
be contended to accomplish the appointed work of the pardon, you declare that
the Popes pardons, go not as Gods pardons, without respect of persons, but
with a necessary respect of worldly frendshippe: so that the souls of poor
men, and such as lack friendship in this world, are in nothing so good a case,
as the souls of rich men that with their pens are able to purchase friendship
enough in the world. So that with you the poor, whom Christ pronounces
happy, are most miserable: the rich, even they to whom Christ makes the
entrance of heaven impossible, may have soonest dispatch, out of purgatory,
for the old proverb was always true in the Popish Church, no penny no
paternoster. No frendshippe in the world no help of the Popes pardons, for
poor men's souls, for whom yet the redemption of Christ is as plentiful and
effectual, as for the scules of rich men. Whatsoever the Devil, or the Pope
has imagined to deface the glory thereof, and to make the friendship of the
world which is enmity with God, to be necessary for the applying of his most
free grace, general pardon, and undeserved reconciliation.


A declaration of the Churches meaning touching the common treasure, which is
said to remain in her store for the recompense of such iniovned penance, as
she releaseth by her pardons, with the conclusion of the wholl matter.

THE 12. CHAP.
ALLEN. But now if you ask me here how it stands with the justice of God,
thus to forgive the pain and debt of satisfaction, which either God or the
Church inioyneth, for the recompense of the former sins especially seeing
the Catholic Church does hold that it pertains to Gods justice, no less to
punish sins with some temporal scourge after it be forgiven, then it does
perteine to his mercy to forgive the said sin and the debt of everlasting
damnation. Now if it stand not with his justice, to let a sinner escape wholly
without correction or satisfaction, then it may much more appear to be against
his justice also, that any power of man should remit and release that bond of
satisfaction, which Gods instice required, and was to the offender enjoined.
For the answer and perfect understanding of this doubt, it is to be known and
well weighed, that in deed no release could be had of such enjoined penance or
deserved pain for sins past, if Gods instice were not otherwise recompensed,
and the lack of the parties punishment, supplied again by the abundance of
satisfaction made by Christ upon the Cross, eueric drop of whose innocent
blood and stroke laid upon his blessed body, were hable of the infinite and
inestimable worth and force thereof, to satisfy for all debt due to all the
sin in the world, whether it be death and everlasting damnation or tempor all
pain and purgation. By which abundant price of his passion, and copious
ransom, the Church for whose sake this precious price, was paid, does not
only hold her self to be redeemed from death and damnation, and so saved by
Christ her head, for he is the savior of his body, says Saint Paull, but
she holds the overplus (as a man wouldsaie) of so abundant copious, and
infinite redemption, to be a treasure in the house of God, to relieve her
childrens lackes, to release their pains, to work with them in satisfying for
their sin, and to work mercy for them also for lack of satisfying for their
offenses: that want being found in our penance toward the recompensing of
our evil life paste, may be supplied by the treasure of Christsdeath that
remains yet of full force and strength, to be applied unto us in such our
necessities, as shall be thought meet unto Christ's, Vicar general in earth, and
other his holy appointed ministers, with whom (as Saint Paul says) he left
the bestowing of gods mysteries. For although the holy and precious treasure
of Christ's pain and satisfaction be of it self sufficient to relieve the
lackes of all men without exception, not only of those which shall be saved,
but also for the damned and for the wholl world (says Saint John) yet no man
may be so hardy, to claim the benefit thereof otherwise, then through such
means as he has appointed, and by the ministry of such men as he has placed
over his householde and family, to give the Children meat and sustenance in
due season not as they shall inordinatlie crave it, but as he shall discreetlie
find to be mere for them. Therefore where this wise steward of Christ's holy
householde, to whom he gave the kcies of the treasure, and sufficient
authority to fceae and govern his wholl flock, where he shall orderly judge
the offender meet, and of good congruitie, worthy of grace and mercy, there
he may pardon, and recompense the residue that can not be fulfilled of the
party penitent, with some piece of that inestimable treasure of Christ's
redemption, which remains in the Church impossible to be wasted, and so shall
remain to the unspeakable benefit of the faithful.


FVLKE. This dream of the Churches treasure and the power of dispensing of the
same, resting infinitlie in the Pope, in comparision of a few small crummes
left unto the Bishops, should have been first handled, as the foundation of
popish pardon, if the compass of your cause and the method of deceit, could
have abidden it, which if it had been done, many a one that had seen the
foundation to be no surer would never have taken pains to view the rest of the
building. But as it was last invented (for none of the ancient Church, for a
thousand years and more ever heard of it) so you have done well to thrust it
unto the last end of your book. And first you begin with an objection, upon
your own ground, that for answering of Gods justice, there remains a
temporal pain after sin remitted. But because the objection is such as you
are never able to answer (so well your principles of popery hang one upon
another) you cover the hardest point and will not let it appear, namely that
Gods justice requires punishment of the party him self, that offended, for
satisfying his justice, which was not satisfied by the death and obedience of
Christ: which if it be true, then can there be no remission by any other means
(saving the justice of God) but by the parties own suffering. Yet let us see
how you avoid the objection io favorably set down for your seife to answer.
you say that Gods justice is otherwise satisfied by the abundant satisfaction
made by Christ, upon the cross and by the merits of his saints. If this be
true, then is the other principle false, that Gods justice requires temporal
punishment of the party: for the recompense of Christ's satisfaction, and
saints merits, is not the parties own punishment. wherefore as in the
objection you run from Christ's most perfect satisfaction, so in the answer
you run from the objection, which is no answer, or satisfaction. The
scripture is plain, that the blood of Christ purges us from all sin: and,
Christ by one oblation has made perfect for ever, 1. John 1. Heb. 10. Heb. 9.
those that are sanctified he has once entered into the holy place by his own
blood, and found eternal redemption. The satisfaction for sin, the purging
of vnrightcousnes, the perfecting of the saints, and everlasting redemption,
can abide no reservation of punishment, either temporal, or eternal, in which
the justice of god is thoroughly answered by the obedience, and suffering of
Christ: whose stripes having healed us, there remains no suffering of our
part for satisfying of his justice. And you confess that there is a sufficient
value in the suffering of Christ, for the taking away of all temporal
punishment, if it be well applied by the Pope. So that Christ's redemption was
but a power of redeeming and not an act of redemption, and a power depending
upon the will of man, to apply according to his pleasure, as you were wount to
speak, and not according to Gods determination, and eternal election; And so
you rob Christ of the effect of his death and passion, by which he obtained
eternal redemption for all gods elect, to enrich the pope with a treasure
infinite, and vnspendable (for that word youlent me before) which he might
bestow and dispense at his pleasure. But let us a little enter into your
storehouse, and see what tresure there is, and how you came by it. First you
tell us, of the infinite ability and the inestimable value of every drop of
Christ's blood, etc. to satisfy all debt due for all sin, and al pain for
the same: and yet you allow to the act, and effect of his bloody sacrifice, the
value but of half a drop, denying the same to have satisfied Gods justice for
temporal pain: all the rest you claim for the treasure of the Popish Church;
which dream was never hard of, before the Jubilee granted by Boneface the 8.
in the gloss whereof it was first devised. where it is said, that pardons are
founded upon the merits of Christ and taken out of it. Passio namque Christi
excessiua fuit vnde and excessus vocatur in Luca: vbi dicitur, quod in
transfiguratione Christi apparuerunt Moses and Elias cum eo, and dicebans
excessum quem completurus erat in Jerusalem, vnica enim guita sanguinis tam
preciost, suffecisset pro redemptione totiu, mundi. Nam propter coniunctionem
humanitatis cum diuinitate: (...) passio Christi perpessa pro redemptione
nostra habebat precium infinitum. Noluit autem Christus quod excessus isie
frustra fuisset, and quod de nihilo nobis (...): sed volait quod esset
Thesaurus Ecclesiae per suum vicarium To pontificem pro fidelibus loco and
tempore dispensandus: dispensatur autem, cum eis indulgentiae conceduntur. For
the passion of Christ was excessive, whereof also in Saint Luke it is called an
excess, where it is said, that in the transfiguration of Christ, appeered
Moses and Elias with him: and they spoke of the excess which he should fulfill
at Jerusalem. For one drop of so precious blood, might have sufficed for the
redemption of the wholl world: For because of the conjunction of the humanity
with the divinity, never so small a suffering of Christ, suffered for our
redemption had an infinite price. But Christ would not that this excess should
be in vain, and that it should serve us for nothing, but he would that it
should be the treasure of the Church to be bestowed by his vicar the Bishop of
Rome, in time and place for the faithful, and it is bestowed when pardons are
granted to the^. Mark upon what text this treasure is grounded, and how
clarkely it is expounded. Moses and Elias talked with Christ of his departure
out of this life, which he should finish at Jerusalem: this departure being
termed in the Greek, (...), in the Latin, excessum, this Doctor interprets
to be an excess, or superfluity of the passion of Christ: the overplus
whereof lest it should be in vain, and serve for nothing, is made the treasure
of the Church, to be dispensed by the pope. But who will grant such excess or
superfluity of the passion of Christ, as you imagine? or that never so small a
suffering of Christ, had been sufficient for the redemption of the wholl
world, which if it were granted, seeing Christ from his infancy snffered
many things for us, every one of them might have been our redemption, and so
the sacrifice of Christ's death was unnecessary for our redemption. So that his
blood shed in his circumcision, and much more in his scourging and crowning
with thorn, had bin infinitely more the^ enough, although he had not suffered
death, and shed his blood on the cross. Again as it does most excellently
set forth the justice and mercy of God to the everlasting comfort of the
faithful, that Christ by his obedience and suffering, did most perfectly
satisfy the one, and most plentifully purchase the other, to the eternal
redemption and everlasting felicity of all Gods elect: so it is against the
justice of god, that he should require that his son should suffer infinitlie
more, then was needeful to answer his justice, and work a perfect redemption,
as this glossary dream of the Popish Churches treasure, does imagine. Neither
does the argument of the conjunction of the humanity with the divinity prove
any such matter. But if that were granted, by what scripture is the infinite
overplus made a treasure of the Church? the gloss thinks that it should be
in vain, if it should serve us to no purpose: as though if any such thing
were, and might stand with Gods justice, it might not serve to set forth the
glory and riches of Christ's incarnation. Ad hereunto, that the overplus were
needeles for us, if the value of one drop be sufficient for the perfect
redemption of the whole world, it might also be sufficient to take away all
temporal pain. But if we should further admit that there were such a treasure
of the Church, who made the Pope general steward of it, and other Bishops to
have so small a portion of so infinite a treasure? You answer, that Saint
Paull says, that Christ left to his Vicar general, and other his holy
appointed ministers, the beslowing of Gods mysteries. But Saint Paull speaks
of no Vicar general, but of all Gods ministers, which be not only bishops (I
trow) that they be stewardes of his mysteries, which mysteries are his holy
word and sacraments, or if this treasure were part of them, the dispensation
of it pertains to priests, as well as unto Bishops. To proceed, this
treasure being so plentiful, as you say, no man notwithstanding may claim
the benefit of it, otherwise then through such means, as God has appointed,
and by the ministry of the man that he has appointed. But neither this
treasure, nor the means, nor the man are appointed of God, as far as we can
learn out of his written word, neither is the Pope any such steward, to whom
Christ would commit the keys of so inestimable a treasure, which considers
not the worthiness of the person, but of the price which he receives for his
pardons, as the greatest practice of them has been ever since they were
invented. Again, if the offendour be meet, and of good congruitie worthy of
grace and mercy, what need any piece of his treasure to be laid out about
him? for Gods justice is as much bound unto congruitie, as unto condignitie.
Neither can he deny pardon to any, that in any respect is worthy to receive
it; saving that grace is no grace, where their is the worthiness of the party
to deserve it, but the reward is accounted according to debt, and not
according to grace.


ALLEN. And such a perfect knot there is, now since Christ's incarnation, of
every member in Christ's mystical body, which is the Church and company of
faithful, with him being the head of the said body, that his merits,
works, suffering and satisfaction may well be applied to serve and supply
all wantes of each member thereof: yea more then that, the holy suffering and
tribulation of holy Saints, as of our blessed Lady Christ's mother, and the
holy Apostles, with numbers of constant Martirs, Confessors, and Virgins,
help to supply our lack also, and increase the huge treasure of the Church,
for the satisfying for our sins, which yet notwithstanding, as they were
meritorious to the sufferers, be fully rewarded by the glory of Christ's
kingdom and eternal felicity, which far exceeds not only the merits
of all Saints, but sufficiently rewards the incomparable humility and
obedience of Christ to his father, in suffering death upon the cross, though
his works as they be satisfactorie for us, are not yet answered in us nor can
not be till the worlds end.


ALLEN. That knot of communication of the benefits of Christ's death, was as
effectual before his incarnation as since, although it became effectual by
means of his incarnation, even as the effect of his death extended to the
salvation of his elect before his death. But you do well to follow your author
at the hard heels, the writer of that glauering gloss upon Pope Bonefacius
Bull, which: immediately aster the words by me last cited adds. Nam propter
vnionem capitis and membrorum, meritum capitis attribuitur membris: and quia
sic per alienum meritun, non per proprium meritum liberantur a poena, ideo
quantum ad ipsos talis liberalior dicitur remissio, seu indulgentia: licet
quoad Christum qui hoc nobis meruit vocetur redemptio copiosa. For because of
the union of the head and the members, the merit of the head is attributed and
applied unto the members: and because they are so delivered from pain by the
merit of an other, and not by their own merit, therefore in respect of
themselves such deliverance is called a remission or pardon, although in
respect of Christ which deserved this for us, it is called a plentiful
redemption. We know that by means of the union of the head unto the members,
the redemption wrought by the head pertains to the members: but the
application thereof, is by the spirit of God, and not by the Popes pardon, or
any ministry of man in speaking properly, which extends no further then the
outward senses in speaking the word of God to the hearing, in washing with
water, or delivering the bodelie food, in sign of baptizing with the holy
ghost, and feeding with the body and blood of Christ. But more than that (you
say) the holy sufferings, and tribulation of Saints do help to supply our
lack, and increase the huge treasure of the Church. Your words found as
though your meaning were, that the suffering of Saints does more supply our
lack, then the infinite treasure of the passion of Christ. But that I may not
take you at the worst, you mean at the lest, that they ad unto it, and you say
plainly, they increase the treasure of the Church. But you forget the infinite
valor of Christ's, bloodwhich you spoke of before, which can no more receive
any increase, then it can be diminished: for there is no proportion of that
which is infinite, to that which is finit. But if the treasure of the Church
which is infinite by Christ's merit, may be made greater by the merit, of
Saints, which are finit, then the quantity thereof must be greater by so much,
or so many parts as are added: and so there shall be proportion of finit to
infinite, or else the treasure of Christ's merit shall not be infinite. This
gross and impossible absurdity therefore came in after the first devise of
the Churches infinite treasure by Christ's merit. For Clemens the fixed which
brought the Iubelie year, from every hundred, to every 50. as he learned of
Aug. de Ancona, that lived in this time, joins in his bull the merits of all
Saints, to increase the infinite treasure of Christ's merits. Of what value the
merits of Saints be, we shall hear in the next section.


ALLEN. And for Christ in this case our adversaries perchance would not much
stick with us, but for the remain of Saints satisfaction, they can not abide.
And if Saint Paull in express words did not utter this my meaning concerning
the travail of holy Saints for Christ's body, which is his Church, the little
kolie ones of these days would have spurned at these kind of speeches, for
fear of doing injury to Christ, of whose honor the good men make themselves
so tender. These words then does Colos. 1.
Saint Paull utter of his travail taken for the Churches sake: Now I do
rejoice in my passions or tribulations, taken for your sake, and I fulfill
those things that do want of Christ passions, in mine own flesh, for his
body which is the Church. Thus said Saint Paul. Whereby you see, that not
only the want of one member may be supplied of the head of the body, but
that each member may help the insufficiency of an other member. Whereby for
all that, we may not conceive, that there is any lack or insufficiency on
Christ's part or passion, which was so full and abundant of it own valor,
that by it self alone without the help of all man's merits or other creatures,
it was a sufficient price for the sins of all the world, and more if more
might be. But the lack that this his passion was not in effect so forcible and
so fully in all men's cases, was the want of some pains and passion in his
body the Church, by which she and every of hers were bound to conform
themselves unto Christ, by taking pains in their flesh and suffering together
with Christ their head. For so long Christ's passion wants his due effect in
us, (though it were never so full and sufficient in it self) as we do not
conform our selves to his pain and tribulation taken for us. Therefore, though
Christ in his own person suffer now no more, yet he does suffer, and daily
shall suffer till the worlds end in diverse members of his holy body: as the
head, says Saint Augustine suffers when the finger aketh, and as Christ him
self charged Saint Paul that he persecuted him, when he only molested his
members. And so long as the Church militant trauailesh here in earth, so long
has Christ our Master somewhat to suffer to Act. 8.
make his passion effectual in such as shall be saved, and in that sense some
piece of his passion, in every of the faithfulls bodies must be supplied. By
all which holy pains of the head himself principallia and of the holy
members of his body, who wrought not only for themselves, but expreslie
meant to benefit other by their works, as the Apostle confesses of himself,
we need not to doubt, but the lack of many a poor member of this blessed
incorporation, is duly supplied, and the want of work satisfactorie in some,
recompensed by the abundance of pains and penance of others. For this is the
blessed cause of such as be in the Church of God, in the fellowshippe of the
faithful, in the knot of those members, whereof our savior is the head, that
is to say, in the holy communion of Saints, in which as some do lack so other
some by Christ's gift do abound and are able to procure mercy for the needy,
and to satisfy God for their poor breethrens sins. And yet all this
intercourse 1. Cor. 8.
of benefits and mutual helps passes not from the head to the members, nor
from one member of the body to another, but by the ordinary means of
Christ's appointment, as by sacraments, sacrifice, and sundry ways of his
service, and that not without the ministry of men, in whom he has out the
word of his reconciliation, to whom he has committed his keys to keep, his
sheep to feed, his mysteries to dispose, and to whom finally he has given
full power both to bind and loose.


FVLKE. Of all the ancient doctors, and learned of the Church whose writings
have come to our hands, it is great marvel no one could see the increase of
the Churches treasure in this text of Saint Paull. But seeing they saw not all
things, let us consider in what express words Saint Paul utters your
meaning. Where is mention of the treasure of the Church in this text? where is
mention of the merit of Saints? where is mention of the remains of Saints
satisfaction over and above their own necessity? where is mention of the
want of satisfying Gods justice for temporal pains?? If there be never a
word of all these things; in what express words does Saint Paul utter your
meaning. First he rejoices in his afflictions, which he suffered for their
sake, because they tended to the confirmation of their faith, and example of
Constancy. Secondly he sulfilleth those things that want or remain, of
Christ's passion in his own body: this argues no insufficiency of Christ's
passion (you confess) for his part, but the want of some pains in his body
the Church, so far we agree with you: for Christ was to suffer in his
members the saints, and they are by suffering to be made conformable unto him,
that they might reign Romans 8. 17. 2. Tim. 211. 3. Cor. 4. 10.
with him: but that these sifferinges were satisfactions unto Gods righteousness
for temporal pain, to make the passion of Christ effectual to themselves, or
unto other, Saint Paull says not in express words, neither shall you ever be
able to prove by a true syllogism out of this place, or any text in the
scripture that he means. But Saint Paull says he suffers for Christ's
body which is his Church: namely to confirm the faith of the Church, as all
the old Fathers do expound it, and as he does a best expound: himself. 2.
Cor. 1. 6. but to satisfic for pain not satisfied by Christ's death, he never
says, ne means. In tribulationibus (says S. Ambrose upon this text) quas:
patiebatur exultare se satetur, quia profectum (...) videt in side credentium,
Saint Paull acknowledges that he reioiceth in the affictions which he
suffered, because he sees his profit in the faith of the believers. And the
words of S. Paul are plain, when he says, that he suffers for the Church
according to that dispensation, which was committed unto him, which was to
edify the Church in the faith, not to redeem the Church by his sufferings: S.
Augustine speaking of the suffering of martyrs, and the effect Tract. 84. In
Joan.
of them, and comparing them with the passion of Christ, thus writes. Ille
nobis non (...) nos saluos saceret, nos sine illo nihil possumus facere: ille
se nobis palmitibus praebuit vitem, nos habere preter illum non possumus vitam.
postremo etst fratres pro fratrib. moriantur, tamen in fraternoruam peccatorum
remissionem nullius sanguis martyris funditur, quod fecit ille pro nobis: neque
in hoc quid imitaremur sed quid gratularemur. He had no need of us that he
might save us, we without him can do nothing. He has given himself to be a
vine to us the branches: we be side him can have no life. Finally although
breethren do die for their breethren, yet the bloood of no martyr is shed for
the remission of his brcethrens sins, which he did for us, neither has
bestowed upon us herein any thing that we should follow, but that we might
reioycein, In these words Augustine denies that Christ's passion wanted the
pains and pas sions of martirs to be fully effectual in all men's cases, that
no man can follow Christ herein, that his blood should be shed for remission of
sins, or the pain due for the same. And very excellently writes Leo the
first Bishop of Rome against the blasphemies of Nestorius and Eutiches,
concerning the effect of martirs Epist. 97. Leont. August. cap. 2.
sufferings in these words. Dicant quo sacrificio reconciliati: dicant quo
sanguine sint redempti. Quis est vt ait Apostolus qui tradidit seipsum pro
nobis oblattonem and hostiam Deo in odorem suauitasis? Aut quod vnquam
sacrificium sacratius fuit, quam quod verus and aeternvs pontisex, altari
crucis, per immolationem fuae carnis, imposuit? Quamuis enim multorum sanctorum
in conspectu domini pretiosa mors fuerit, nullius tamen insontis occisio
redemptio fuit mundi. Acceperunt iusti non dederunt coronas, and de for
titudine fidelium exempla nata sunt patientiae, non dona iustitiae. Singulares
quippe in singulis mortes fuerunt, nec alterius quisquam debitum suo fine
persoluit, cum inter filios hominum vnus solus dominus noster Jesus Christus,
qui vere erat agnus immaculatus extiterit, in quo omnes crucifixi, omnes
mortui, omnes sepulti, omnes sunt etiam suscitati de quibus ipse dicebat: Cum
ex altatus fuero a terra, omnia traham ad meipsum. Fides enim vera
iustificannimpios and creans iustos, ad humanttatis suae (...) a participem in
illo acquit it salutem, in quo solo homo se inuenit innocentem, liberum habens
per gratiam deide potentia eius gloriari, qui contra hostem humani generis in
carnis no sirae humilitate congressus, his victoriam suam tribuit, in quorum
corpore triumphauit. Let them tell by what sacrifice they be reconciled: with
what blood they be redeemed, who it is (as the Apostle says) which gave
himself for us an oblation and sacrifice of sweet savor unto God? or what
sacrifice was ever more holy then that which the true and eucrlasting high
Priest laid upon the altar of the cross, by the sacrificing of his own stesh?
For although the death of many Saints has been precious in the sight of the
Lord, yet the slaughter of no giltles person was the redemption of the world.
The just men have received, they have not given crowns, and of the valeantnes
of the faithful are grown examples of patience, not gifts of righteousness. For
the deaths in every one were singular, nei there did any man by his end pay
the debt of another, seeing among the sons of men there was but one alone,
our Lord Ie sus Christ, which was truly the immaculate lamb, in whom all are
crucified, all dead, all buried, all also raised again. Of whom he himseife
said, when I shall be exalted from the earth I will draw all things unto my
self. For true faith which justifies ungodly men, and makes them just,
being drawn to the partaker of his humanity, obteineth salvation in him, in
whom alone man finds himself innocent, having liberty by the grace of God
to boast of his power, which encountering with the enemy of mankind in the
baseness of our flesh, gives the victory to them, in whose body he triumphed.
If the Romish Antichrists that followed Leo the Bishop of Rome in place, had
followed, and allowed this his doctrine, they would never have devised nor
manteined this increase of their treasure by the merits and sufferings of
Saints: whose martyrdom profited the Church, by the examples of patience to
the confirming of faith, not communicating of Justice to the en crease of
merit. Whose deaths were singular, and proper to themselves to receive the
crowns of glory which Christ had merited for them: not common by way of
desert, to gain crowns for other, or to satisfy for the debt of other, For
that was the power efficacy and effect of the only sacrifice of our savior
Jesus Christ, to satisfy for the sins of his people, and to purchase the
crown of eternal glory for them.

The conformity therefore of the members unto the head in suffering, and the
suffering of Christ in his members, proves no satisfaction necessary to be
wrought by the members to make the passion of the head effectual for them, that
are saved; and much less the want of works satisfactorie, in some to be
recompensed by the abundance of pains and penance in other: neither does
Saint Paul confess any such thing, whose sufferings did otherwise benefit
the Church, then by satisfying for the pain due to other, that wanted works
satisfactorie. Neither does the communion of Saints, favor any such in which
all power of spiritual life by joints and sinews is conveyed from the head to
the members, and every member yeldeth to the rest the duty of love and
service which is appointed unto it. But to satisfy for an others sins, is
not the office of any member of the Church, neither has S. Paul where you
quote, or any where else, either the words or meaning of any such merit or
satisfaction of any man for himself, much less for other. The ordinary
ministry of men for such end and purposes as it is ordained of God, is to be
thankefully embraced: but he has no where appointed men to sacrifice, or
satisfy his justice for sin, albeit he has committed to men the word of
reconciliation, the keys of the kingdom of heaven to keep and exercise, his
sheep to feed, his mysteries to bestow, and full power to bind and loose
according to his word, and not according to their affection will and pleasure.


ALLEN. Let no man marvel, that in such a face of Gods justice, as we see by
the inioyning of great penance in the Church after sins be remitted, and by
Gods own often scourgies temporal both in this world and the next, let no man
(I say) marvel, that yet there be ways of Gods mercy, and means through
the ministry of man to turn away the wrath of our Lord, and by other helps
to satisfy his justice again. Only let the party in all his insufficiency
be zealous, deuous, and diligent as he may, and God himself will a thousand
ways seek of his own mercy to satisfy himselfc with his sons pains
applied by the travail of other the faithful that have been and be in his
Church, to the help and releife of that member that has nothing left but
love, and the fellowship of holy Saints, whereby he may crave mercy and
pardon. Let them consider that doubt of this point, how often God has, as it
were, determined to plague the people of Israel, which he chese to be his
peculiar, and yet in the midst of his decree and justice, has given mercy and
grace at Moses and Aarons requests. Yea, how often he has, as it were,
procured the just to stand betwixt him and the people whom he meant to punish.
Mansuetum habemus dominum, solum occastonem arripere vult, and mox omnem praese
fert misericordiam, says Saint Chrysostom. We Homil. 10. de poenit.
have a meek master, he only takes occasion, and sireight he shows
himself wholly to be given to mercy. He appoints to punish, that they may
see, what of justice their sin requires yet he seeks means himself, that
their high priests and guides may turn away the iniovned plague, that they
may learn (said the said holy Doctor) that they had their pardon, not of
their own merits or deseruings, but by Moses Patronage and prayers. That you
may see thereby how one member relieueth, through Gods mercy, his sellowe
member that lacked. Whereby there appears both exceeding justice, and much
more mercy. All his ways truly be mercy and judgment, to such as love his
testimonies.


FVLKE. Men must needs marvel at yourimpudencie, that will defend a necessity
of temporal pain to be suffered by the party whose sins are remitted for
satisfying of Gods justice, and yet will have the same be released without the
parties suffering, and Gods justice be answered without the pain of the soul
that offended. For otherwise the passion of Christ we know is sufficient and
effectual to take away all pain, because Gods justice is thoroughly
satisfied by him. You grant it sufficient, and deny it to be effectual,
because Gods justice requires temporal pain of the party that offended, as
well as satisfaction for the sin 'and eternal pain thereby deserved, which
heretical assertion cannot stand with any pardon or satisfaction by an other,
how soever you go about the bush in words, and show of setting forth Gods
mercy to reconcile them. Neither does inioyning of ponance by the ancient
Church, nor Gods own temporal scourges in this life prove any necessity of
suffering for satisfaction of Gods justice unsatisfied by the passion of
Christ. The temporal scourges after this life, you must first prove that
there be such, before you can conclude any thing by such. Neither has God a
thousand ways to seek, to satisfy himself with his sons pains, but the
only mediation, and propitiation of his son, is the way to satissie his
justice sor sin: Neither requires he the travel of any man other 1. Tim. 2.
1. Ioh. 2. 2.
then the external ministry of the Church, to apply the pains of his son
unto the benefit of sinners, which ministry consists in preaching his
word, delivery of his sacraments, and exercising of discipline, not in
meriting and making satisfaction for sin, or in deserving that Christ
satisfaction should be available to take away sin, or any pain due sor the
same. That God has often given mercy and grace at Moses and Aarons request,
it proves not his justice to be satisfied by Moses or Aarons works; but
only by Christ, in whom all prayers of the saints are effectual, or to
obtain mercy, either for them selves, or for others. And when he stirs up
the just to stand betwixt him and the people, when he should punish, he Ioh. 5.
sets not man's justice or merits between his justice and the offenders,
but provoke them to seek mercy and forgiveness for Jesus Christ's sake, the
only Mediator of God and man. And that is the meaning of Chrysostom, whose
words you cite, and translate at your pleasure: but thus they are, hom. de
penit, and confess. Mansuetum habemus dominum, solum occasionem arripere vult,
and mox omnem praese fert misericordiam. Nam ne peccantes and inulti manentes
nos efficeremur deteriores, non remisit nobis supplicium, sed vidit hoc
manifest, quod peccatis ipsis non minus damnosum sit non puniri: propter hoc
imponit poenam, non exigens supplicium de peccatis, sed ad futura nos
corrigent. Et vt discas quod hoc sit verum: audi quid dicatad Mosem: dimite me,
and iratus delebeos: dimitte me, non quod Moseseum retinuerit, neque enim
loquutus erat ad eum, sed silenter astabat sua pro illis oratione: non autem
supplicacionem ei dare vo lebat, quonamilli digna suppliciis comiserant,
suppliciisque ineuitabilibus, punire autem volebat sed miserecorditer: quod eos
segniores reddebat. Viraque autem fecit, and us paenam non inferres, neque
illos faceret ignauiores paena non irrogata. Discebant. n. quod non sue merito,
sed Mosis patrocinio, iram dominicam effugerint. We hau a gentle Lord, he
only will take an occasion and straight he shows forth al mercy. For lest
we sinning and abiding vnpunisbed should be made worscr, he has not remitted
the punishment unto us, but this he saw manifestly, that it is no less
hurtful then the sins themselves, not to be punished, for this cause he
lays on us a pain, not exacting punishment for sins, but correcting us for
the time to come. And that thou may learn, that this is true, hear what he
says to Moses. Let me alone, and in mine anger I will destroy them. Let me
alone (says he) not that Moses did hold him, for he had not spoken unto him.
But stood with silence in his prayer for them. But he would give him no
supplication, because they had committed things worthy of punishment, and of
punishment vnauoydeable. He meaned to punish, but mercifully, which made the^
more slouthful. But these two things he did, both that he should not lay
punishment on them, nor make the^ more sloth full because punishment was not
taken. For they learned that not by their own merit, but by patronage of Moses
they escaped the Lords anger. These words of S. Chrysostom do manifestly
declare, that the temporal punishment that God lays upon his people, are not
satisfactions of his justice, but corrections of his mercy. The patronage of
Moses in this place signifies not the merits of Moses, but his prayers and
entreaty made for them, which are heard for Christ's sake, and not for the
worthiness of him that prays. For no man has access to God, but only in
the worthiness and merits of Jesus Christ: in whom Ioh. 14. 6.
God has set forth his wonderful glory of mercy and justice, to the
eternal salvation of all his saints, which love his testimonies, and unto whom
al his ways are mertie and truth, as the Prophet says Psalm. 25. 10.


ALLEN. And it fares with our Lord God, as it does with a wise and discreet
master toward his servants, or with a father toward his loving children for
they will often show themselves to be rigorous and bent to chastise, the faults
of their servant and children, and yet themselves of their own accord will
often procure some other to hinder their intended punishments, and to take from
them as it were by force their children or other offenders: even so stands it
between God and the children of his chosen Church, who though he often justly
show himself angry, and bent to correction, never the less he does not
only mercifully remit, but procures him self, other, either patrons, or
intercessours for whose sakes he may justly and by good reason remit, After
many threatninges of the city and people of Jerusalem he thus moves
himself to mercy: Circuit vias Jerusalem, Hiere. 5.
and a spicite, and considerate, and quaerite in plateis eius, an inuenias
virum facientem iudicium, and quaerentem fidem, and propitius ero ei. Look
round about the city, and veiw the streets thereof and have good consideration
whether any one may be found there that does instice, and studeth after
faithfullnes, and I will have mercy on the City. In the fifth of Jeremy.
Where you may perceive that God will forgive all, for ones deserts, and that
the good works of one, may by Gods justice supply the lack of many other,
not yet to deliver any man from everlasting damnation that is impenitent, and
therefore in case and state of eternal death. For the work of the faithful
can not extend to do good to such as be for ever separated from their
fellowship, and therefore can be no members of the common body, in the firm
knot whereof only, their is mutual health and healpe, among such as partly
lack and partly do abound, for release of the rod of temporal correction,
that is often laid upon the children, and not of any eternal punishment,
that only happeth to such as be separated and cut of effectually from
Christ's body, which is the Church, for ever.


FVLKE. You continue still in Chrysostomes argument, but you follow neither his
words nor his meaning: for he speaks neither of meriting nor satisfying. For
his words are these immediately following that which I have last rehearsed?
Haec and nos Saepe facimus and famulos qui peccauerunt dignos suppliciis
nolentes punire, neque a supplicij metu liberari, anico, iubemus, vt illos e
nostris eripiant manibiatque vt ita timor illorum in eis crescat, and nostra
effugiant verbera. Hoc and Deus fecit. Et quod hoc sit veri^s ex ipsis verb is
manifestum est. Dimitte me inquit and irascar. Etenim nullus remittit qui
punire vult: tuncenim irascimur: Ipse autem dicit dimitte me and irascar: vt
scias quodirain Deo non sit affectio, sed pana in nos eo vocabulo nominetur.
Quando igitur audis Mosem dicentem, siquidem dimittis pecceatum dimitte: prae
seruo Dominum obstupesee, quod ipse fibi ipsi miserecordiae occasionem quaerit.
Non hic autem solum hoc fecit, sed and ad Ieremiam, and ad Ezechielem idem hoc
dicit: circuit and videte in viis Jerusalem, number sit qui faciat iudicium and
insticiam, and miserieors ero cis. Vidisti misericordiam? Multietiam impij
vnius virture simul fruuntur. Multorum autem malitia quamuis vnus sit qui recte
agat in medio magni populi non (...). Sed vnes quidem homo recte viuens populum
integrumeri pere potest ab ira Dei. Ciuitas autem integra per nersaque in suam
poenam and supplicium attrahere been viuentem, and dietecre non potest. Et hoc
de Noe manifestum. Pereuntibus enim omnibus, solus seruatus est. Et de Mose
clarum est. Solus enim potuit tanto populo impetrare veniam. This do we also
oftentimes, and being nether willing to punish our servants worthy of
punishment which have offended, nor to deliver them from the fear of
punishment, we bid our friends that they should deliver them out of our hands,
and that so their fear may increafe in them, and they may avoid our
stripes. This did god also, and that this is true it is manifest out of the
very words. Let me alone (says he) and I will be angry. for no man
relenteth that will punish: for then we are, angry. But he says, let me alone
and I will be angry: that thou may know that anger in God is no affection,
but punishment toward us is named by that term. Therefore when thou hear
Moses saying. If thou do forgive this sin, forgive it, wonder at the Lord in
comparison of the servant, that he him self seeks unto him self occasions
of mercy. Neither did he this thing here only, but also unto Jeremy, and
Ezechtel he says the same thing, go round about, and see in the ways of
Jerusalem: whether there be any that does judgment and justice, and I will be
merciful unto them. Have thou seen his mercy? many also ungodly persons
enjoy the virtue of one man together. And by the malice of many although there
be but one that does well in the midst of a great people, he does not fall.
But one man truly living well, may deliver a whole people from the wrath of
God: but a wholl communaltie that is perverse, cannot draw into their pain,
and punishment him that lives well, nor cast him down. And this is manifest
of Noe, for when all perished he alone was preserved. And of Moses it is
clear. For he alone was able to obtain pardon for so great a people. In all
these words, here is no mention or meaning of merit or satisfaction, but
only of mercy, as appears in the example of men requiring their friends
to deliver their servants from punishment: where not the worthiness of the
friends can be the cause, but the mercy of the Master. Again he speaks of
the avoiding of temporal plagues in this life, whereof even the ungodly, and
they that perteine not to the communion of Saints, often times are partakers,
which proceeds of the love of God toward his children, and not of their
merit, which you confess can not extend to them, that be for ever separated
from their fellowship.


ALLEN. Neither do the deserts only of the living help the necessity of
their fellow members being yet alive, but such as bedead also, do communicate
in their works with their brethren yet abiding in this world. And God of his
singular mercy is often contented, to be answered by them for their poor
fellow servants that be indebted so far in the Church, that they be not hable
in their own persons to dscharge their own debt Sermon de poeniten. and
confess.
nor come out of the same, whereof the said Saint Chrysostom does excellently
well consider in these words of his sermon de poenitentia: mihi autem (says
he) aliud maius est diuinae misericordiae iudicium, quod dicam. Cum enim non
inuenis homines viuos, and fiducia praeditos, qui possint intercedendo veniam
obtinere, confugit ad defunctos, and per illos inquit, se remissurum peccata.
Ezechiae enim dicit, protegam ciuitatem hanc propter me, and propter David
puerum meum. Olim enim mortuus erat David. That is to say: I have yet a
plainer and greater token of Gods mercy, which I will show you. For when he
finds none alive that be of confidence, which might by intercession procure
pardon, he turns to the departed, and says he will remit sins for their
sakes. For he spoke to Ezechias thus: I will defend this city for my own
sake, and my child 4. Reg. 10 and Esa. 57.
David's sake and yet David was dead long before.


FVLKE. This place of Chrysostom follows immediately after his words set
dowen in the section last before: in which he speaks neither of the deserts
of the living, nor of the dead, able to answer his justice for other: but
altogether of the mercy of god, which takes occasion even of his love, which
he bears toward his Saints that are departed, to show compassion upon them
that are alive: and this for his covenants sake: although Chrysostom seems
to speak of the intercession of them that are departed, which yet proves no
merit or satisfaction. For to become an humble suter for a benefit, or a
pardon, is not to deserve a benefit, or to satisfy for an offenders trespace.
And this benefit he gives ( says Saint Cyrill upon this text) unto the
memory of holy men, that sometime he forgets the evils which their
posterity have committed. In Esa. l. 3.
To the like effect speaks Saint Hierome, that which God gives of his mercy
is no merit or satisfaction to his justice.


ALLEN. And suerlie if in the days of old, where neither so much grace nor
mercy was to be found, nor Christ which is the fountain of all pardon, was
not yet offered up to pay the debtes of his brethren sins, nor the communion
of Saint was yet so fully established, whereby the merits, of one might
redound to an other, nor the Church so honored with the gift of Gods spirit
for remission of man's offenses, nor the priesthood of God so credited with the
keys of the kingdom: if before all these things were no otherwise wrought, but
in base figurse, such ways were found out, and that by Gods own procurement
of mercy and grace. in the midest, of intoyned penance and punishment, what
need we to doubt, but their now be many means made in this happy society of
Saints, so to remit the bond of satisfaction to some, that Gods justice may be
answered again by other of this happy household in the abundance of their
holy works, which the Church holds most holilie for to be a perfect and
everlasting treasure, to satisfy Gods righteousness and procure mercy to the
needy, which by love, zeal and devotion do deserve the same? If God remitted
of old, temporal pain unto his people at the call of Moses and Aaron, and
for his child David's sake that was dead, what will not he mercifully forgive
by our high priests procurements, whose pardons and punishments Christ has
solemnlie promised he would ratify and allow in heaven above? What will he
not do in respect of the pains and abundant passions of his own child Jesus,
that has yet in the Catholic Church his death so duly represented for the
remission of our daily debts? what can be denied to the intercession of so
many Saints, to the chaste combat of so many Virgins, to the bloody fight of
so many Martyrs, to the stout standing of so many Confessors? what mercy
may not the Church crave and doubtless obtain for any of ber children, either
in penance' in this world, or in pain in the next: that has in her treasure
such abundance of satisfaction, first in our head Christ Jesus, through whose
gracious works all other men's pains, are become beneficial either to
themselves or their brethren, and then in the store of al holy saints
trauilles not yet wasted in procuring mercy for others, besides more ways of
grace and remission, that our mother the Church has in readiness to relieve her
children that do continue in her happy lap and in the society of her
communion, with humble submission of themselves to the powers ordained of
Christ for the government of their souls, with request for this pardon, at
their hands, to whom be given the bestowing and disposing of the inestimable
treasure of so blessed a ministry?


FVLKE. The grace and mercy of God in Jesus Christ, was as largely to be
found for the salvation of his people in the days of old, as in these days.
Jesus Christ was yesterdaie, and to day is the same, and for evermore. And the
Lamb was slain, from the beginning of the world Heb. 12. 8.
as touching the effect of his death unto all Gods elect: and the communion of
the Saints was as fully established, to the receiving of al virtue of life
from Christ their head, and to the mutual service of love, and ministering of
gods gifts one to another: but not to merit at all, either for themselves, or
for other. Such meriting is dishonorable to the head, from whom every member
receaueth life, and all power and offices thereof, ac cording to the measure of
every member, to the increase, and Ephesians. 4. 1. 6
building up of the wholl body in love. The Church of old had also the
ministry of remission of sins, and the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
that not in base figures only, but insufficient effect, to the everlasting
salvation of Gods people. And therefore to say, that all these things were
none otherwise wrought, but in base figures, is to deny the salvation of all
the fathers that died before the incarnation of Christ. For base figures could
have but base effects: base figures could not work eternal life. The
ministry figures of the law separated from Christ, are in deed the weak and
beg gerlie elements of the world: but being referred to Christ, and made
effectual by his death through faith in the partakers, they are of the same
power and riches unto everlasting salvation, that the ministry and sacraments
of the new Testament. But admit that nothing was wrought to them but in base
figures; yet it follows not, that after the incarnation and actual death of
Christ, there should be any more means to remit the bond of satisfaction, by
answering Gods justice, then in that only sacrifice obedience, and suffering
of Christ, or that the Church should have such a store house of man's merits to
satisfy Gods righteousness, or that men by love, zeal, and devotion, may
deserve Gods mercy: these popish positions can never be proved. Again
whatsoever God remitted at the prayer of Moses and Aaron, and for his covenant
made with David, or whatsoever he gave to the memory of that holy man, he
remitted, and gave for Jesus Christ's sake, in whom only his justice was
satisfied, and he well pleased. But your high priest with his Antichristian
pardons, and punishments, which are grounded upon the merits of men, or
colored with the merits of Christ, which yet are rent and rorne from the
effect of his death, Christ will destroy with the breath of his mouth, and
abolish with his glorious appearing. For the death and passion of his son
Jesus Christ, God will be merciful to his servants that by faith take hold of
the power of his death: but neither by masses nor pardons does he bestow the
virtue thereof. The good works and sufferings of the saints, be examples of
virtue and patience, not merits or gifts of righteousness. The death of Christ
answering Gods justice, and reconciling us to his favor, has made that good
works of his saints, which are the gifts of his grace though imperfect, as
they proceed from us vnpure and unworthy vessels, yet nevertheless to be
acceptable before God unto reward, which he gives of mere mercy, and not of
merit or deserte. Therefore there is no shadow for Popish pardons, to shroude
themselves under the wings of the good works of Saints, which are the
fruits of faith, to declare them to be justified, not any cause by which in
the sight of God they can appear just, and much less be able to justify
other.


ALLEN. Would God every man could feel, how happy a thing it is, to dwell as
brethren together in the house of God under the appointed Pastors of that
family, in which only Gods favor is everlastingly found, that they might
therewith be partakers of all their works that fear God, and might have some
sense and taste of that holy ointment of Gods spirit, and gift Ps. 132. In
Psalm. 132.
of his grace, that first was upon the head of this householde, our Master
Christ Jesus, and then dropped down abundantly to his beard, even to the very
beard of Aaren, whereby (as S. Augustine says) the holy Apostles be
signified, and by them is ishued down to the homme of Christ's coat, and
imbrued all the borders of his garments, that every one of the fellowship might
receive benefit, and feel the verdure thereof. Quoniam (...) mandauit Dominus
benedictionem, and vitam vsque in seculum. For in this happy fellowship only
our Lord bestows his manifold blessings, and life for evermore. Amen.


FVLKE. Who so looks for sense, from any other fountain or beginning, then
from the head alone, shall feel no more then a stone. But who so thorough
faith is become a lively member of the mystical body of Christ, by the
operation of his holy spirit, shall undoubtedly have a most sweet feeling
of that most happy and spiritual conjunction of himself, first unto the
head which is Christ, then unto his body, which is the Church, and may
cheerefullie sing with David: Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, that
breethren dwell together. But such is the abundance of grace and virtue in the
head Christ, that he seeks not for merit or desert in himself, or in any
of his fellow members, although he receive the gracious ointment of spiritual
doctrine, as S. Augustine does expound it, flowing from Christ to his Apostles,
and from them into all parts of his Church: by which he is not taught to trust
in himself, or to depend upon other men's merits or pardons: but to repose the
wholl hope of his salvation and deliverance from the wrath of God in the
merits and satisfaction of Jesus Christ his head: towhome with the father and
the holy ghost be everlasting praise of our redemption, reconciliation,
salvation, glorification in his holy Church, and fellowship of Saints
throughout all generations, and world without end,


Amen.
God be praised for ever.
AN APOLOGY OF THE PROFESSORS OF THE GOSPEL IN FRANCE AGAINST THE RAILING
DECLAMATION OF PEter Frarine a Louanian turned into English by John Fowler.

Written by William Fulke.

AN APOLOGY AGAINST THE RAILING DECLAMATION OF PETER FRARINE.
IT is pity, that the president of the Quodlibeticall disputations of Louane,
had no more discretion, then to propounde in steed of exercises, of learning,
a question perteining to the estate, and doeings of other people, with whom,
neither the speaker, nor the hearers had any thing to do, neither were hable
by knowledge of their affairs to discearne the cause, nor by authority of
their place, to decide the controversy. But seeing they are disposed,
otherwise then wise men would be, to be curious in a foraine common wealth;
and Fowler has fantafied, that the same also may apperteine to England, which
in Flaunders was de claimed against France: Let us see what Peter Frarine
brings, which may concern the common cause of religion, where in they of
France, against whom he has shot his bolt, do agree with us in England.
First he says, as most wicked persons, they have disturbed religion, and
peace. A grievous accusation. But where is the proof? The question of
religion, he leaves to be handled of others, the deciding whereof
nevertheless, would purge the persons accused, for the most part of the other
crime of disturbance, of peace. Well, the respo^dent is not to be blamed, that
stands upon that question which according to the custom of the school, was
propounded to be the argument of his talk at that time. And therefore he will
open and declare, first that there was no cause, or just occasion why these men
should rise, and make insurrection. Then that they took weapon in hand without
authority, contrary to law, and in dispite of all Magistrates and Rulers.
Last and finally, that they used themselves to cruelly, and handled their
sword to bloodelie, to the greatest damage, hindrance, and loss, that ever
was felt in Christendom. These are the divisions of the circle, with in which
the orator has enclosed himself. But al these points, so far as they
concern the troubles in France, are fully and directly confuted, by all the
edictes of pacification, given forth to the knowledge of the world, by Charles
the ninth, and Henry the third, Kings of France: in which they have always
acknowledged, that the Protestants upon just cause, with sufficient authority,
and in their service, and to their honor, have put them selves in arms, and
done whatsoever the necessity of war lawfully taken in hand, has enforced
them to do. Then judge, whether against the public testimony of two Kings,
whom the matter most concerned, and that more then once, or twice repeted, I
need to stand in the co^futation of Peter Frarines petty and private
declamation. Notwithstanding although I have with one hatchet hewn a sunder
the wholle stoke, of this railing oration, yet I will not spare to brattell out
the bows, and branches thereof, in answering to every particular quarrel,
and cauil of the same.

There was not any good or reasonable cause (says he) why the founders, and
brokers of this new Gospel, should be driven to put themselves in arms,
against the Catholics. See how the vain declaimer, which refused before, to
handle the question of religion, now takes upon him most arrogantlie to decide
the same. For if the Protestants be founders and brokers of a new Gospel, and
the Papists be good Catholics, there is no cause, why they should once open
their mouths against the Papists, much less arm themselves, (as he said
they did) against the Catholics. But if this matter pertain to the question
of religion, the debating whereof is not presently intended, let us pardon him
these prejudicial terms, as well now, as hereafter, and consider only,
what reasons he brings, to prove his purpose. No laws ought to be changed,
with out great cause, least of all the laws of religion. So far we both
agree: but there is great cause to change laws ofreligion; when Antichrists
decrees have displaced the laws of God, the only rule of true religion. Yet
(says he) there can never be any reason, or sufficient cause alleged, that
innovation of religion, should be attempted by force of arms, by war, and
rebellion, by fire, and sword, by murder, and blood shed, of good and faithful
subjects, Let this also be granted: for this nothing touches the cause of
them, which, to mantaine a law made for religion, and to defend themselves
from the cruelty of private persons, are required by the governors of the
realm to arm themselves, for defense of the King his laws, and their own
lives.

The law of the Locrensians pleases him well: that the procurer of any
alteration, should preach with a rope about his neck, wherewith he should be
strangled, if the audience misliked his devise. The rope had need to be in
wise men's hands, where that law should be practiced; or else the Apostles, and
first preachers of religion in the world, might have been hardly handled,
before they had half uttered their message. And therefore the Princes, and
rulers of the word in this our time, are wiser then Peter Frarine, or John
Fowler, in not establishing, and practicing of this Iawe, as these men would
wish they had. But the default thereof (says he) has caused so lamentable an
estate of all things, wars, tumults, slaughters, ruins, Churches, and
towns ouerturned, etc. Admit these were the effects (as they are nothing
less) of the Protestants preaching; what would the law of the Locrensians
have stayed in this case; when with the good liking both of the Prince, and of
the people, these preachers have been heard, and their doctrine received? It
greeueth him, that it was free for these preachers, without any fear of the
rope frankelie and boldly to persuade with the people. And thinks he that
fear of the Locrensians rope would have restrained them, whom the terror of
Antichrists fire, and tragical torments, never discouraged to publish the
message of Christ their master? Naie they went further, from words to wounds,
and blows, they attempted reformation, by civil war and rebellion. There
was a company of desperate persons that ran about the strcetes of Parris,
with naked swords in their hands, and cried out, the gospel, the gospel, (as
Claudius de sanctes, an utter enemy of the gospel, bears witness) But I
pray you M. Frarine were these preachers that so ran and cried, that beside
varnished words disbursed wounds and blows? If they were not preachers, (as
your author Claudius cannot say they were) how hangs your talk together?
Must the preachers be charged with every disorder of their hearers. Then let
the Popish preachers answer, for all thefts, murders, treasons, incests,
rebellions, and other offenses, of papists; but if any such desperate persons
ran about, as you say, how prove you, that they were disciples, of the
protestant Preachers, and not rather futious firebrands, of the popish friars,
and Sorbonicall teachers, by whose seditious sermons, they were incensed to
murder the Protestants, and true professors of the Gospel; for how like is it,
that so small a number of the Protestants, as was never able to afford but an
handful of fighting men in Parris, would attempt to arm themselves, against
such an infinite multitude of zealous, and mutinous Papists, as were in that
City? Where the very Croisters and common porters, (that I speak nothing of
so many thousand artificers) had been able, not only to have withstood their
attempt, but also to have chased them out of the city. Notwithstanding, if you
willneedes urge your Authors report, that they were Protestants, why do you
not tell us how many they slew with those glistering swords? At least wise
name one whom they wounded with those weopons in their hands, when they cried
out, The gospel, the gospel.

Contrariwise how thirsty of blood the Papists and their preachers have
been, it is an easy matter to make manifest proof. For that I speak nothing
of the horrible massacre most cruelly executed not only in Paris; but
throughout all the realm of France: the cruelty whereof would over whelme at
once, and swallow up whatsoever can be fained of the Protestants severity.
There be many hundredth witnesses alive, which can report, that in the latter
end of the reign of King Henry the second, the Popish preachers perceiving
how greatly he favored their cause, stirred up the people in their daily
sermons unto sedition, affirming that it was a thing acceptable unto God, and
meritorious, if any man should kill a Luthe rane: whereupon insued many
horrible murders, of which some are perticularlie recorded in history. In the
Church yeard of Saint Innocents immediately after a sermon, when two were
brawling as the people came Comment. de statu lib. 1.
forth of the Church, and the one more of spite, then of any cause, called the
other Lutherane, the people straight way ran upon him, and pursued him into
the Church, whether he fled for sanctuary. A certain gentleman passing that
way, with his brother, which was a Popish Priest, hearing that a man should be
slain of the people, in deuoureth to pacify their minds with fair words, to
deliver the poor man from their hands. A hedge Priest by and by cries out,
that this gentleman was the man whom they sought for, which durst defend a
Lutherane. The people immediately set upon the gentleman. The priest his
brother began to speak for him: but thereby they were more enraged. To be
short, after they were both drawn out of the Church, the gentleman hardly
escaped into the Curats house: The poor priest with many wounds was cruelly
murdered, saying his Confiteor, by which it did sufficiently appear he was no
Lutherane. Not many days before that, a certain Sorbonist (whom they called
the Picardes soul, a common trumpet of sedition in those days) to inflame the
people against the Lutheranes, used often to beat upon this point, that it was
an holy thing to shed the Lutheranes blood. The slaughter of whom, as of the
Cananites of old time, was very acceptable to God, and that the hands of the
godly Catholics should so be consecrated. Acertaine student, which came to
hear one of his sermons, chanced to smile upon his fellow which sat by him:
an old woman that espying, cried out, that there was a Lutherane which mocked
the preacher. The brutish people no sooner heard that voice but without further
inquiry, they drue that student out of the Church, and most cruelly dug
out his eyes, and dinged out his brains.

The indiferent reader may reasonablelie by these examples gather, what havoc
was made of them that were known to be Protestants indeed; when upon so light
occasions, they that were not, known, nor justly suspected, were so suddenly
murdered: when the Priestlie apparel could not defend the priest, who favored
the Lutherans no further, then to speak a word for his own brother, who was
in manifest danger of being murdered, while he sought no more, but by honest
persuasions, to deliver a third person from murder. against whom there passed
no sentence, to convict him of Lutheranizme, but the malicious reproach of his
enemy, who by all likelihoode was as much a Lutheran as the other, and
perhapes, neither of them both either of religion, or of honesty. These
preachers of Paris most worthy not of the Locrensians rope, but ofa much
greater torment, as procures of so wilful murder, should M. Frarine call upon
with the saying of Christ unto Saint Peter: put up thy sword into thy sheath:
rather then the preachers of the Gospel, who neither drew any sword
themselves, nor ever were authors or councellers to any man, of murder and
cruel bloodshedyea to the pope himself which vaunteth that he is Peter's
successor, this text should be most aptly applied, when he not only
stirs up Princes to make wars, one against an other, but he himself also
makes bloody battelles, not for defense of religion, but to maintain his one
worldly quarrels, not to hold his own right, but to invade other princes
dominions. Put up thy sword into thy sheath (said Christ unto S. Peter) the
sword of Paull, said Iulie the second, shall defend us, when yonder keie of
Peter will no longer serve us. But Friar Luther is called to witness, that it
was not the Gospel, which the Protestants took in hand to maintain, by
these bloody wars: who said in the assembly at Lipsia. (Neither was this
matter ever begone for Gods quarrel, neither shall be ended for Gods sake.)
Hereupon follow great outcries: but who is witness, that these were Luthers
words, which every Papist does so spitfullie gnawe upon? None but Luthers
enemies Emser and Eccius, and the Legate: yet was there present many other,
not only his friends, but more indifferent persons, then his professed
adversaries: yet none of them can bear witness of this speech. But admit the
words were spoken in the only hearing of his enemies, does it follow that
they must needs have no other sense, but that which the Papists do most
malitiouslie imagine of the? Might not Luther mean of that cause, and matter,
which his adversaries had begone against him? or is it proable to any
reasonable man's judgment, that Luther would deny, that the contention which he
then maintained against the popish heresy, was ever begone for Gods quarrel,
or should be ended for his sake? If the^ this malicious sense carry with it no
likelihood of truth, whereto serves that exclamation? O noble, sentence, etc.
and the rest that follow eth. What wars did Euther ever make or move, that
he should be called sorth by Frarine, to show his commission from god for soul
doings? Yea if at were true, that Luther both spoke and meant as you falsty
charge him: and had bin as great: an hipocrite, as he was a sincere preacher,
were those only word sufficient to carry away the wholl cause of the Gospel,
from the Protestants to the papists, and to prove that no other protestant had
commission or authority from God, if Luther confessed he had none? See I pray
you what weighty arguments the papists lean unto while they accuse the
protestants to have made war without just cause. But P. Frarine dissembleth
no this adversaries objection, that faith was well nigh querched and out of the
Church, which the Protestants purposed to reform. Neither may we dissemble
his answer. Christ prayed (says he) for S. Peter, that his faith should never
fail, and will you say that he prayed in vain? No verily: for we believe
that S. Peter's faith, neither in that most grievous temptation, against which
he was comforred by these words of our savior Christ, neither in any other to
his lives end did ever fail. But what does that appertain to the pope or
popish Church? Again he says, has not the holy Ghost taught the Church all
truth, for which cause he came down from heaven? we believe the holy ghost
taught al truth to the Apostles according to Christ's promis, and upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles the Church is builded to continue
forever. If the popish synagogue host of the holy Ghost without the foundation
of the Prophets and Apostels, who shall believe that she is the Church of
Christ?

But if your purpose was (says Frarine) to reform the Christian faith, when
you could not persuade the people by reason, did you think it the best way
with gonneshot and beetles to drive the faith into their heads? You are
greatly deceived: the mind may be induced by reason, it can not be compelled
by stripes. No sir: they never had purpose to persuade faith by blows and
battle, neither did they ever put on armor for such purpose; but constrained
by injury, and allowed by authority to defend themselves. Neither did they
ever think, that the vicious manners of men, were to be reformed by any other
means, then by preaching of Gods word, Christian discipline and godly laws.
And therefore to term them but fling-braines and light Lack strawes, and all
their doings nothing but a bloody butcherie, a heinous wickedness, a deuilish
dealing an impiety never to be pardoned (as Frarine does) it is the sentence
of a light, and lavish orator, and not of a grave and lawful judge. What would
this man have termed the massacre of Parris, and the executioners there of?
where not in painted words, but in most cruel and lamentable deeds, more
then ten thousand persons of all degrees, ages, and sexes were murdered in one
day, without any examination, process, or sentence; but being called
together under the pretense of (...), league, and marriage.

But to proceed in our matter, you that accuse the papists (says Frarine)
for their evil life, are the work men and naughtiest livers that ever trod
on earth. And that did Luther himself, (whom he calls the third Elias)
plainly confess, that the manners of men were far more vicious under his
Gospel, then ever they were before under the Popedom. But I pray you Master
Frarine, says Luther so much of all that professed the Gospel, which he
preached: or of some hypocrites, whose wickedness was grea ter after knowledge
received, the^ it was in ignorance? The truth is, Luther neither flattereth the
ungodly, which out wardlie professed the Gospel, nor yet accuses al true
professors, for the wickedness of some hypocrites. What then does Luthers
testimony make for Frarines slander? that they which accuse the papists are
the worst men in the world. But if anyof the disciples (says he) dare deny
this matter the adulterous beds, the smoke of burnt houses; the earth yet moist
with blood, theirpurses swelling with spoil, bear witness against the^. These
general acusations deserve no answer, except they be exemplified by
particulers. And therefore he calls forth Martin Luther, being ready to
charge him if he dare show his face, with rebellion, sedition, sacrilege,
impiety, heresy, and all manner of wicked vices, and heinous offenses that
can reign in a man, by the testimony of Charles the Emperor, Henry the
eight, King of England, and Sigismonde King of Pole, in their several edicts,
and public writings. And as though he had him bound with invincible chains
of this argument, he asks him, what he can lay against these witnesses? As
though it were not the easiest thing in the world to answer, that all these
(though the noblest, the best, and worthiest of credit in their time, yet were
to far distant from the place where he lived, to be eye witnesses of his
naughty behavior. And therefore whatsoever they did write, must needs proceed
from the false suggestion of his enemies. Where otherwise it is not credible,
that the Duke of Saxony under whom Luther lived, if he had known him to be so
vile a person, would have suffered him to live, much les would have reformed
religion according to his preaching. From Luther thus summoned to appear, he
takes upon him, as the Pythonesse played with Samuel, to call up Calvin out
of hell, to confess, that he kept a Nun five years in his chamber, until
she was great with child by him, and that he married her to an Apostata
channon that dwelled at Lausanna. And this (he says) that all the world
knows. If you ask him, by what testimony? he produces a slanderous
libellintituled passauant Parisien printed at Paris 1559. Against the falsehood
whereof, which never deserved credit with any reasonable man, the wholl city
of Geneua is ready to give testimony, under their common seal, if need
were, that there was never any color of such a slander, so impudentlie
devised: which in deed sufficiently confuteth it self: that in so many
years, and among so many, enemies as Calvin had both in that city, and
abroad, it could never be broched, until the year 1559, which was 24. years,
after his coming to Geneua, which vile slander Fowler in the description of
his infamous, picture, setterh forth, with blasphemous abusing of the holy name
of the Gospel, to signify the most vile and filthy act of lechery.

From Calvin our Frarine passes to Beza, whom with like impudency he
burdeneth with two heinous crimes: and yet so confidentlie, that he doubts
not to speak unto him in these words. Deny if thou dare Theodore Beza, deny
if thou can for shame: Would you not think, he had manifest proofs of the
crimes in such sort objected? Let us hear then, what they are. First he
charge Beza, to have sold his eccleslasticall liuinges (which he had in
France) before his departure to two diverse men for ready money. For which
double dealing he was denounced excommunicate, and so proclaimed in all the
market places of Parris. To prove this crime, he quoteth in the margent, the
preface of Bezaes confession. But in that preface Beza indeed confesses, that
the revenues of those Church liuinges (which his friends had procured for
him) were a great let to him for a long season, to make open confession of his
faith, from the sweetness of which gain, as a filthy dog from greasy
leather, he could hardly be driven away, until almighty God by an extreme
sickness, so waked him out of that security, that immediately after his first
recovery, he left at once his country, Parents, and friends, and departed
with his wife unto Geneua. But of selling his benefices in such an dishonest
manner, there is no mention: but contrariwise in the same preface, he defieth
all the world, for any other crime of dishonestie, then the setting forth of
certain wanton verses, which were made when he was a child, and printed while
he was under the age of twenty years. The second crime objected is: that he
married an other man's wife, who was a tailor, dwelling in Harp street at Paris:
whom Master Charkes Censurer out of Bolsec, affirms to have dwelt in the
Calender street (that you may know how well the witnesses agree together) with
further slaunderrs: as that she was called of Beza Mistres Candidae or mistres
Beauty in his bawdie verses. Whereas it is well known, that Beza in that
poetical fiction, devised after the imitation of ancient Poets, meant no
special person; and least of all could mean his wife: for that in those verses
he commends Candidae, being great with child to the Gods, Whereas his wife
never had any child by him. Further he says that she fled to the stews,
because her husband having taken her in adultery had given her a gash with a
knife in the hippe. A pretty invention, if the gash had been in her face, or in
any other part of her body, that might have been seen with honesty; some or
other should have been witness of the scarre: and therefore it is placed, where
none for shame, might demand the sight for trial. An other cause of her
flight unto the stews was (as he says) because she had been put in prison,
for that she fetched a friscoll when she was dawnsing in a tavern with her
customers, and said. Hoigh one leap more for all Christian souls. A sorry
cause why she should fly to the comme stews, because she had been
imprisoned. Is it not more like if any such thing had been, or if she had
been willing to depart from her husband, that she having so many customers,
as this tale pretends, and specially Beza, who could spend seven hundred
crowns by the year, (as he confesses) would not have sought aid of him, or
them, rather then to have cast her self into a place of such public infamy.
But all this fable is utterly denied of Beza, as containing no spark of
truth: for his wife (whom he married privily in Paris, in the presence of one
or two only of his friends) was of so godly and honest behauionr, that she
would not consent to the match, but upon express promise and condition, that
as soon as he could conveniently, al impediments set asside, he should carry
her into the Church of God, and openly confirm the matrimony between them,
and also that in the mean time he should enter into none of the Popish orders:
both which conditions he faithfully performed. Here isnothing therefore
brought against Beza, or his virtuous wife, but accusations without witness,
slanders without proof, lies without color or show of truth. The like I
say of that general railing which follows, both against the scholars of
this gospellish congregation (as he scornefullie terms them) and the Mistres
of the same: whose wickedness in all kind of horrible sins he affirms to be
so great that if the lot had bin between the Protestants and the papists
(which order of justice he wishes had bin observed) that whether have most
wickedly tra^sgressed gods and man's laws, should have gone first to the
gallows, there had not been one Protestant left alive to hold war against
the Papists. I am ashamed to use any words in confutation of such a monstrous
a lie, which no eninmie of the Protestants being in his right wits, does
think in his conscience to bear any credit, or similitude of truth. Many
called Protestants have been wicked livers: but that all should be condemned
in capital crimes, beyond the most wicked of the Papists, it is too beyond
measure, a most pestilent, but yet a riduculous slander. But you (says he)
that can be are with no man's faults but your own, did not subscribe to the
crime, as the law ordeineth, to bind your selves to the punishment of the
faults, which you could not prove against other. Yes verelie, either for the
general crime of heresies laid against Antichrist, and his sinagogue, or the
particular crimes, against the persons of many Papists, the reachers of this
learning, which we profess, and many professors also have put to their names,
and subscribed with their own hands. And although they failed not of proof,
if they had been heard before indifferent judges, yet have they been cruelly
tormented, and put to death, for the testimony of the truth: whereas if
Frarine should have been bound to the ordinance of the law, which he
prescribes to others, if he had as many lives, as Hydra is fained to have
heads, his body would not have sufficed, to the execution which he has
deserved, both for his particular slanders against some men, and for his last
general accusation of all Protestants. But yet more impudentlie you behaved
your selves, and more contrary to all order and form of lawful proceeding:
for in this your monstrous judgment of reformation, you were accusers,
witnesses, Judges, and hang men yourselues. How much more rightly, might he
have uttered this against the Pope, who being accused of heresy and
blasphemy, would be his own judge, and tried by no witness, butof his own
allowing: whereas the Protestants never refused the arbitriment of a free, and
lawful council, the ancient remedy to decide the controversies of the Church,
where the word of God should be the highest Judge, against which no convocation
of men have power to define any thing.

But it may be says Frarine) that your vow of chastity which you were not
suffered to break by marriage (which he calls bathing their bodies in the
stinking pudle of carnal pleasures) was the cause of your vprores. How
unfitly this quarrel of vows is alleged against Calvin and Beza, the
principal teachers of the french nation, who never made that vow; all wise men
may laugh to consider. Yet he follows the matter very whotlie, and says:
that faith and promise to a mortal enemy is to be kept: much more made to
almighty God. I would this eloquent orator had been alive in the time of the
council of Constance, that he might have persuaded the Popish Church to have
kept the public faith, and safe conduite granted to Hus and Hierome, which
was shamefullie violated, under color, that faith was not to be kept with
heretics: or in the time of the slaughter of Varni, which drew with it the
destruction of the noble realm of Hungary, that he might have diswaded the
pope, from stirring up the king of Hangary to break the faith, and league of
peace, made with the great Turk, upon pretense, that faith is not to be kept
with infidels. But as for vows made to god, except they be of things
unlawful, or which are not in our power to perform, who doubts but they are
inuiolablie to be observed. The vow of chastity in such as are not able to
contain, is not kept, by not marrying; But rather daily broken in burning.
The remedy whereof, by the judgment of Epiphanius, and Saint Hierom, and the
Catholic Church of their times, is marriage: and not the common stews, and
brothell houses, light women, married and unmarried, and Nuns fallen from their
profession; which Frarine does leave unto them, as a less evil then marriage.
But where are those common stews, and brothel howses, which (he says) are
open at all times, and every where at men's pleasures? Are there any to be
showed under such Christian Princes and Magistrates, as manteine the doctrine
of the Gospel? no verily: but where popery reigns, and where the Pope
setreth himself at Rome. No marvel though such gross impiety. be not only
suffered to be unpunished: but also by the Popes proctors to be desended, as
convenient. Yet some towns are so well ordered, that votaries can not be
suffered to have a misteris Harding contra Apoligiam.
Candida, for a vessel of easement, which (he says) is Couerdales phrase (yet
shows no place where) he demands then, whether that were a sufficient
quarrel, to bid battle, to manteine the kingdom, and Gospel of Venus in
every place (so chaste and religious his phrases be) while he carpeth at
Couerdales phrase: whom perhaps he belieth, in such sense as he means. I
answer there was no such cause: For if they had been as greatly addict to
Lady Lechery, as he faineth of them: those well ordered towns are not so
many in Popery, but that they might with much more ease, have removed to
Cities of greater license: then to have taken in hand, and endured so great and
dangerous wars. And if the satisfying of lust, without regard of conscience
had been the mark they shot at, they needed not so to have bound themselves
to one woman in marriage, which brings many cares, and troubles with it, when
they might without controllement have had their change and choice (as you
confess) by the common stews every where, even to the cloying of carnal
lust, if they had continued still in Popery.

But yet further searching out the cause of these wars taken in hand, he
obiecteth, that some of our 1. Tim. 5.
side suffered for the words sake, for so (says he) ye call that cursed Gospel
of yours. Doubtless we call the word of God, and no Gospel of ours, but the
Gospel of Christ, by that term, which we find used in the holy scriptures,
and therefore are not afraid of it. Nay but you suffered worthily (says he)
for barking at prelates, and Princes, for working al means to wring the sword
out of their hands for troubling and disordering the state of commonweals,
for blaspheming the sacrament of the alter, and therefore they were no Martyrs,
but rather Diuelles. This lastcrime depends upon that controversy of
doctrine, whether that which he terms a sacrament, be not rather a
sacrilege, and detestable Idol, as it is used in popery. The other crimes
are utterly false, and manifestly confuted, by the quiet behavior of those
professors, in all places, where they be not assaulted with intolerable
injuries, and by the flourishing estate of those kingdoms, and common wealths,
where this doctrine, by public authority, has long time been received. But
was it meet (says he) that because they could not freely preach the word,
therefore they should, by and by, lay hand on the sword. The Apostles were
went to suffer, and not to strike. But O Master Ministers, your word is very
hard, you speak gunnestones, you preach fire, and powlder, you ride to preach
on barbed horses, you put on your corpsiet, not of faith but of iron. Al your
proceedings and teachings are contrary to Christ, and his doctrine. What wise
man may not laugh, at this vain rhetorike, who has seen or hard the modest
and Christianlike behavior of our preachers (that I speak nothing of their
doctrine) yea Christ) says he) was content to ride on an Ass, the Apostles to
go barefot, in planting the Gospel. But whereon (...) the pope, and how be
his Cardinals feet surbaighted, in going barefote, to preach the Gospel?
Although, I know not where he finds in holy scripture, that the Apostles
went barefote, in planting the Gospel. Their travel was great into all parts
of the world, though they had been well shood, yea booted, and ridden on
horseback. But if the comparison be made, between the ministers of the
Gospel, and Antichrist the Pope, and his proud prelates, whether in patience,
humility, and mildnes of behavior, be more like to Christ, and his Apostels:
we doubt not our cause, though the trial were before very partial judges.
Well, howsoever it were, you should have suffered Martyrdom, rather then to
have resisted and murdered other, but that you would not, for you sought to
live licentiously, and had no hope of eternal life after this. Among so many
thousand as suffered martyrdom most quietly without resistance, when they
were imprisoned, tormented, and condemned, by those which had power to kill
their bodies, he can find no examples of patience, and hope of eternal life,
except all the Protestants in the world will give there throtes to be cut, and
suffer themselves to be murdered, contrary to law, and liberties established
by lawful authority, and that by private persons and bloody Tirants: as the
poor Christians were by the Duke of Guyse, at Vassi: and so should all the
rest in France have been, if God had not stirred up diverse Princes and noble
men, at the request of the Queen Mother, to oppose themselves against the
furious and traiterous attempts of that bloody tyrant: who abusing the
minority of the King, whom he took captive, with his mother, usurped most
unlawful power against the King, the Queen, the estates, and all the realm.

Frarine therefore fares with us, as that seditious Ruffian of Rome, who sued
an action against his enemy, whom he had wrongfullie wounded, because he
received not his weapon deep enough, to death. Christ himself the pattern of
patience, said to the servant, which most injuriously smote him, when he
stood in judgment before the high priest, why smitest, thou me? if I have
spoken evil, bear witness of evil, that is deal with me as order of justice
requires. And Saint Paul his faithful disciple, could not forbear that
painted wall Ananias, who pretending to sit in judgment, according to the
law, did (contrary to the law) command him to be smitten: and should the
Protestants in France having both authority, and power to defend themselves,
suffer the Duke of Guyse, a private man, and a stranger with his accomplices, to
smite of all their heads, as it were with one stroke? and not rather, to
oppose themselves against his fury; not only for defense of the gospel, but
also for the maintenance of the law, and the liberty of their nation? There
resistance therefore, was not treason, rebellion, cruelty, (as this declaimer
raueth) butobedience, justice, and authority, to withstand treason, cruelty,
and rebellion. Yet again he repeateth, that lack of liberty, was no just
cause of these wars, seeing every where they might fill their paunches,
carry a sister wife, about with them, toule Nuns out of cloisters, and
filthilie abuse them, still he speaks as though none were Authors, Captains
or Soldiers of these wars, but such licentious ministers, or as though so
many princes, noble men, gentlemen, and valiant soldiers, as served in those
wars, had no other quarrel, but to maintain the gluttony and lechery of a
few lewd ministers; of which sort yet he is not able to name one: Nevertheless
he says that most commonly every Apostate Monk, had his Nun at his toil:
and holy Kate her holy mate: Although the world knows that this might
better be verefied of Clauster all Monks and Nuns, of limiting friars, and
their holy sisters. But srier Luthers pleasure was (if we believe this man)
that his Lady Venus court should be frank and free, if the wife (says he)
will not do it, let the maid supply her place. The will of God commands
and necessetie binds, as well to have carnal copulation as to eat and
drink. See how malice draws all words to the worste meaning. Luther in his
book of Babilonicall captivity, speaking in the person of Assuerus, taking
Hester his maid to wife, when Vasti refused to come to him; has some such
words as he reports: If the wife will not, let the maid come, and possess
her place, meaning nothing else, but the diuorcing of Vasti, and the marrying of
Hester: but nothing (as the Papists cavil) that a man having a wife, may
abuse his maid. The other saying of the necessity of carnal copulation, is
spoken only of them, that have not the gift of continency, for whom
marriage is the lawful and necessary remedy, ordained by God, to avoid
sin.

To conclude this first part, he says, it was neither religion, nor gospel,
nor Gods quarrel, they meant to further, but malice against the pope. as
Luther in an epistle ad argentin: confesses. But Luther never confessed any
such matter, he might well acknowledge his just hatred against the Pope, as the
enemy of Christ, and so do all true Christians. And if the estates of France
had raised war for malice against the Pope, they would have sent a power into
Italy to have annoyed him, or his possessions, there, as Charles the 5. and
Philip, his Catholic sons have done for the love they bare to the Pope. As
for the restitution of Christian faith well near worn out, there was no need
(he says) to labor. For the Church of God, the seat, and pillar of truth,
had always without force, and battle kept that most recurently. Then it
follows the Church of Rome was not the Church of God, for which Christ prayed
Ihon. 17. To which he promises the holy Ghost Ihon. 14. In which are found so
few sparks of true faith, and which mainteineth so many gross errors,
eontrarie to the express words of God, contained in the holy scriptures, as
often and most clear demonstrations has been made. To be short, if the
cause of these wars taken in hand be demanded ( which he calls Tragical
and cruel doings) you shall have a short answer (says he) with Mum Budget,
except they will allege perhaps the ambition, avarice, boldenes, wantones,
of certain loose Friars. as though he could be ignorant of the public
protestation of the Prince of Condy, and a great part of the nobility of
France, set forth when they began the first Comment. de stat Relig. and Rei.
part. 2. Lib. 4.
wars: In which they neither allege the fond surmised causes by Frarine, nor
mumble them over in Mum Budget, but plainly declare the reasonable sufficient,
and necessary causes which moved them to that attempt. The copy whereof is
yet extant in story, to be seen and read.

Now is he come to the second part, wherein he will prove that as without just
cause, so without authority and commission they have made wars. And first he
says, though Kings for light or no just causes making wars are greatly in
fault, yet the soldiers are excusable because they obeie lawful authority.
But in these wars, where no Magistrate bids them strike, all are private
men, or rather all (...), (...), and most cruel murderers, and so with many
needles words, he runs out into the common place of treason, and rebellion,
in which whatsoever cause be pre tended, the war is unlawful, because it
wants lawful authority. But such was not the cause of the protestants wars
in France, where the King being under age, and brought into captivity against
his will by a traitor, by Edict of Ianuar.
who^e also the edict made by the authority of the three estates of the Realm
was violated, witha most barborous, and cruel slaughter, ofinnocent men, being
in exercise of their Religion, as it was lawful for them to do, by the
Princes of his blood, and other nobles, called also thereunto by the often
letters of the Queen his mother to deliver him and her from captivity, was
sought to be set at liberty, his laws to be observed, and the public quiet
of the realm to be restored. and so Frarines question is answered, whence came
you? who sent you? by what authority do you all these things.

The princes and noble men that joined in leagu to withstand the tirannie of
the Guisians have declared their commission in a public instrument set forth
to the view of the world, the copy of the Queen mothers letters are set forth
in story for every man to reed. The originalles remain with the prince of
Condyes heirs and have been seen of many, But what shall Guise answer, if
he be called to show his commission, by what authority he slew the poor people
at Vassie: by what authority he seized upon the persons of the King and the
Queen his mother, against their wills, as was manifest by the Queens great
pro testation against the violence, and injury, and the young Kings tears. By
what authority he removed them from the palace of Fountain de Bleu first
unto the (...). de (...). rel. and (...). part. 2. (...).
prison of Melun castle, and afterward to Paris, a place indeed more mere for
a King, if the violence of the enemy had not made that also a prison. For not
so much the place as the restraint of liberty makes a prisoner. It is certain
that Guyse had no commission, no authority, no lawful power to do these
things, nor whatsoever he did afterward, abusing the name of the captive King,
and the authority of the King of Navarre contrary to the edict, and true
meaning of them that laid government upon him. As for Beza and the ministers
of the reformed Church, (whom he faineth to have been dombe) when they were
demanded by the Cardinal of Lorraine in the assembly at Poysie answered for
their vocation, first to the Sorbonist Espensius (who proponed those questions)
that they were lawfully called, and approved in the Churches, where they
served. And the next day more at large, to the shame and confusion of the
Popish clergy, and their unlawful and simoniacall vocation, contrary both
to the old Canons of the Church, and to the authority of the holy
scriptures. declaring also that as the ceremony of imposition of hands by the
ordinaries (as they call them) is not allwaies needful in an extraordinary
(...). prim. lib (...).
calling. So miracles are not always necessary to approve an extraordinary
vocation: as the examples of Esaias, Zachary, Amos, and others of the Prophets
declares. But Martin Luther (whom Frarine makes our chief Apostle, and
patriarch) he takes upon him to know very well, what he was whence he came,
and what authority he had. First his name was not Luther, but Luder, which
signifies a slave or knave, but that for shame he changed that filthy name of
his. He would make us believe that he was driven to do the same, that Pope Os
porci, or Hogs snowte did, which turned his name to Sergius, of whom all
Popes since, save one, have taken the custom to change there names: which
thing if Luther had done, he had done, no worse, the^ the pope had given him
example, to do. It is a folish quarrel, that is picked against a man's name
which he has received of his elders, although the name of Luther, being of
honest Luther in duch signifi eth pure or clear. Luther M. of people
signification, needed no such change for who will think that Luther knew not
his own name, as well as Frarine. But it it is a greater matter, that he was
begotten of a spirit Incubus, as the common report goes, says Frarine. For
that he was borne at Islebium in Saxony, I trust it is no reproach to him, more
the^ for Frarine to be borne at Antwerpe in Brabant. But is Frarine such a
great philosopher to believe the common report of Luthers conception by a
spirit Incubus, which is impossible? And who should be the authors of such a
report? But such impudent wretches, as showed more malice then wit, in devising
such a monstrous lie, as never was, nor ever could be. And yet what papist is
there, of any acount, which favors not this foolish fable: which although in
their conscience they know, it neither was, nor can be true, yet are not only
content that it run among fools, as a current argument: but also offer it in
their writings to the ignorant, as a matter sufficient to discredit Luther,
and all his teaching. But to proceed, that he studied the civil law, when he
was young: that he was moved to become an Augustine friar, by terror of his
companione slain with thunder or lightning: if it were never so true, what
needed it to be rehearsed: seeing it makes nothing to the lawfullnes of his
calling, or to the discredit of his doctrine. But at last (says he) he was
made Doctor with shame enough, for he came to that degree, with the money that
was bequethed unto an other man, whom with the help of his prior he be guiled.
If Luther were not sufficiently known to the world, to have been
excellently well learned, he would insinuate, thathe were like a doctor
Bullatus which bought his doctorshippe of the Pope for money. But seeing for the
solemnity of that degree in schools, their is usual some expenses, he
charge Luther at the least, to have come by that money wrongfullie, and as it
were by theft. They that write the story of his life affirm, that the Prince
his sovereign, did bear the charges of his co^mencement. And this slander of
Frarine, as it is void of proof, so has it not so much as any likely hood of
truth. For Luther being at that time a friar, could possess nothing in proper,
no more could any other friar possess any money, that was bequeathed unto
them. Now if the prior of the house did defraie the charges of Luthers
commencement, with the legacy that was given to any other of his brethren,
it was all one, as if he had done it out of there common box: for friars
possess nothing in proper, but in common, the disposition whereof pertains to
the head of the house. But if he will say, this other man was no friar, then
he must show what he was, who was the testator, what fraud Luther and his
Prior used to deceive him, and bring good proof thereof, or else who is bound
to believe him?

But to go forward: other estate, or degree, or Apostleshippe he knows not,
that Luther had any. what then? was not this sufficient calling for him that
was a Doctor of the Popish Church, to preach against the abuses and errors
thereof? and when his doctrine and conclusions were undoubtedly agreeable to
the holy scriptures, might he not justly affirm that they were from heaven?
And that he was sent from heaven to teach the Germans the truth of the
Gospel, which of long time had been hidden from them. For that he was their
first Apostle or that before his days, they never had any true religion or
Christian doctrine, he never said. Neither did he make more account of
himself, then of Saint Augustine, and all other Fathers of the Church,
although in the book quoted, by Frarine he prefers that doctrine, which is
agreeable to the holy scriptures, before the judgment of Augustine, and all
men that ever were. As for the familiar conference and talk with the Devil,
which Frarine affirms that he reporieth of himself. And that Cocleus and al
his enemies do gnaw so much upon, to prove, that he was set on by the Devil,
to gainesaie the mass: Is nothing but a ridiculous cavil. For Luther speaks
of a spiritual conflict that he had with Satan, for saying mass so long,
which at length he acknowledged to be blasphemous against the death of Christ.
Not of any bodelie appeerance of the Devil or familiar talk with him, as the
malice of the Papists do expound him. Next Luther, our Orator will examine
Caluins vocation. Calvin (says he) was borne at Nouiodunum in Picardie. What
of that? He was banished from his country for his wicked behavior. That is
false. For he lived in his country in good credit, both of learning and
honesty, till the cruelty of the Papists caused him to seek the liberty and
profession of religion abroad, which he could not have at home. That he was the
veriest vnthrist, and naughtiest varlet of all his companions, when he was in
his country, is an impudent slander: for at Orleans, Beza in (...) Caluini.
he red the law lecture oftentimes, in the place of Petrus Stella, the public
reader, and was so well accounted, both for his learning, and virtue, that the
degree of Doctorship in that faculty, with full consent of all the teachers
was offered him, without any expenses, as one that had very well deserved of
the university. Afterward, at Paris, he set forth that notable commentary of
his, of Seneca de Clementia. He was of great familiarity with Nicolaus Copus,
Rector of the university of Paris: and in good credit with the Queen of
Navarre, sister unto King Frauncis: He had conference with Iacobus Faber
Stapulensis in Aquitanes and after he had set forth that worthy book of his,
called Psychopanuchia, at Orleans, against them which taught, that the souls
departed do sleep until the resurrection, without sense of good or evil, he
came to the City of Basil. This course of his life, as it is written in his
story, with much more to this effect, does witness, that he was, even from his
youth, a man endued with singular modesty, temperance, and godliness,
whatsoever his adversaries, without all proof, or show of truth, are not
ashamed to invent, and brute against him. When he was at Basil he did not hide
his head, as the slaunderer says, but desired in deed to be private, that he
might better apply his studies, and especially the Hebrew tongue. But such
was his excellency, that he could not be hid from the principal learned men
of that university: and so little was he hid, that there he first set forth his
Institution, dedicated to King Frauncis. Our declaimer says, that from Basile
he passed to Strasburg, and there began to show his head, and preach to the
Runnagats. But that is false, for from Basil he went into Italy, to visit the
Duchess of Ferrara: from whence he returned into France, where having set all
his affairs in order, he brought away his only brother, AntonieCaluine,
intending to settle him self either at Basil, or at Strasburg. But al other
passages being stopped, he was forced to travail thorough Sauoye: and coming to
Geneua, only to visit Farellus and Viretus, by whose zealous and earnest
labors, Popery being banished, and the Church there reformed, he was stayed by
the terrible obtestation of Farellus) and by the Presbytery and Magistrates,
chosen to be a teacher and intepreter of the Scriptures, in that Church. But
that he put out the deputy of the city, expelled the Bishops, and Popish
clergy, reigned there like a conqueror by the law of ireason, and force of
arms (as Frarine says) it is a most impudent lie, though an hundred
Lindanes had sworn, that it was true. For the Bishop with his Popish
clergy was departed out of the city, and the Religion reformed, by public
authority received, long time before Caluines first arrival thither. Of like
truth it is, that Beza, in his baudie, and filthy epigrames (as it pleases
Frarine to call them) far passes the wanton Pagan Poets, Martial, and
Tibullus. For in the most licentious of these epigrames, first condemned by
Beza himself, there is not one word of obscenitie, although they were made in
a fained argument, after the immitation of those Poets. And if they had bin as
full of baudie terms, and matters, as Martial himself: Yet, so long as Beza
continued in popery, where they were freely printed, and selde, they were
catholic enough. What should I speak (says he) of Bernardinus Ochinus, the
preacher of Polygamie? Verelie there is no cause why he should speak of him,
seeing both the man, and the doctrine are detested in our Churches, and by our
writings confuted. He names also Bernard Rotman, and John of Leyd, authors of
the Anabaptisticall sedition at Monster, as though we had any thing to do
with them. Yes (says he) they conquered the field against the Lutheranes, by
pretense of scripture only, as Rotman before vanquished the Papists. The
story is written, who list to read, wherein may be found they used other
crafts, beside force of arms, then pretense of scripture only, to compass
their devilish attempts. And what if they had used the pretense of scripture
only, as the devil did in tempting our savior Christ, was the scripture
only of less force to confute their false pretense, then when it was used by
our Savior Christ against the Devil? He tells us of Hosiander, reproved of
us for heresy and of Carolostadius, who thorough folly and madness became a
ploughnian. The names also of Peter Martyr, Illiricus, Musculus, Farellus,
Viretus, and Bucer, a against whom he has nothing to say, besides I know not
what Marote, and Malote. And that these should usurp a lordly authority, and
imperial souer aignitie, he knows not by what right except it be from
satan. But we know, that from satan the first father of falsehood come these
shameless lies of their usurpation of Lordship, or affectation of imperial
soueraignitie. Well yet he proceeds and says, the Bishops do excommunicase
them, and the Princes banish them, God shows no sign for them, except it be
a miracle to make the live, stark dead, while they feign that they are able by
the virtue of there gospel to restore the dead to life, as one Mathias did in
Polonia. And the like is reported of Calvin credibly in Geneua. Touching the
excommunication and banishment by the Prelates of Antichrists Church, and
Princes thrall unto the same: it ought to be no more prejudice to the preachers
of the Gospel now, then the condemnation of the high priests of Pilate, and
Herod, was to the author of the Gospel of old. As for miracles they are not
to be required, where the same doctrine is taught, which so long ago has
been confirmed by the miracles of Christ and his Apostles, and those fables of
raising up dead men by Calvin and others, are like the tales of Robin
Goodfellow, which are reported to be done in so many places, that no wise man
thinks them to be done in any. Next this follows a wholl floode of tedious
rhetorical railing, in general accusations of schism, heresy, tumulis,
sedition, rebellion, contempt of Princes and laws, order, and honesty. At
length he desires to be excused of his bitterness, in respect of the cursed
mouths of them which rail against Princes and Prelates. Yet brings no
example, but of Luthers pen, whom many men wish in deed to have used a more
temperate style, sometime, especially against Princes, and temporal estates,
and he himself did openly acknowledge his fault therein, especially his
immoderate inuection against King Henry the 8. But as For the Pope and his
wicked clergy of heretics (the ungodly enemies of Christ and his Gospel)
it were a hard matter to exceed measure in vehemency against them, so lies
and slanders be always avoided. If Luther said that the Turk in suffering
all religions is wiser then Popish Princes in persecuting the gospel: I see
not that his saying is greatly to be misliked. For it is more wisdom, to
follow Gamaliels council in letting all alone, then to fight against god,
against whom they are sure not to prevail. That Luther diswaded al men to
obey the ungodly decree of the Emperor, proclaimed at Worms: who can justly
be offended, which knows, that the obedience to Princes may not be yealded
with manifest disobedience unto God? But here a great matter. Luther said in
hearing of the Emperor at Worms, upon those words of our Savior Christ in
the Gospel (I came not to send peace, but the sword.) That it ought to be a
thing wished for, as most acceptable to Christistian men, and especially unto
him that strife and contention should rise and grow about the word of God. The
witness of this report is Lindane, who farseth his Dialogues of dubitantius,
with all manner of fables that he can hear, sounding to the discredit of
Luther, and the Protestants. Although I see not what great harm should be in
these words, being understood according to the saying of our savior Christ:
that seeing all men will never agree to embrace the word of God; it were to be
wished, that many men would contend against the impugners, for it; then that al
men should agree to withstand it. But Luther is charged, to have set out to the
view of the wholl world, seditious, and heresicall books, wherein he labored
to abolish all due obedience, and to persuade the people torebellion, robbing,
murth er, sacking and burning of Cities, and Churches. I hope there is no man
so far carried beyond all judgment of reason, that he will believe this
slander to be true, seeing it is not possible, that such a monster (as he
faineth him to be) should have been so much favored and cherished by Princes
and estates, as Luther was. Nevertheless you shall hear his proofs. First,
Wicelius, Luthers enemy reports, that he said, that men should wash their
hands in the blood of the Romish clergy. If this report were true, it
proves not the former accusation. For allbeit the Popish clergy were all
slain, by lawful authority, in detestation of there blasphemy and idolatry.
The government both of the Church and common wealth, should never the more
decay: but how are we bound to believe Wicelius without proof in this, or in
any other matter. Then says Frarine, he affirmed in his writings, that it was
the very nature of the Gospel to move and stir up war and sedition, that
there ought to be no Magistrate, no superior at all among Christian men. For
which he quoteth Epist. ad frat. infer. Ger. which is an impudent fiction. For
he never writ any such epistle, or taught any such doctrine; but the clean
contrary, of the necessity of Magistrates in all Christian common wealths.
Secondly he charge him to have written, lib. de Potest, seculari, that men
ought to pray to God, that the vplandish men obey not their Princes, nor go to
war against the Turk, the title of which book find not in his works. And
sure I am, no such matter is contained in any book, of what title soever, but
contrariwise he writes, many treatises against the rebellious Bowres, very
earnestly condemning their disobedience and sedition. Thirdly he quoteth lib.
contr. duo edict. Caesaris, that men should contribute nothing toward the
charges of the wars against the Turk: which is malitiouslie construed, as
though he denied tribute to the Emperor, whereas he commends the judgment of
the slates of Germany (which when the Emperor would yield nothing to their
requests for the liberty of religion) denied to grant him a subsidy or
contribution. which he required under a pretense to resist the Turk, when his
purpose seems rather to be bent against the French King, and perhaps even
against them, whose money he defireth to be given him. He warns them also
that they attempt not rashly to war upon the Turk, who in council and
moderation does far excel these Princes, and living as they did might hope
of no victory. Forthlie he notes lib, de bello contra Turcam, and Luther
assert artic. 24, that it was not lawful for Christian men to war against
the Turk, and whosoever did fight against the Turk, fought against Gods
punishment. Whereas Luthers meaning was in any such writings, that those
Christians which were under the Turks dominion and had free liberty of there
religion, should not rebel against him, although they were otherwise
grieuouslie oppressed.

Last of all he alleges out of his book de (...). Babil. that neither man
nor angel, had any authority at all to make any law or one syllable
whereunto Christian men should be bound to obey more or longer then it pleases
them. For we are (said Luther) free from all things, and there could be no
hope of reformation, except all laws of men were abolished, and the Gospel of
liberty (...) home, with much more to the like effect: whereupon Fowler the
wise man con cludeth in the margent, that Luther chief preacher of that
Gospel would have been king alone him self, and of those his pardoxes sprang
the rebellion of Muntzer and the Boores. But good God what shame have the
Papists in slaundering? Luther in that book speaks of the spiritual
freedom of conscience, which Christ has purchased for us, and which ought not
to be entangled with any traditions or precepts of men: against civil laws
and ordinances he writes not one syllable. But whereas the false Prophet and
traitor Muntzer, boasted that he did fight the Lords battles: Frarine calls
Melancthon to witness, that Luther affirmed the same, namely that God him self
did rise and stand against the estates of Germany and their tyranny. And who
doubts but (how wicked soever the attempt and doings of those seditious
persons were) that God used them as a scourge to punish the sins of the
rulers. That Luther prophesied of the victory of the rebels, it is a fable as
many others are, which Frarine reports but contrar iwise in his writing
against them, he threatens them destruction both of body and soul except
they gave over their devilish enterprices. After the discourse of the
Muntzerian rebels, he comes to Luthers marriage with a Nun, against which
he inueigheth in two respects. First of the time which was immediately after
the calamity of Germany. And then of the person which was a Nun, stolen
with eight others out of the Nunnerie of Nimike, upon good frydaie by his
Bawd Leonard Knoppen. after which time she was broken with wanton toies and
lecherous recreations, by the space of two years among the scholars of
wittenberg: yea Luther took it no scorn, to daunse and drink carouse, etc.
and all for very penance and sorrow of these mischiefs whereof he himself was
author. Though many men misliked Luthers marriage with a Nun, which he
perhaps did the rather to confirm by his own act the liberty of matrimony
in them, that had made a rash vow, which they were not able to perform: yet no
wise man, I hope believes, that he made no better choice then Frarine
affirms, or that he was of so light behavior to daunse, and drink carouse;
of all which slanders there is no proof brought, but Frarines bare
affirmation, whose bold lying else where, and dogged scorning here, let
indifferent men judge what credit it deserves. But whereas Luther did write
most vehe mently against the seditious Boores, by which the impudent slanders
of Frarine are most manifest he convicted, he now faineth that Luther turning
with the blast of fortune, when they were overthrown did write most bitterly
against them, affirming that the nobles might win heaven by shedding the
blood of such traitorous rebels, whereas it is manifest that Luther having
diverse times before by his writings at their first attemptes, diswaded them
from rebellion, and exhorted them to obedience, when by no means they would
yield to his Godly persuasions, did at fleidan 1. 5.
the last most sharply inueigh against them, and denounce their utter
destruction, but yet at such time as they were in the ruff of their rebellion,
and when they were most terrible to all good men, after they had committed
many horrible outrages: yet may Luther the traitorous Cateline of our time be
thanked for all these bloody tragidies, and not of them only, but for the
turkish wars also. For he cites out of Stoltius in somnio Luth, etc. that
Luther came in favor with Soliman the great Turk by such practices: yea
Solomon wrote in plain words, but he shows not to whom, that he wished
Luther long life, that he hoped the day should come that Luther should find
him his good ma ster. Does any man believe these vanities? yet Fowler in his
infamous picture would have it seem, as though the Turk by his letters was
called to make war upon Christendom. But Frarine says more craftelie that
by occasion of debate about the Lutherane Gospel, and so through Luthers
means the Turk conceived hope to conquer all Germany, when he came to the
City of Vienna being the key of Christ endome, with such a huge great host.
What if this be granted, is Luther (which preached the Gospel of Christ) the
cause of the Turks invasion, or they that will not embrace the truth of God
by him reueiled?

But he clean omitteth by whose good service that noble City of Vienna was
defended against the Turk, that worthy prince Phillip the Palesgraue a
fauerour of the religion reformed. As also it is certain that Solomon by the
provocation of John the vaiuode made by his ambassador Jerome Laske an
Hungaria^ was called into Hungary and Austrige against the Emperor and his
brother Ferdinande, by whom he was debarred to enjoy sleidan 1. 6.
that right which he pretended to have to the kingdom of Hungary: so true it
is, that Luther was the only cause of Solymans invasion of Christendom.
Likewise where Charles the fifth without just cause made war upon the princes
and states of Germany that were entered into the legue of Smalcalde, as the
stories of that war and the protestation of the states sufficiently declare,
to satisfy the Popes cruelty, and oppress the liberty of Ger many, Frarine
makes a great matter of their resistance, saying, that Germany should have
obeyed him at a beck: as though the king of Spain were made Emperor of
Almaine, not for the defense of Germany, according to the ancient priueliges
and liberties thereof, but to the utter ouerthrough and destruction of the
same. But his victory pleases Frarine well: and no cause why it should
displease us, seeing it pleased god so to punish the security of Germany, and
to show how vain it is to trust in the strength of men. Albeit Charles carried
not this victory clear, for while he keeps no couenantes with the
conquered, and against the laws of arms detained the Lantgrane prisoner, who
of his own accord came unto him to entreat of agreement, his unjust dealings
provoked even those, whom he had most advanced, to seek revenge of his
falsehood Duke Moris of Saxony Marquis of Brandenburg.
by means where of he sustained more ignomine in the end, then ever he gat
glory in the beginning of those wars.

But if Frarine think it so necessary for Germany to be at the Emperors
beck in all cases, why did he not persuade the Louanians, and all other Popish
states of the low countries, to be obedient at a beck to all the
commandments of the Spanish King their sufferaigne? But if the King of
Spaines sufferaignetie was not so absolute, but that it was limited within the
compass of certain conditions, against which they were not bound to obey: let
him not doubt but Germany has better ground of their doings, then all the
young Orators of Louane have wit to control. As for the war of the
Heluetians, it is a wonder to see how he terms it sedition and insurrection
stirred up by Zuinglius: whereas it is certain, that the five Cantones of the
Popish faction by intolerable injury provoked them of Zurek and Bernes to
lawful wars: whose cause if it had been never so unjust, yet might it not be
termed insurrection; because they were states of themselves, and ought no
obedience to the other.

The rebellion of Wiat, and practices to kill Queen Marie, were never allowed
by the teachers of the gospel in England. And Knookes his book was misliked,
and forbidden to be sold, even at Geneua where it was put in print. But the
Pope (the head of the Popish faction) has not only (...) up rebellion
against the most honorable Prince of Europe Queen Elizabeth Hebellion in the
North.
in England, but also has sent his standard and Soldiers to invade her
dominions in Ireland. And to omit the traitorous writing of Saunder and
Bristow, what is more vile, then that beastly Bull of Pius the fiste, against
our said most noble sovereign, confirmed by that hypocrite, which now
sits in the chair of Pestilence at Rome, with a faculty granted to
Parsones, and Campiane, by which he licenseth the Papists to dissemble their
obedience, until public execution of that Bull may be had: that is to be
privy Traitors till with hope of success, they may be open rebels. The
Scottish Queens behavior has so much dishonored her Person, that Frarine is
to be pardoned, if he spoke any thing in her praise, before the uttermost of
her reproach was made manifest to the world. The rebellion of the gentlemen in
Sueuia, and of the commons in Denmark I pass over, (as Frarine does) seeing if
it were unlawful, our religion allows it not: if it were upon just cause,
and by sufficient authority, it is unjustly called rebellion, and uproar. But
he cannot omit the late treason, and cruel conspiracy of the Hugonites in
France, whereof Calvin was dictatour, and general, Beza lieuetenant,
Othomannus, and Spisamius petie captains? who can refrain laughing to hear
these pleasant devises, but least you should think he iested, he says these
were the chiese doers indeed, though they used the names and service of
certain of the Nobility to bear out the brunte, whilst they slept as the
Knaves in the stock and as for the other, they were but their trumping cards.
Such pesantes he makes all the Princes and Noblemen, which took arms, to
deliver the King and his Mother from captivity, his law from oppression, and
his subjects from cruel murder, and tyranny. Yet he confesses, this
tragedy had a peaceable beginning, for they gat a law by force and extorsion
(says he) against the King, and Magistrates will and pleasure, Mark how
probably he speaks. A law was made whereunto none gave assent, that had
authority to make a law. But their consent was enforced, for the Parliament
of Paris made answer at the first, we cannot, we will not, we ought not. But
afterward they were compelled to let the bill pass, and so the edict of
January was made. Here is force, here is extorsion, and compulsion alleged,
to elude the authority of the law: but by what persons, what means, and in
what manner, it is not showed in one word. And indeed it is impossible to be
showed, that never was: for in truth, the edict was made by the consent of the
three estates in France, in time of peace, when their was not so much as any
fear or suspicion of war, but of policy to maintain peace, and to avoid
all troubles that might ensue thorough controversy of religion.

The quiet and peaceable behavior of the Protestants in the conference at
Poysie was so notorious, that our Orator being not able to deny it, says it
was dissembled, that they might more easily obtain a lawevnder shadow
whereof, they might banish all law, and religion out of the world, root out
all civil order and policy of all temporal affairs, out of all Christian
realms, countries and cites. A most wicked purpose. But how is it proved?
First they made a conspiracy to rob and spoil all the Churches in France in
one night, witness hereof Claudius de sanctes, a man very like to be made
privy of such a conspiracy, an utter enemy of all true religion, and the
professors thereof; But the execution in Gascoine and diverse other places do
testify of this conspiracy. Indeed by some more zealous then wise, at Turon
and Bloise the Popish Churches were bereued of their Idols, which fact because
Comment de stat. rell. and reip. part. 2. Lib. 4.
it was contrary to the edict, the prince of Condie, forthwith gave charge to
the kings officers, that the authors thereof should be diligently sought out,
and seuerlie punished, according to the edict. Compare with this fact, the
horrible murder of the faithful by the Guisians at Vassie, by which the edict
was first broken, whereas these men in time of the war without the hurt of
any man's person, did only break a few stocks and stones by which God was
dishonered. Nevertheless the punishment of the offenders confuteth the
pretended conspiracy, which to say the truth, has not so much as the shadow
of truth in it? For how was it possible for them to spoil all the Churches of
France in one night, where they were not of power to spoil the tenth part, if
they had so co^spired? But it is a greater matter which follows, that at
Challone in Burgundy, they made a Synodicall decree that every man should
endeavor to his power to drive three vermines out of Christendom: The Church
of Rome, the Nobility, the public order of justice. And this if you deny
(says he) your names are to be seen yet in the records of the high court of
Parliament at Paris: where many of you were accused for it, by the rulers and
estates of Burgondie. A sufficient proof no doubt, that the names of them that
were accused are extant in record. It is sufficient proof among the Papists
that men be accused, and that by their malicious adversaries, yea the very
accusation is a condemnation. But it seems the Parliament of Paris had more
regard of law and justice, then to give sentence against them upon a bare
accusation: for if it be sufficient to accuse, no man shall be innocent. If the
court had condemned them, he would have alleged the sentence and lawful
process remaining in record against them. But almighty God knows that the
Protestants have not only been free, but have always abhorred such
Anabaptisticall conclusions, and labored by all means to establish the
authority and obedience due unto Princes, which the Pope by his pretended
supremacy, shamefullie usurps against them; as though the charge of feeding
and spiritual government were granted only to the Pope by those words of
Christ to Peter, Or if it were, that under color of feeding and spiritual
government, John. 21.
he had authority to command Princes at his pleasure, yea to command their
crowns of their heads, and their scepters out of their hands as even at this
present, that vile Antichrist cease not to practice against the most lawful
and Christian Queen of England.

But by what scriptures (says Frarine) did you conspire at Geneua, like
villains and traitorous to murder king Frauncis, and the scottish Queen his
wife, his mother, brethren and all the nobles, and Catholic osficers of
France? Surely I know not what conspiracy he means: I remember not, that I
have hard of any in the time of Frauncis, but that whereof ensued the tumult of
Amboyse, never allowed at Geneua, as the letters of Calvin to his friends do
testify, nor heard of until it was on foot and suppressed. The beginning
where of; was at Nantes in Britanie. The purpose was to remove the Guisians
from government.

The articles of which diverse were these. That nothing should be done against
the King, the Princes of his blood, and the state of the realm. That their
dignity and the liberty of their country, should be defended as much as might
be from the violence of strangers. But if you ask Frarine how he knows all
this, he answers by a book set out in print, under the kings privilege,
entitled. Defense Reg: and Relig. As though all must needs be as true as the
Gospel which is printed with privilege: where it were more reason, that he
should give credit to the kings own edict of pacificatio^, signed with his
hand, printed with privilege, and proclamied with sound of trumpet in all
cities of his realm, in which he clears the princes and them that took
arms for his liberty against the Guisians, and the mantainance of the edict
of Iaunarie, of all crime of treason, and sedition, and acknowledges that they
did all things in his service, and to his honor. But Frarine being at Orleans
in the time of that war, did see with his eyes a seditious sibell, printed in
the name of all Hugonites, wherein was nothing but impudent bouldnes,
threatening, and weason. Nevertheless he confesses that this libell was not
allowed of the Prince, and states, when he says, the printer was kept and
feasted a few days with the officers of that town, within their houser
instead of a prison. Belike the libell was not so harnous ( as Frarire
affirms) else it is not to be thought, but that the printer should have had
greater punishment. Concerning Goodmans book, being of the same argument and
ume with that of Knoxe before mentioned, shall need no other answer then I set
down before. But a greater accusation is behind. When the Emperor Charles
was entangled at Oenipont, the great Turk was requested to make war in
defense of there Gospel, and the Bassa of Bude to set upon his brother
Ferdinande in Hungary. Who affirms this? Staphilus the runnegate which
never, lied, or rather which seldom spoke the truth. tush says Frarine, the
letters of that conspiracy were taken, their treason by no color can be
cloked. Whose letters Frarine? by whom were they taken, by whom were they
sent? to whom were they directed? If you answer nothing, we say, it is as
easy for you or Staphilus, to feign the taking of letters, as the conspiracy
with the Turk. The next complaint is of abolishing the laws of the Imperial
chamber, that all things may be decided with fire and sword, (as Brunus says)
which is an impudent slander. For Germany was never in greater peace and
quieines since the reformation, of the unreasonable customs of that court,
more then thirty years ago. As for the abro gating of the civil laws, and
making of a new policy of their own, devise which he says, appears by
many books, and libelles, is a foolish slander, not worthy of any answer,
seeing he names no author of those books, by which it might appear, that the
Protestants had such fantastical coies in their heads. Unto the last place he
reserved the weightiest matter of all, and that is: their contempt of the
council of Trent, in railing at all the Prelates and Princes, and in refusing
to come thither under sufficient safe conduct. As for Princes, which are no
part of the council, it is false that they contemned them: but Antichrist, and
his rabble of Idolatrous Priests and prelates deserve a worse thing then
contempt. that they refuse to come to the Chapter of Trent among many reasons
they have two most evident to defend the^. For the tragedy of Constance
council does admonish them, that no safe conduct can be sufficient among
papists. And where he which is chiefly accused of heresy and Idolatry will be
the only judge of al controversies, what should it auaill them to be heard in
such a council, in which is an hundredth times less equity, then was showed
in any heretical council of Arrianes, Nestorianes, Eutichianes, or any
other ancient heretics.

And now he is come to the third and last section of his circle, to declare how
cruelly they have behaved themselves in their wars, and what hurth ath come by
them, in which part, after much vain babbling and general accusing of all faith,
religion, justice, chastity, devotion, learning, nurture, goodness, and
godliness, banishea from many places and persons, and planting of Turkish,
hethenish, Jewish, and insensible blindness, at last he touch eth particulares
that Lu there by that verse of his ( Host is era^ (...), moriens tua mors ero
Papa) Thine enemy I was living, and thy death O Pope I will be dying, attempted
the utter overthrow both of the spirituality, and of the Empire, by what reason
I know not; for I see no consequence but as the rising of the Pope was by the
decaie of the Empire: so the falling of the pope, whose enemy Luther threatened
to be quick and dead, would be the establishing, and advancement of the Empire.
After this he reckons the expenses, trauayles and care of mind. that Charles
the fifth was put unto by fighting against them. For answer whereof, it may
be said, that Charles the fifth, with more gain, les labor, and thought of
mind, first and last, might have suffered them to inioie their religion,
according to the liberty of Germany. and not to have made such cruel war
upon them, for no just cause, as he did. Further our Orator czieth out, how
many cities, castler, Abbeys, Hospitalles, schools, colleges, Palaces,
gentelmens houses, and cloisters, has this gospelish rebellion quite
overthrown and sacked. All which damages, who sees not are to to be ascribed
to their fault, who were authors of unjust wars, and not of the Protestants,
who were either defenders of their liberty, or reuengers of intolerable
iniarie? It is a pleasant jest with Frarine, when he says, their gospel is
both negative, and destructive of al goodness. As if it were not as easy for us
to say that papistrie, is both affirmative, and extructtiue of al wickedness.
God be thanked we affirm all that the holy scripture affirms, the rest we are
bold to deny, and we are willing to build, both spiritually, and bodily,
whatsoever appertains to the glory of God, and the pro fit of the common
wealth. Besides this he imputes to those wars the Turks gain of Hungary,
and whatsoever calamity insued thereupon. As though the first misery of
Hungary began not at the breath of the league with the Turk, whereof the
Pope was cause. The next, which fell in Luthers time, when Belgrade was taken,
was long before any wars were moved by the Protestants or against them, and
so was that overthrow, in which Jews the King was overthrown and slain. Al
other invasions of Hungary by the Turk have been by occasion of the claim
which Ferdinande the Emperors brother, made to that kingdom, wherein be was
resisted by the Vaiuode of Transiluania. The conquest against the Turk (that
Frarin dreameth of) might be atchiued by occasion of his overthrow at Malta,
(were not these dissentions in religion) I pass over, as a thing to be wished
for, rather then looked for, until God se the good time. When all was Popery,
and no appearance of dissension in religion, the Turk nevertheless gained and
Christendom went to wrack. Therefore most vnreasonablelie is the Turks
gain and our loss, imputed to the Protestants wars, who move none, but
such as are necessary, for defense of religion, and the common wealth, when
they are lawfully called thereunto. Likewise the shutting up of the school
doors, and the solitarines of diverse universities in France, which is an
usual effect of war, must be laid to the charge of them, whose oppression,
cruelty and tyranny enforced those wars. That Luther despised the
university of Louaine, and called it a stable of Asset, stews, and school of
the devil, it was not for hatred of good learning; but in contempt of those
Barbarous doltes, which in those days opposed them selves against the light of
the truth. ( Erasmus whom all men knew to have deserved very well of good
learning) writes as hardly of the university of Louaine in respect of the
multitude of Epithal. Pet agid
unlearned sophisters, which were in that time, as Luther: saying, there was no
place for the muses there, where so many hogs grunted, where so many asses
routed, so many Camells blattered, so many Iaies chattered, so many pies
prattled. But doctor Cox is chardged to answer, why the schools in Oxford were
suffered to go down in King Edwardes time, and the ordinary disputations in
Logic and Philosophy were left of. Not for contempt of learning I warrant
you: but either because the Papists his predecessers, had so wasted the
university stock, as it was not sufficient to set them up, or else because
those little celles were thought to be insufficient, for so famous an
university: and therefore they hoped that through liberality of the king, or
of the nobles, a more magnificall building, able to receive the multitude of
that university, should have been erected. In the mean time the exercises of
learning ceased not in every college, no nor yet the ordinary disputations
inlogick and philosophy were left of, but removed to a more public place,
namely to Saint Mary's Church, where Master Ward, the great professor of
philosophy, in the hearing of many yet a live, did exercise the same: by
means of which, good learning was as much promoted in King Edwardes time, as
ever it was before or since. Naie says Frarine, they have set their heads
together, and fully agreed among them selves, to banish the greek, and latin
tongues quite and clean out of the country. O monster of impudency: who has
more deserved, of the Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Caldy, Syrian, and Arabique
tongues, then such as have been professors of the Gospel? Who are found in
all places better learned in the tongues then they? who have more care to
instruct youth in the knowledge of the tongues, then they? I knew the
university of Cambridge in Queen Mary's time; and this I dare be bold to
say, there are more good Grecians in one of the little colleges now; then was
in those days in the wholl university. But it is a great confirmation of
Frarines or Fowlers senseless slander, that a preacher in the diocese of
Sarum, being ignorant in the Latin tongue, thanked God, that he had never
learned that Romish, and Papisticall tongue. If any such thing were, it showed
the folly of one man, which might be requited with an hundred merry tales, of
Sir Ihon Lacklatines in popery, if a man were disposed to blot paper with such
bables. But their overthrow of schools and universities (says he) they
excuse, by bringing all knowledge into the mother tongue, and by inuenting, a
compendious order of teaching, whereby children in short time may profit more,
then ancient men in many years of old time. True it is that much knowledge
is brought into the vulgar tongue, for the benefit of them, which have not
studied the learned languages; and the method of teaching, has found an easy
way in short time to great knowledge and learning: but it is utterly false,
that any such excuse is made, for the overthrow of schools and universities,
which the professors of Christian religion desire by all means to be
maintained and increased, as there is manifest experience in all places where
our religion is embraced by public authority. When Luther burnt certain
books of the Canon law, he meant no decay of good learning, but protested Epit
hal. Pont. aeg.
against the heresy and blasphemy of the Pope, of which those books were
full. who nevertheless most injuriously condemned Luther unhard, and burnt
his books vnconfuted. Whatsoever Corolostadius did against good learning,
seeing Frarine confesieth it was misliked by Luther, what should the blame
thereof extend any further then the offendour? But Frarine wishes they had
been satisfied with burning of books, and had not proceeded to burning of
men, cutting of throtes, tearing, and chopping in pieces, with much foolish
amplification of their cruelty in general terms. All which might be
exemplified more truly of Popish tyranny in time of peace, then it can be
verified of any outrage committed in time of war, and allowed by the Princes
and captains of the field, or by the preachers and teachers of the Gospel.
But at length he descends to some particulars, and calls forth Beza to tell
him, why he went up to the pulpit in Orlians with his sword by his side, and a
pistolate in his hand, and exhorted the people to show their manhood, rather in
killing the papists, then in breaking of images, al which was reported to him
at Orlians. Although in time of war it were not much to be wondered, if the
peacher especially in such places where be many traitorous enemies (as were
that time in Orlians) should be armed as well as other men: yet it has been
reported unto me, by them which heard daily Beza preaching at Orlianes, that
there was no such matter. But if he exhorted soldiers to exercise their
manhood against their enemies, rather then upon stokes and stones, seeing the
war was lawful and necessary, I see not why he should be reprehended. The
rest which follows, wherein he is charged with murder of Magistrates,
selling of towns, spoiling the country, pulling down of Churches, giving the
spoill to strangers, profaning of Churches with his whores, and laying up of
armor, and lodging of soldiers, robbing of all Churches in which he came, is
nothing but general slaundering unworthy of any wise man's answer, other then
a flat and general denial of al. In like manner, that he says was reported
unto him, by Caluines schoolefellowes in law, that he stole the (...), cross
and vestimentes which were committed to his custody, when he departed from
Orleanes, is thorougly confuted by the public decree of the university, whereby
the degree of doctorship was freely offered unto him at his departure: and by
his continuance afterward in diverse Universities of France, where this
sacrilege should have bin required at his hands, if ever any such had been.
Also that Beza in Champanie took many Priests prisoners, sat in judgment
upon them, condemned some to dongeons, some to be hanged, some to be burned,
other to be beheaded, so that his mouth was sprinkeled with the blood and
brains of those that were murdered at his feet: Is any man so mad, that he
will believe it? That many priests were slain in time of that war, it is
not altogether unlike. For the enemies spared not to murder the preachers of
the gospel most cruelly, wheresoever they found them: yet of certain and
true report we hear not of many, beside those two which were hanged at
Orleans, of which Parson Guisent being a cruel in quisitor, had cast the
president of Orleanes in prison, and they both had been extreme persecutors
of the Gospel in time of Popish tyranny. Yet had not this example of
severity been showed upon them, if the Papists by hanging up of Augustine
Marlorate, and other learned and Godly preachers at Rone, after they were
taken prisoners, contrary to the law of arms, had not enforced the Prince and
estates unto this warlike kind of revenge, upon two which had well deserved it,
to teach them to use more clemency toward such of the religion, as might
afterward hap to fall into their hands.

What outrage soever was committed by the Soldiers, without commandment and
consent of the Princes and Captains, no wise man will impute to the wholl
state of Protestants, as Frarine does: and yet he brings nothing but flying
tales, such as in time of war are blown abroad on both sides. I have given
some diligence to enquire of them which lived in France at that time, and they
can say nothing, that they heard of any such examples of barbarous cruelty
committed by the Soldiers of the Protestants camp, as Frarine has heaped
together: except the report of one, which made him a chain of Priests cares,
who for his cruelty (when he required to be of the Church of Geneua) was not
received and yet it follows not that he killed all those Priests whose ears
he cut of. Nevertheless they confess, that although the discipline of war was
as well looked unto, as in that state of things it could be, yet many things
were done by unruly Soldiers: which neither the captains, nor the Preachers
could think well of. If any that fled out of Orleans to carry news to the
enemies, were hardly dealt with all, it is the less marvel, seeing within
the city keeping themselves quietly, they might have continued without any
man hurting them, as a great number of the Popish priests lived there even to
the end of the war. whereby it appears that those reports of cruelty
deserve less credit. that Priests were dragged with ropes about their necks
in the street, bound to trees, and shot at with gunnes for exercise: that
their guts were wound about a staff, and drawn out of their bellies, and
cast about the house, that they were hanged upon the roode in the Church, that
their eyes were put out, their noses cut of, the tops of their fingers cut
of, the skin of their crowns pared, their privy members cut of, roasted, and
they compelled to eat them, and afterward their bellies ripped to see how
they could digest such meat, and such like monstrous inventions, which if they
had bin true, should have found some Papist of France, that would have
committed them to writing, and set them forth with all the circumstances, that
they should not stand upon the only light report of an Orator of Louane, who
brings no testimony, but report of one prebendarie of the Cathedral Church
of Orleans, whose name he has forgotten which lay hid in a bench hole, and
through the chinkes of the bench saw, while the butchers cut of a priests
members, pulled out his guts, and cast his entralles all about the house. But
what if the poor prebendarie was so overcome with fear, that he imagined he
saw through the narrow creuisses that which was never done, nor intended? For
what similitude of truth has it, that the soldiers would so beraie that house
with blood and bowels, wherein they themselves lodged? peradventure a hog or
some other beast was killed and dressed for the Soldiers supper, which he in
the bench hole thought to be the Curate of the town. The cutting of little
children in pieces at one stroke with a sword, the burning of children in a
Church at Patte, not far from Orleans, who will think they were like to be
true, when Baldwine in his inuectiue against Beza, could find no such matter
to object unto him, although he objected a great many things more then were
true? But these and such matters, if they had been committed (as they are
impudentlie fained) by barbaous and outrageous soldiers, why should the
reformers of religion bear the blame of them? you will say perhaps, they
should retain no soldiers, of so cruel and wicked a disposition; and
certain it is, that willingly and wittinglie they did not: but such is the
necessity of war, that soldiers be not always saints. David for his
necessary defense, was feign to retain such as came unto him, which as the
scripture describes them, were scarce honest men, but a sight of male
contents, which for debt and deserts could not abide to ta rye in their
country. And yet was David the lords anointed, and used that band both for
his own defense, for annoiance of his enemies and for obtaining of his right
in the kingdom. Let not the cruelty therefore and outrage of soldiers, if
any such were, as none is proved, be objected against the preachers, and
procurers of reformation. Other damages and losses he rehearses, the rasing
of the Kings house, and diverse Churches in Orleanes, filling up the ditches,
throwing down the bulwarks, making the walls plain and passable, destroying
the suburbs and vines about the city. All which things who is so mad, that
he will not acknowledge to be the act of their enemies for the most part,
except that the necessity of war requires some places in such towns to be
rased for fortification? He co^planeth of the Image and tomb of king Lewis the
eleventh, broken down, his body burned with the Church, wherein he was
buried, overthrown at Cleris, four leagues from Orleans, which is like to
have been in detestation of idolatry there committed. For otherwise if it had
been in hatred of his monument and memory: the Protestants being so long in
possession of the town of S. Dennis, two leagues from Paris, would not have
spared so many monuments of the kings, as are there yet to be seen untouched.
The burning of K. Frauncis the 2. his heart at Orleans, whom he suspecteth to
have been poisoned by the Gospellers, is a fond fable. For which he cites
Claudius de sanctes, a lying friar of Paris, where as if anysuch thing had bin,
Frarine might have learned the truth when he was at Orleans himself. As for
the crime of poisoning was never objected by the papists themselves of
France, neither is there any likelihood, seeing it is certain that he died of
an aposteme in his head, where of grew an intolerable pain in his ear, which
after it took him, being ready to take his journey, left him not, until life
so iooke him.

The impouerishing of many welthy towns in France, the slaughter of men, and
all other incommodities of war: how unjustly he obiecteth unto the
Protestants, which were no cause of the wars, all indifferent men may judge,
though I say nothing. But the poverty of S. Peter and the riches of our
preachers gotten with sacrilegious spoil of Churches, were more meet to be
objected to the pope, and his proud prelates, which by the spoil, both of
Churches and tounes, have made them selves, Lords of the earth. Yet is it most
certain (says Frarine) that Beza and his companions stole out of the Churches
at Towers 2000. marks in silver, and 1000. marks in gold, besides precious
stones, chains, and Jewels of great value, and and in so great abundance of
treasure were so gredie, that they left not a nail behind them. Which
wickedness he doubled, by burning the shrine, and casting the ashes of Saint
Martine into the river. But Beza himself, when the like was objected unto him
by Baldwine the apossata, answered, that all this is a most impudent slander.
For he was then at Orleans, when the treasure of the canons of Towers was
taken, not spoiled, before sufficient witnesses, a goldsmith weighing al
things, the notaries writing all things, by the commandment of the most Noble
Prince of Condie, and that for most just Beza respons. ad (...).
causes, as they themselves will testify, which most misliked that sight. All
which things are testified in public acts, and were allowed after by the kings
counsel, that no reasonable person may say, that any thing was done unjustly,
or unlawfully in so necessary a time. And as for the dispersing of S. Martins
reliks, for which he declameth so tragically, Beza confesses that he aloweth
the same by the exampell of the brazen serpent in like manner destroyed, when
it was abused to Idolatry. As were thereliques also of S. Iraene, and S
Hylarie, to the great dishonor of God, and ignominte of those holy men: and
this supposing, they were true relics. But to the intent all men may know,
what manner of relics they were, the abolishing where of he so pitefullie
bewaileth: Beza brings two or three examples. There was at Towers a silver
cross, set with many precious stones, which there was worshipped, with
shameful superstition. Among which stones there was an Acates of ancient and
curious grauing, which after it was brought to Orleans, and vewed in his hands
which had brought it, there was found the image of Venus bewailing the death of
her minio Adonis slain with a bore. And this stone was that, which on
goodfridaie was most devoutly kissed of them, that crept on their knees to
the croslc, as the Image of the blessed Virgin Marie. There was also brought
forth a silver arm, as the case of an holy relic of the Saint, which when it
was unclasped in the presence of the Canons, themselves by the goldesmith, and
that which was hidden within with marvelous foulding of silks, was brought
forth, there was (...) first a paper, which contained a baudie song, written in
old Rithme, and within that a Card, commonly called the knave of Picques or
Diamondes. At an other place, that is at Biturige, in an other case of
relics, there was found a stick thrust into the naue of a wooden wheel,
with this magical or foolish verse written in partchement.

Quand cesteroue tournera.

Celleque i aim in aimeraidest.

When this wheel shall be turned, she that I love, shall love me. and these
things Beza offers to prove by five hundred witnesses, and affirms
moreover, that a large volume will not suffice to rehearse such shamfull
dishonor to God, and dilusions of the people. Let Frarine therefore cry out
as long as he will, against the destruction of Idolatry, and compare it with
the cruelty of the Panimes mentioned in Eusebius, which for hatred of Christian
religion, raged against the bodies of the saines whom they murdered: yet al
reasonable men must acknowledge a wonderful great difference, not only in the
facts of them, and these: but also most specially in the ends.

But yet again to return to Orleans, Frarine rehearses the uncomely
stripping of an honest maid, and shameful groping of her to search, if she
had hid any money above the rate of the proclamation, to carry privily out of
the town about her: a foul fact surely if it were true, and worthy to be
punished: for they might rather have committed the search of her to honest
women. But a thousand times more detestable was the violent rauishing of a maid
in Picardie by that Popish captain Monsieur de pontes, whose soldiers held the
maid til the captain forced her: for indignation whereof, she slew him with
a knife. The soldiers slew her with their gunnes. And the Pesants of the
country destroyed the soldiers, as is testified by a Pamphlet set forth in
French and English. And yet more monstrous, even in time of the first wars in
France (whereof Frarine speaks) was the rage of the Popish women of Province,
against their own sex; which having cast of-al womanhood, yea all humanity,
like furies of hell, ran about in the night spoiling the houses of the
faithful, and such women as they found, they dragged through the city, with
many stripes unto the place which they had appointed for their devilish
cruelty, and there they hanged them by the heels, and by thrusting a staff
in their priuiest parts (a thing most shameful to be rehearsed or heard of)
in that most beastly manner murdered Comment. de stat reip. and rell. l. b. 5.
them. Of this hellish. practice the cities of Marciles and Aix are witnesses.
What witness Frarine has of a Traitor, as he calls him by Angiers, which to
save his fort from gunshot, hung a noble woman out in a basket. I know not:
but if any such thing were, it was a stratageme or policy of war, the like
whereof in such cases has often heretofore been used. But that there full
purpose was to rob and spoil all, he proves by the words of Gabuston,
Master of the watch at Paris, whoriding into the high alter of Saint Medardes
Church, cried to his Spoil all.
mates in Barbarous french, Pilla tout, pilla tout. What words he spoke I know
not, but all men know it is a foolish argument, to prove the purpose of all
the Protestants, by the words of one captain uttered in heat, in time of
shameful sedition moved by the Papists, for while the congregation of the
faithful was hearing the sermon in the suburbs of S. Marcell, in the place
appointed by the King for that purpose, the priests of S. Medardes Church
thereby, kept such a tangling with their bells, that the preacher could not be
heard; whereupon two of the company went and gently desired the Priests to
stay their bells, but they being guarded with a number of men, fell upon those
two, and the one they slew in the Church, the other escaped by flight. The
priests then went up into the steeple, and rang the bells backward, which they
call Tocksaine, whereupon the people of the suburbs flocked rogither, and
disturoed the audience with stones. I he servant of the Magistrate was sent in
his masters name, to command them to cease their tumult, and keep peace: But
with stones and arrows he was compelied to return, whereupon the sermon being
broke of, the multitude of the Protestants hasting to the Church, brake open
the doors; where finding the dead body of him that was slain, marvel not if
they were moved with indignation: and therefore some of the armed Priests with
their accomplices they apprehended, the rest fled into the stecple, from whence
with staves, logges, arrows, and such like matter, which they had provided for
the purpose; not sparing to throw down their Idols, which they had carried up
least they should have been destroyed by the Protestants, they defended
themselves a great space, still ringing the Tocksaine, till at the last being
threatened that the steeple should be fired, they ceased, about forty of them
being wounded, and 15. taken and committed to the officer. And that their
could be no great spoil made in the Church, the priests had before provided,
for they had carried out Comment. de stat. Rel. and retp. lib. 4.
all their massing stuff, and other trumperie, as chalices, basens, vestiments
that were of any value before they attempted this sedition. The next day the
furious people having other priests to their captains, came into the house
appointed for the assembly of the faithful, brake down the pulpit and the
stools, and fired the house in many places, until by the said captain of
the watch they were put to flight. This is of truth the some of that sedition.
The cause whereof was yet so handled by the Popish judges, that the Papists
were acquitted, and certain of the Protestants committed to prison for it.
The most heinous fact of al, except one perhaps, is yet behind, and that is,
the profaning of the precious body of Christ him self, which with furious
and outrageous impiety, was cast on the ground, trodden under feet, hurled
into the fire, and into the water, and so despert elie all to be pricked with
their swords, and carried upon the tops of their spears. This he means of
their Idol of the altar, called of the french men Jean blanke, which of old
time (if we believe the fables of the Papists, still avouched by great plenty
of miraculous hosts and blood to be showed in diverse places) was so moodie,
that if he had been pricked but with knives of Jews and Miscreantes, he yielded
forth not only great streams of blood, but also was avenged by fire or other
means, of those that so abused him. But where are now those miracles? where is
one drop of blood? where be the examples of his vengeance, aginst so manifest
and spiteful contemners? I suppose it was no more but a thing forgotten. For
otherwise he might have fained miracles, blood and vengeance, as well as all the
rest, wherein he has impudentlie lied and counterfaited. The greatest matter
of all think, is reserved to the last place, that is, the Traitorous
murdering of the Duke of Guise, by conspiracy of that vilecaytife Beza,
inuentor of all these mischiefs, bondslaue of all bawdie, lust, and all
detestable sin and vice. You know Frarines eloquence, in handling such
matters. The crime objected (to omit his ruffinlike railing, and whorish
scoulding) he proves by Poltrotei confession: but Beza even by the same
confession, proves that it is false and forged. For therein Poltrote is made
to confess, that Beza should counsel him to commit that fact, as a work
very meritorious, whereas the wiser sort of Papists know full well, that Beza
would never use any such persuasion. And Poltrote himself at his death;
howsoever that pretended confession was either forged, or by torture enforced,
did clear both Beza, and the Admiral of being a counsel with the
enterprice, affirming that it was his own only devise. And yet I see not how
that fact of his should be counted treason in the Admiral, if he had bin of
counsel thereof, seeing Guise was an open enemy, and slain in time of war,
by one also, who ought him no service, or alledgeance. howsoever it was, it was
a just plague of god upon him, and a great benefit to the whole Realm of
France. For his end made an end of the lamentable wars for thattime. The
rest that follows in two or three leaves to the end, containing nothing, but
either tedious repetitions of matters handled before, or else odious
amplifications of general accusations without proof, or likelihood of truth,
I will spare to trouble the Reader withal, trusting that every man, which
with indifferent judgment shall consider these matters, will confess, that
Frarine (having taken in hand to prove three points, in his oration) is able
to justify none of them all, bringing nothing but accusations without proof,
Reports without witness, lies without truth, and words without matter.

God be praised.

