A most true report of the myraculous moving and sinking of a plot of ground,
about nine Acres, at VVestram in Kent, which began the 18. of December, and so
continued till the 29. of the same month. 1596.

The true figure of the foresaid plot of ground, containing nine Acres.



From A. to A. signifies the carrying way at the North end, which is sunk in
one place 100. foot, and in an other place 65. foot.

From D. to C. signifies two pittes of Alders, which are driven up to the
top of a Hill 4. perches a piece.

From B. to B. signifies the old foot path, which is driven from F. to E. 8.
perches.

E. signifies a hole suncke in the plain ground thirty foot.

From H. to H. signifies a standing Hedge of 28. perches long, which is
removed 7. pearches out ^his place.

The names of certain of those which were eye witnesses for the testimonial
of the truth hereof, under their hands.
Richard Bostocke Esquire, Justice of peace. James Austen Gentleman. John
Studley, Vicor of Westram. Will. Holton Physician. John Gainsford Gent. Erasmus
Gainsford Genesis Gyles Gainsford Genesis John Dawling the elder, Genesis John Dawling
the younger, Genesis Richard Reynold William Reinold Genesis William Holmeden Genesis
John Larmoth Genesis Thomas Chapman Genesis William Came Genesis Robert Lighe yeoman.
John Chapman of Cockam, yeoman. Richard Wells yeoman. Thomas Tollor yeoman.
Giles Brown yeoman. Thomas Stacy yeoman. Richard Stidowle yeoman. Raphe Stacy
yeoman. Thom. Chapman of Holdfast, yeoman. John Constable yeoman. John Chapman
of Shots, yeoman. John Stone yeoman.
To the right Honorable my singular good Lady and Mistress, the Lady
Margaret, Barronesse Dacre of the South, John Chapman your poor servant,
wishes much increase of honor in this world, and eternal joy and felicity in
the world to come.
RIght Honorable, my singular good Lady and Mistress,
whereas I find that ingratitude and forgetfulness of due reverence to be
performed of servants toward Masters and Mistresses, is among all sorts most
odious; as contrariwise, diligence to please, and reverent dutifulness toward
their said Masters, etc. is in them a thing most laudable: as among many
other, we read of one Mucronius, servant before time to a poor Artisan named
Hargabus, who being afterward called to be a Senator, did still for ever yield
such reverence unto his said old poor Master, as thereby he did not only
give cause of great joy, to Hargabus, but it was esteemed in him a great praise
and increase of honor, to be so dutiful to him that had brought him up. In
regard whereof, I your Ladyships servant, being desirous to make known to the
world the obedient duty and serviceable mind that I bear to your honor, have
thought good (for want of better opportunity, to present your Ladyship with the
education of the plotting and publishing of this miraculous work of God,
touching the strange moving of certain ground, at VVestram in Kent, whereof,
I with diverse others, have bin witnesses. Humbly beseeching your good Ladyship,
to accept this as a poor new years gift, at the hands of him, who prays
unto God that your honorable Ladyship may enjoy many happy new years: and is,
and always will be ready and diligent to please your Ladyship to the uttermost
of his power.

Your Ladyships faithful and obedient servant. John Chapman.

An admonition to the Christian Reader.
AS it is most evident to them that are of the household of faith, that in the
beginning our most gracious God did by his mighty power create and fashion the
whole frames of the heavens above, and all things else on earth beneath: so
also it is no less manifest, but yt by his wonderful and unsearchable
providence he does from time to time, preserve and keep, govern and guide,
alter and change, and every way dispose thereof according to his own good will
and pleasure, and as it seems best to himself for the glory of his blessed
name, and the good of his chosen children: dear to him in Christ Jesus, to
whom therefore be praise and glory now and evermore, Amen. These things (I say)
are most apparent unto men: And yet notwithstanding the bright eye of his
Almighty majesty continually pearcing into our hearts, and sounding deeply the
unseen secrets of men's deceitful thoughts, does by his divine wisdom see
and perceive, that many there be who have their continual conversation among
his children, and do sometimes suck the fat of the earth more plentifully
then they do, who yet like unto brute beasts, destitute of reasonable
souls, can go no further in contemplation of spiritual matters then their
bodily senses, common unto beasts, which do lead and direct them: And
therefore these carnal men (as the Apostle terms them) have as he says, no
taste nor sense, of divine matters, nor any perceiving of those things that do
appertain unto God: yea there be some of them so far from having any
reverent estimation and religious feeling of his gracious majesty, and
especially from acknowledging of his fatherly goodness and watchful providence,
sustaining the^ and theirs in their daily necessity of life and living, as
that unto themselves, and in their own hearts they say plainlye (and that the
Lord himself does know) that there is no God at all.

This damnable impiety, although it do deserve, as a most blasphemous
contempt of the sacred deity, to be no ways tolerated, but to be most
sharply censured, and rigorously punished, either with the fearful fire that
fell upon Sodom, or the suddayne gaping of the ground that swalowed up Corah,
or the swarming lice and vermin which did feed upon the flesh of that
presumptuous Herod, and devoured his loathsome carkesse alive, yet such is the
great patience and long suffering of the Lord, as that he does vouchsafe to
forbear, to execute his sharp justice upon the same for a time, and in the
mean while (as one pitying this natural blindness) does most bountifully
(as it were) put forth his glorious hand, and therein does hold out such
lamps of light as may clearly shine unto us, and be (as the star to the
wisemen was at Christ his birth) sufficient guides to lead us out of this
gross darkness of error and ignorance, and bring us to find him where he is,
if we apply our selves as they did to follow the course and footing of ye
same going before us, even here upon the earth: For seeing we be thus hardly
tied unto our outward senses, and so strongly pressed down with the heavy sway
thereof, as that we cannot pass higher then the reach of them: and so resting
thereupon, become altogether unapt to mount a loft, and ascend by faith to
discern him sitting above in the height of the heavens, in his invisible
majesty, he does not yet leave us here, and forsake us so: but to the intent
our dead and benumbed consciences might even by these our natural senses be
sufficiently convinced in this point, and further our human dullness (if it
may be) stirred up, to have some more lively feeling, forcible perceyuerance,
and effectual consideration of that supreme essence, who is God all
sufficient, unto all, and in whom we live, move, and have our being, he does
therefore vouchsafe, to descend in some sort unto us, and offers here upon
earth, unto our eyes a sencible testimony of his most certain being, and of
his mighty power discernable by his strange works, daily done in our sight,
far above the common course of nature, and beyond the policy and strength
of man: And to the intent we may understand so much of them, he does in doing
them, call unto us by his prophet, willing us to look upon them, and to
consider them reverently, while he says, Come and behold the works of God,
for he is terrible in his doings toward the sons of men: For if they were in
deed well wayed as they ought to be, and duly considered one with an other:
the order and course of them one way, and the varyetie and alteration of them
an other way, is such, as may easily induce and persuade us to know and
believe, confess and say, verily there is a God that rules the earth: And
among sundry other his works that may be of this force, he commends unto us
in place where some especially, namely these (that as the prophet says,) One
while he turns running rivers into a wilderness, and the springs of waters
into dry ground, and conuerteth fruitful land into barrainnesse, for the sins
of them that do dwell thereon. An other while he turns the wilderness into
pooles of water: And a dry land into water springs. Whereto we may add, that
sometime he hurleth down hills, and makes them to become low valleys, and
withal exalts the low valleys, and makes them to become high hills: Which
extraordinary effects when they come to pass, they are not to be altogether
neglected, nor attributed, as the manner of some is to do, unto blind chance,
casualtie, and fortune, or else to the only force of natural causes measurable
by philosophical reason: but as it appears by the holy prophet, they are to
be esteemed as matters of especial mark, and worthy to be regarded as
heedefull d^cuments, which have their first original and beginning of their
motion, proceeding from the great fountain of Gods divine providence, not
working idly therein, but tending unto some especial end and purpose: and
chiefly this, that men beholding and seeing the same, should thereupon take
occasion as it appears by David, with trembling and fear to think upon that
mighty majesty, who is the first cause and causer thereof, and then to
reverence his holiness, who reigning triumphantly in heaven above, does yet by
these his works on earth, show himself terrible unto the sons of men, and
thereby causes them to remember him perforce, that so one good thought in
them, may as fire increasing fire, beget an other, before all be quite
quenched. This then (as it seems) being the purpose and counsel of the holy
Ghost, by such his works to stir up in us a more strong and fruitful
impression of the great deity* we need not now travail far to seek out
some presidents thereof, in strange countries for the satisfying of our selves
by the testimony of our own eyes: for lo, the Lord does now at this instant
in some sort present the same unto us at home in our own native country, and
that in diverse places by common report, but especially in one place more
abundantly then else where, as may sufficiently appear by this discourse
ensuing, faithfully set down by them who are very (...) persons, and do
testify that which they themselves (...) know to be true.

A most strange and true report of certain ground, containing nine acres and
upward, which was suncke, removed, and carried out of his place, eight perches,
with the trees standing thereupon, at Cockam hill, in the parish of Westram in
Kent, about fifteen miles distant from London.
IN the parish of Westram in Kent, about a mile from the Town Southward, not
far from the East side of a certain great and common high way, called Cockam
Hill, leading from London toward Buckhurst, and other parts of Sussex, about
that coast lies a certain Farm possessed by one master Robert Heath, an
honest Gentleman, dwelli^g at Sandersted in Surry, and presently tenanted by
one Giles Brown an honest yeoman. Among sundry parcels of ground belonging
thereto, in the midst of that Farm are two closes lying together, saving that
they be separated with a standing hedge, of Hollies, Ashes, Hazels, Willowes
and Alders growing thereon: the situation of which, and namely of the upper
close, till the 18. day of December last past, was after this sort. The upper
face of it lay somewhat adant, and upon the shoot of an hill, but not so much,
but that a bowl being cast up against the hill might easily have layen and
settled without tumbling back again perforce: otherwise it was reasonably
level for the most part: for it has been usually mowed, and within these five
years has been sowed three times with three sundry kinds of grain: first
with wheat, secondly with Barley, and thirdly with Oats: A little above the
North end thereof, lying somewhat higher then the rest, hard adjoining to the
foot of a very high and steep hill, there was a certain carrying way for Carte
and Waine, to the Tennaunts use, and beneath that, toward the midst of it, a
foot path did cross to the close: Between the said carrying way, and the
said foot path, were two standing pittes, the one being about six foot deep
of water and more, the other twelve foot at the least, and about four perches
over in breadth, having sundry tuffes of Alders and some Ashes growing in the
bottomes of them: the ground on the south side of the said pittes, lay mounted
higher then the upper face of the water, about ten foot.

Again, from the great high hill lying at the upper part of the ground
whereof we spoke before, two very little gozels passed down along Southward
through the close, their water Courses being divided asunder at the upper end,
about the carrying way, twelve perches, and about the midst twenty eight
perches: All which earth of the said closes within the said gozelles, and about
an Acre more in breadth one way, and eighty perches in length another way,
began the said eighteen day of December to alter and change form and
fashion, and that very diversely from day to day, for the space of eleven days
together, after this manner.

First on the said 18. day, the said Tennant Giles Brown going in the morning
toward that Cart way, with purpose to pass along it, to a barn standing
beyond it, when he came to that part of it which lay about the head of the
gozelles, he found it for xij. pearches long to be sunk there down right six
foot and a half deep, by measure taken by himself and other. The next
morning being the nineteenth day, he coming thither again, found it to be
sunk sixteen foot more then it was the day before. The third morning being
the twentieth day, he came again, and then found it to be suncke about
eighty foot more at the least. And then from that day forward, that great
trench of ground lying partly in these two closes, and partly in sundry other,
containing from the carrying way southward in length (as is before said) about
eighty perches, and in breadth in some place twenty eight and where it was
narrowest xii. pearches, began with the hedges and trees thereon to loose it
self wholly from the rest of the ground lying round about it, and withal to
move, slide, and shoot southward, not with any sudden shot, but creeping by
little, and little, so as the motion and stirring thereof was not discerned nor
perceived, by the^ that were presently standing upon it and working about it,
but only by the sundry effects that followed, as the cracking of the roots of
trees, the brushing of boughs, the noise of the hedge-wood breaking, the
gaping of the ground, and the riuing of the earth asunder, the falling of the
torn furrows and huge trenches after it, some four foot deep, some six
and some seven and more, whereby there were made in it at the least not so
few as eleven thousand furrows, riffes, cracks, and clefts in diverse places
here and there. This moving and carrying of the ground southward continewing
still both by day and night for the space of eleven days together, sliding a
slant, sometimes as it was noted, fourteen handfulls by measure, in one hour
and a half did wonderfully alter and change the whole face of that land: for
in some places thereof, the hinder ground coming faster forward (as it
should appear) then the former ground did give way unto it, caused it to
swell up in round hillocks like unto graves, the green turfe remaining
still whole and unbroken above: In other places the hinder ground came so
violently, as that it did not only tear the green turfe above, but also did
rise and lift up it self, and did roll and tumble ever the other as it were
waves or surges and so stayed as standing buts, and at the last the whole
plotte was so toused, torn and rent, and withal the green turfe so tattered
and turned up side down, as that there is scant so much as one perch together
of all this ground left whole with the grass upon it vncrackt.

The ground of the two water pits even from the very muddy bottoms whole, with
a great rock of stone under the same are not only removed out of their places
and carried forward toward the South, at the least four perches a piece, with
their tuffes of Alders still standing upon them, but withal, they are mounted
up aloft, and become hills, standing yet to be seen with their sedge, flags,
and black mudde upon the top of them still, higher then the upper face of
the water is now (which they have forsaken) by at the least nine foot: and
into ye place from which they are removed and risen, other ground which lay
higher before, is descended and come down, receiving the water lying now upon
it, as it did before upon the other.

Moreover, in one place of the plain field, there is a great Hole made by
sinking of the earth, to the depthe of thirty foot at the least, being in
breadth in some place, two perches over, and in length, five or six perches.

Likewise there is a hedge of 30. perches long* removed and carried Southward,
with his trees and all, seven perches at the least: And of these trees some do
still stand, and grow upright, and some are quite overthrown, covered and
buried, with the folding of the earth running upon them, and almost both the
ends of the said hedge are sunk and covered wholly with the earth: the East
end of it four perches long, the West end five perches long.

Many other alterations there be of trees that be sunk and removed out of
their places, some five perches, some six: as namely, one Holly tree is driven
seven perches out of his place, and yet it stands upright still, and a great
Alder is torn root and all cut of the ground, and carried from his place
four perches, and there it lies, the top turned down to the ground.

Beside this, there was one piece of ground of half an Acre, which in times
past did lie up shooting in between the two fields: this piece now, with an
hedge row of trees standing upon it, is slipped quite away Southward, from
between those two closes: and they two before severed, are now come together
and joined as one, and in their coming, are tumbled over a summer hedge, and
withal two other hedges, and a shawe of hazell trees, and bushes, which did
sever them, are now driven together on heaps at the Southend.

Sundry other sinkings there be in diverse places, one of sixty five foot, an
other of forty seven foot, an other of thirty four foot.

By means of all which cofusion, it is come to pass, that where the highest
hills were heretofore, there the deepest Dales ^ee now. And where the lowest
Dales were then, now the ground lies mounted hiest.

The footepath spoken of before, is now carried out of square eight pearches at
the least, the lower end of this ground is carried southward in breadth three
pearches over into two meadows, whereof one is in the possession of an other
man called Thomas Toller.

Finally the whole measure and content of this breaking ground, was at least
nine acres seven day works and four perches, on the twenty ninth day of
December when this figure and measure of it was taken, as here ye see it set
down: And since that time it cracketh and cleaves daily more and more on all
sides round about it.

Among other things touching this matter, this also is especially to be
considered, that whereas by the great abundance of water, and continual
rain which have fallen so many months together of late, sundry great
bowrnes, and violent streams have broken out in many places of this land, and
at the least seven such within xii. miles of this place every way, the least
whereof is able to drive a corn Mill, where seldom or never any such have bin
before, and that this ground lies (as we have said) under a high hill that
might occasion some such issue, yet there has no extraordinary course of water
broken out upon it, nor near unto it by a mile any way, neither have the
small springs thereof, during all this wet weather, bin any thing increased to
speak of. In so much as the two little gozelles mentioned before, being they
that do carry most water over this rouing ground, are neither of them so great,
but that their streams might at any time all this year (and so many still)
easily pass through an auger hole of an Inch and half broad. Which I speak
to this end, that the strange carriage, moving, dryuing, and displacing of huge
mass of earth, and the heauing up of the vallyes and low pits, with the great
roots thereof raised and mounted unto hills, with the trees thereupon, cannot
be imputed to the abundance of water enforcing it as the cause thereof, as some
perhaps otherwise would imagine and suppose.

The whole manner of the strange confusion of this plat cannot be discribed
according as it is but there has (by report of the Farmers and others) come to
see it at sundry times, from London and other parts of the country four
thousand people since it first began: to whom it has seemed to be a very
strange and fearful sight, giving occasion unto some of them, to think upon
that great opening of the earth that shall be in the latter day when she shall
yield up her dead, that be in her to come to the resurrection, to other to
think upon that fearful gaping of the ground wherein Corah and his company
were devoured.

And to the intent the reader may not think himself to be abused in this
report by some vain devised fable, sundry of the neighbors and inhabitants,
and they of the best credit dwelling thereabout, who have bin at it, and are
eye witnesses thereof, have bin content here unto to give their testimony, by
subscribing their names at the beginning of this book.

FINIS.

