TWO WISE MEN AND ALL THE REST FOOLS: OR A COMICALL MORAL, CENsuring the
follies of this age, as it has been diverse times acted.

Anno. 1619.

Names of the Actors.
Proberio. Antonio. Rustico. Sperato. Insatiato. Lamia. Malingua. Furioso*
Purgato. Parvagracio. Simplo. Securus. Hortano. Spurco. Infaelicto. Susanna.
Mureto. Corraso. Stercorato. Levitia. Noverindo. Hermito. Acuto. Gulato.
Granato. Phantastico. Camerado. Pes^ifero. Vulcano.
PROLOGVS.
RIGHT noble and worthy Assembly: It has been a very ancient and la^dable
custom, in the best governed commonwealths, to admit and favorably to allow
interludes and discourses upon the Stage for diverse reasons; but especially
two. The one, to entertain the welconditioned people with some delightful and
fruitful conceits, thereby as it were to deceive idleness of that time which it
had allotted for worse purposes. The other, for the just reprehension of such
as with serious and more grave aduisings cannot or will not be so freely
admonished and corrected. The later of these two respects has begotten this
Dialogue, ready to b^ acted, principally and specially pointing that Impe which
is infortunately fostered up to this day, to ruin it self with infamy. Only
this comfort is afforded, that if he be present, and withal silent, he may
suppose that of all others it concerns not him. If he be absent (as most
likely he is) then every other that finds himself parcel guilt may see the
deformity, and forbear the excess. Other touches and passages are, which our
Author and we present not with mind to offend any, but to please the
weldisposed. And so in the name of all the rest I entreat ^ourteous ^udience,
and pardon of all faults.

TWO WISE MEN AND ALL THE REST FOOLS.
ACT I.
SCENA I.
Enter Proberio alone. HOw much we that have been trauailers differ from
other kinds of people? So soon as we arrive, we are attended to the Burse or
Randevou of Merchants. There we walk as if the whole world has need to be
informed, yea and directed by us in matters of greatest moment; such as is
traffic and commerce with foreign nations, and the state and disposition of
those kingdoms through which we have passed. For it may be we can give
intelligence of preparations and invasions. We can demonstrate their strength
and munition. We can number their Captains and Generals. We can discover their
designs and confederates. And finally, we can lay plots to cross and make
void all their purposes, and stratagems, which these homebred and country
spunne people can never attain unto. Therefore by good right we are had in
esteem, and special request, and courteously received of Counselors of state
wheresoever we come. Neither do w^ tie our selves to any one dominion more
then another, but indifferently to all states we deliver freely the condition
of every nation. And the place we ^^ll i^^o is our best beloved so long as
there we tarry, and not a minute longer. We oblige our selves to no Prince for
gold nor gain, nor be pensioners to any Monarche: but with desire to see more
we pass through all gouernements, vnchecked and uncontrolled, because we take
part with none, offend, none, nor are false to any. And this life we love
above all lives, not content with any life, but that which seeks an other life.

Enter Simplo and Nouerindo. Mounsieur Proberio, you are welcome home.

Pro. That Is more then you know Segnieur Simplo, what country shall be my home?


Simp. Then you are welcome into England.


Pro. Thanks gentle Simplo.


Simp. What news? And what company came over with you?


Pro. News I have none but ordinary to tell you. With the state I shall have
some business. And in my company came over an old acquaintance of yours, one
Segnieur Antonio, a man of extraordinary action and faction.


Simp. If it be the man I contiecture him to be* his name is plain Anthony, an
English man, borne some 70 miles from London Northwest, and has been beyond
seas some ^euen or twelve years.


Pro. That Is the man. But we call him Segnieur Antonio, by reason of his
trauailers in Italy and other places.


Simp. As he has changed his name and country, has he not altered his
conditions? I assure you he was very honest, and of good expectation before he
went.


Pro. No, upon my word. He came over a great deal better then he went, and
well qualified: and there was no doubt but he would continue so still, but that
covetousness, and the diuel's on it.


Simp. What? is he given to that? it were great pity.


Pro. Well, this Sir Antonio or Anthony whether you will* has seen many
countries, and learned many strange qualities.


Simp. Strange qualities! be they as good as they be strange?


Pro. Nay, do you judge? I Will tell you some of them. And if you like them,
we will put them in print, and set them up to be sold at the Hospital porch,
near S. Nicholas shambles, and annexed to the great thing in magna chart^, or
magno folio, entiuled, an Admonition to householders.


Simp. Well, if they deserve so, it shall be so; and I Will bestow the cost in
printing, and deal with a friend for their allowance sub pri^ilegio.


Pro. But first I Will account to thee what accidents we had in travail.


Simp. But I Will hear nothing till I hear them.


Pro. No? what if I should first read a Sermon preached within these seven
days at Amsterdam by a man of most pure profession and invention not ordinary,
passing all that lived before or behind him in the novel strain; himself of
the right cut of Carolstadius: in which Sermon he proves most deucutly, that
it is Idolatry to fight against the Turk. Would thou not hear that first?


Simp. No. What tell thou me of Sermons? let us have these qualities without
any more digressions.


Pro. Well, since you are so desirous, you shall have them by whole sale,
retaile them at leisure when you come home.

Imprimis, when he lives in a great town like, London, he loves to lie in a
corner over the Kitchen, because the Jack shall not whirle too often, to waken
or distract him in prayer. His dinners are for the most part ordinary, except
four days in the week he visit his housekeeping friends. And at supper a
couple of eggs, and a bit of cheese is a choice diet after a liberal dinner:
besides it saues fire and washing of dishes.


Simp. But if I were his man, if he kept no better cheer at his chamber* I
would make the cheesefrye until the butter were spent.


Pro. But your cunning would fail you, for he has a trick beyond your reach
for preserving his cheese. But to the next.

Secondly, he so cauils and wrangles with any man that he deals withal, that
they never agree or love after, and yet every Saturday he makes eauen with all
the world.


Simp. Thou tell me a wonder. How shall I believe this?


Pro. It is so: choose whether thou will believe me, or no.


Simp. Let me see how these can be reconciled.


Pro. Can thou not reconcile them? I see thou art a very barren fellow; thou
have not a spoonful of wit. I am sorry that ever I undertook to teach thee
these incomparable tricks of Don Antonto, labored for so toughly in climing
the Alps, and so dangerously brought down* Thou look too neerehand, as if
a man would spy for a Woodcocke in the next queath of bushes; whereas thou
oughtst to eleuate thy aspect^ to thy uttermost kenning, as those do that lie
on their backs to keep sight of hawks which aspire beyond the first region.
Search me the furthest corner of thy capacity, and there see if perhaps do lie
as in an abstruse angles, some secret pattern of these proiects. Every B^zzard
will prye if a mowle or a mouse shall happen in an hours watching to creep
from a bushe right under her stand: give me the Eagle soaring conceits, to
spy what springs before the furthest ranger a mile off.


Simp. I know not how to diue into this bottomless secret* It is sure some
riddle. I pre thee suspend me no longer: for if I should beat my brains with
an Iron pestle, not a sprinkle of them will light upon the outside of this
enigmaticall proposition. Nay, good now tell me, how he that palters with every
body, should be eauen at weeks end.


Pro. Well, I will not stick with thee for this once, but look not for it
often; for I Will not use you to it. Find them out by your own study for me
hereafter. You are of age one would think. Thus it is: hearken well what I
say at first. for I Will not repeat it again for losing of time. He i^ ^a^en
with all the world every Saturday. Those were my words, and I Will make them
good; mark diligently.


Simp. Nay, pre thee dispatch, or else I cannot mark as I was wont to do. The
mark will be out of my mouth if you come not quickly out with it.


Pro. Well, every Saturday night he makes eauen with all the world, because he
will be the better disposed against sunday. Hem Ha.


Simp. Alas! not yet* I am not able to endure it, I faint.


Pro. He is even that is to say. Ha. Ha. Hae.


Simp. O my heart: not yet. A penieworth of Aquauit^, if I shall live.


Pro. Hold, hold: thou shall have it presently: it is at my tongues end.


Simp. Well, say on. If my senses fail not, I Will hear you.


Pro. He loves no body then, and no body loves him. And thus thou see there is
no odds, but all eauen.


Simp. What a jest is this? there is an eauen reckoning with the devils name.
You shall be hanged before I Will torment my self with desire to hear any more
of your knauish tricks. I Will besworne I had like to marred all. It wrought with
me like a purgation. It has given me a treble stool at once, though I find no
fault. I have it hot* and worse then any perfuming pan in the world. You scuruy
fellow, an twere no for loosing land I have (he lays his hand upon his sword)
not marvel though a man must be sick at heart (I swear) and study so hard,
and strain my wits to reach the reason of this riddle. I am sure I did
ouershoot it 40. yards, and had like to put a dozen cases, how these two cases
might well enough have stood together in one subject salua conscientia, taken
out of Scotus, and Thomas Aquinas, fully resolved by them; but still I doubted
I should fall short: therefore I thought better to conceal them: and now do
thou gull me thus grossly?


Pro. Ha. Ha. Hae. An thou be a good fellow rehears^ thre^ or four of these
cases thou had like to have produced; and let us judge how fitly they had
been applied if need had been.


Simp. To what end? for thee to mock me more? you may command: but if I were
willing, thou have now put them quite out of my mind, I know not where to
begin.


Pro. I think so. Thou were pockily distempered.


Simp. Will It please you to proceed? let us hear some more of your goodly
squires conditions.


Pro. Thirdly. When he means to ride to his countteyhouse, he goes three days
before to some grooms at court. And if from them he leatne any news (if it be
but of a posy given the king of France by his nurse, or that a fisher man
sailing by the Barmoothes saw a fire at singing of a hog) this carries him
scot-free to all the ^ gentlemen's houses of his acquaintance situate, set,
lying, and being within seven miles of the high way of any side until at
length he set foot at his own stable door pecunijs numeratis remaining entire
in his right pocket. And the like he can do retrogrado to London, but by
variety of friends because the same news may be news forward and backward.


Simp. This is a very plain trick, and needs no such encomions, and Epithets
of commendation as you bestow on it.


Pro. Is it so Sir? there is your judgment, and bolt soon shot. But if I show
that it is a very difficill, ambiguous, perilous, perplexed and involved
stratagem, what will become of your opinion hereafter?


Simp. Who? here is a business about riding a few miles by many gentlemen's
houses, as though it requires such ingenious circumstances.


Pro, I, that it does Sir. And I undertake to make it appear though perhaps
you have nere a capcase to put it in.

First Segnior Anthony so soon as he puts foot in the stirrup, is to fear
least the Master and Mistres should not be at home and his perplexity in that
case is very hardly dissolved.

Secondly how to carry his tales and discourses methodically.

Thirdly to take heed he discover no familiarity with the gentleman's adversary.

Lastly what kind of farewell he were best to take at parting. These be
matters of mighty moment (as thou see) which he has to cast, and recast; to
meditate, and ponder; to toss, and tumble; to revolue, and refolue; to put
forward with Pro, and pull back with contra, to object, and confute; to throw
doubts and mishaps like snow-bals, and against them erect bulwarks and
defenses, to admit wounds and scars, and to apply salues; to conclude, come
what come will to have cordials in store, and all little enough to save his
best beloved in his purse. And yet thou Dunstable breed thoughtst it as easy a
matter to perform them handsomely as to make a good posset with a quart of new
like and a quantity of clear chamberly.


Simp. Sir I confess all these be far above my element: and that in many
years study I cannot comprehend one of them, therefore, I leave the to your
cavaglyer without Peer in mine opinion. Has he any more qualities of this
nature? Lets have them, for at least I shall learn some wit out of them.


Pro. Thou learn wit out of them? never while thou ^vest: not honestly
neither. They will rather rob thee of those wits thou have, he has infinite
such as these, which in very pity to thee I forbear to relate at this time*
These are enough to conceive at once. For if I should drive them all into thy
brains together, though it were with a tenne-pennynaile, thou could not
carry them away: but rather they would make thee mad in the case thou art now.


Simp. Why? what case am I in think thou?


Pro. Not sit I was to receive such potions without due preparation.


Simp. What shall I do to be made fit for their operation? I Will take any course
thou will prescribe me to get perfection. And I can imitate like an Ape.


Pro. Thou makst a large offer, and a rash, which full soon (I doubt) thou will revoke: but i will try thee. Before thou begin to profess this art, thou
m^^t forget all rules and instructions of manners taught thee by thy fathers,
godfathers, or schoolemasters, and renounce all good counsel given thee from
the beginning of the world to this day: that so being an empty and void
vessel thou may be the more apt to receive the tincture and impression
applied. And thus begin thy A.B.C. in matchevillaines school. Otherwise; if
tho^ should reserve but so much as a secret intention to keep thine old
honesty on the one side of thy head, and lay open the the other side to entertain
these restless and still stirring cratchets, there would be such hurly burly
in thy brain, that all the wit thou have will not keep them in order.
Therefore, if thou desire to be of the cunning cure* and withal love thine
own peace* come clear without wit or honesty, we will teach enough in a week to
serve thee all thy life time. Il^ bring thee acquainted, and then i will turn him
loose to teach and furni^h thee with destructions enough for a whole country.


Simp. Destructions. What should I do with them except it were to destroy
others. But I doubt I shall pay dear for my schooling, and that I like not.
But for the other point of parting with my former good lessons, faith, I can
quickly do that for I never gained any thing by them, therefore I can be
content to come to him as naked as ever I was born.


Pro. That Is great step to your well profiting I may say to you; and it is a
great sign of grace to be obedient, and wholly to resign your self to good
inspirations: but can thou tell when thou have good counsel given thee?


Simp. Not I; more then a child: For now you haumade me put off all my old
learning I am become a very innocent, as if I were this day taken from my
mammee: but I trust you because you are my friend. I hope y^ule put me to none,
but such as shall teach me enough for my money. And you say he is wise and will
give me samples enough, and then I warrant you I Will take um like a sponge till I
be twice so big as I am.


Pro. Well, then thus far we are agreed. And I wish you not to stand upon his
getti^g by you, least you be pennywise, and pound foolish.


Simp. How learned you his cunning so perfectly? hau^ you known him long.


Pro. O, I^ why I have known him these 30 years at least, and conversed with
him in his best times; somewhat (...) cost me you must think, but that is past.
I would not for any thing but that I did known thoroughly.


Simp. Has he been in Italy then as you said before?


Pro. I that he has, and carried from thence more th^n all the towns in Italy
could spare.


Simp. what is that?


Prob. I will not tell thee, thou have already more then thou can well bear:
thou art almost drunk with the very smell of his wit, or else thou would
never so idly ask me a question which I told thee twenty times.


Nover. Mounsieur Proberi^, I have heard all the conference between you and
Simplo: and I do so much mislike your discourse that I cannot choose but oppose
my self in my friends behalf whom I hear egregiously to be wronged by you
Pr^beri^.


Pro. In what Noverindo, have I done him injury?


Nov. In all your speech generally: and in many particulars.


Pro. O vinversall Noverindo in what particulers?


Nov. It Is no matter. I Will tell him all when we meet next*


Pro. That Is not matter. but can thou disprove me in a^y thing I said? or
do thou know any good by him that I have not spoken of*


Nov. Faith, or else I know but little: for if you praise ^ friend on this
fa^hion I prithee speak the worst ^^ou can by me.


Pro. Sir, it may be^ I Will pleasure you so much: but to the mat^er* can thou
disprove me in any thing I faid?


Nov. Yes, that I can, and that I will. I can disprove thee in that thou ^aidst
he never deale^* with any man but he cavills, and wrangles with him* which is
untrue. And I had much ado to keep in my mother tongue, but could have found
in my heart presently to have put the lie down thy throat, but I did bridle my
nature to hear all thou would speak. And now to demonstrat thy falsehood, I
say, and will i^stifie that he is as good a 10 ith 100 man either to give or
take as any is in London* and that he keeps his days (especially of receipt) as
strictly to an hour as any man. And further, that he cavelleth or wrangleth
not with any in this Kind: therefore you are a lying fellow.


Prob. Not to forward with your lies Noverindo if you love your self: for
though I will not fight for fear of the proclamation yet know I can make you
give me satisfaction upon your knee if I would complain: but I will seek no
such advantage; for the cause it self give me victory enough over thee, and
returns the lie most bra^ely into thy gullet. I can prove Nody Noverindo, that
in thy own trade and his of decemper cent. when he lost 100l which the
scriuener delivered his own messenger after the bond sealed, (who ran away
with the money) he brake his day, and sued the scriuener striving to recover the
whole, or some composition by that means.


Nov. But did he recover any? or did the scriuener give him any thing?000?


Pro. He re^ouer'd not; nor got any thing from the scriuener. But was not this
a wrangle, and a shameful cavil? yea and with a Noverint man himself which
thou deniest? 000 now thou lie in thy swallowing place Noverindo.


Nov. Segnieur Simpl^, Help me a little. Can thou say no good of this
gentleman* it frets me to the heart to hear a man of our own making to be
thus misused.


Simp. Faith not I, not much, saving that I have heard many years ago^ that he
was a reasonable honest man but for's religion, and they say still he is a kind
of a Papist.


Nov. What a rascal stis? do I call thee to speak in his behalf, and do
thou prate of religion? what has he or I to do with religion? I dare swear
that he is an honest man of no religion. (Intrat Antonio) and younders the man,
let us see now who dares charge him with religion. I hope he and I have work
enough and never busy our felues about religion. So many banckrupts, and
housekeepers now adays it is time to look about us.


Pro. What? do thou find fault with housekeepers: you will please him never a
whit with that, for ant were not for good housekeepers he would have many
hungry meals*


Nov. I find fault with such housekeepers as dare not show their faces without
their own doors. I cannot endure this. I Will complain to him on you both, if
ever he light on you within the lash of the law, there is no ^^rcy: and it is no
matter, teach you to speak so evil of him behind his back.


Pro. Why cockscombe; how can thou tell his back was toward us.


Nov. Well, mock on, it was in his abs^nce, that's all one: I Will tell him if you will
give me nothing.


Pro. Give thee, yes a rope (Noverindo turns toward Antonio) these
caterpillars are al for what will you give me like I^das*


Enter Nov. and Anton. at several doors Noverrindo speaks. Nov. Bonu^ dies*
Segni^ur Antonio, Magnifi^^; the worthiest gentleman that ever consorted with
the bankers of this city. Sir I hope you make no doubt ^o^ teneri and firmiter
obligari^ibi aut t^o certo attnrnato, etc. And further obligamus nos, and
quemlibet nostrum, heredes, and exec^^ores nostros etc. The condition is to be
ever ready at your lowest service.


Pro. What a rogue stis? he can speak nothing but obligations as Ovid did
verses.^


Ant. Gramarcees gentle Noverindo: how go the rates now?


Nov. Sir you may have as much as you will at eight in the hundred, others pay
ten.


Ant. I thank you: then I have a match already: a friend of mine must use a
thousand pound and entreats my band; I Will ^ay he shall have it by my means.
Thou ^halt have forty shillings in the hundred for brocage* and I will gain
other forty shillings, this is but twelve in the hundred that is dog cheap, I
know some pay a great deal more: And I Will have good land twice the worth for
my counter security. Let me alone to hamper them.


Nov. You are wiser sir, fast bind fast find. And if they fail yeull trice
them. I trow upon the mortgage.


Ant. Ah ha, art avis'd of that? surely I shall do them good to make the
fools take heed of others. And what falt is in me, a bargain is a bargain:
and if I give them a little more for their land when it is forfeited, they may
thank me but no parting with the land, for it is so deep if a man would dig it
that it reaches to hell, and there is no redemption.


Nov. Well, this is agreed: and if you will have 3000l ^peak^ but the word, and
give three days warning, we will come at your whistle as your wife was wont to
do: but there is a thing I must impart to you which (I hope) you will take well
at my hands, being but the relator.


Ant. What? is any Backrupt that has my sums put forth*


Nov. Not one, they are as safe as in your chest.


Ant. Let it be what it will then, I care not a rush.


Nov. Sir it is some discredit to you if it be true.


Ant. If it be true, and discredit I weigh it not.


Nou. Ah noble Antony (he imbraceth him) pardon me if^ I be bold with your
worship, for no man could have spoken more pithely, and more like our own
corporate brother then this was: why Sir for all the world so are we, never
moved say what men will: we could not live richly if men had cause to speak
well of us, give me your hand, I Will live and die with you for that word* and leo
here with this handof mine I reach you the hearts of all our company; now I
dare say any thing to you without fear, or blushing. That which I was so
vnwillidg to utter was no more but this: it is very credibly reported that you
never deal, or contract with any but you ^avill, wrangle^, paulter, wrench,
shift, chapp, change, deny, ^efuse, go back from your word, break off, and
play all manner offowle play; whereupon all men speak evil of you, and as many
as had once commerce will never more meddle with you.


Ant. All this is nothing, I have heard twenty times so much with my own
ears, and smile at the poor fellows that they spend their time with talking
of me. But did thou ever hear but I gained by them all.


Nov. Nay, that is certain: they all agree on that as a verdict.


Anto. Why, there is it then. Now thou seeft where wit lodges, with me, or with
them.


Nov. Faith it is true. And they have nothing to charge a man withal but
Conscience and Religion, and such impertinent stuff. But I think I have taken
down some of the^ about the word Religion of the oldest stamp, that you
should be tainted withal, and I trow I have so silenced them that you shall
not need to trouble your self with studying to reveng^ it.


Anto. I, they talk their pleasure behind my back, but I wish they would
speak one word to ground an action upon* Did thou hear him (whosoever he
was) say, I am a Papist?


Nov. O, no Sir, I warrant you, they dare not for forty pound say so. But that
you were one, that you look like one, that your heart is so still, if you
durst for losing some of your goods, that you were honester when you stuck to
it. That now you dissemble. And such like words full of suspicion, but not to
bear an action. They are crafty enough for that. But I trow. Sir, you are too
wise, and so I answered for you.


Anto. Thou did well. I know some of them would gladly catch me in a trip.
But I Will watch them well enough.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. I.
SCENA II.
Enter Securus and Hermito at several doors. Sir Hermito. No man better met
here then your self. I was in great care for an Associat in the affair with
this day, and almost every day I undertake.


Her. Sir my society will afford you small contentment, if my daily taskes
required not my attendance, where by perpetual vow I have engaged all my hours
until my death. For I am fit for no other employment but my beads*
Nevertheless if it please you briefly to let me know your desire, I will by my
answer you reasonable satisfaction.


Secu. When I do seriously consider the worlds present condition: And that we
which converse abroad with all sorts of people are subject to so many
mistaking, censures, and vn^ure reports, that it passes the skill of any man
to ca^y himself uprightly, and without blame, I begin to judge you, and your
like only happy, who chuising to leave the world, have procured quietness to
your life. But Sir Hermito, I marvel what has removed you from your cave to
the country. Are you as weary of private living, as I am of too much company?
The news must needs be great, and strange which brings you hither.


Her. No such matter, as that my intended course of dwelling with my self
sequestered from all resort, should have an end so long as my abode in this
world endures. Far be it from my thought ever to wish the change of my
estate. As now I am I trouble not others, nor any man offends me. And where
no mistake is, who can think of alteration? my resolution has bred my
contentment: the peace which I enjoy, counter-valueth all manner of wants. And
my spiritual excercises take away tediousnes. The cause of my coming hither
(Sir Securus) is a Proclamation lately set forth by the king, that all his
subject being men of 21 years, and upwards, living within 50 miles of the
Court, shall appear there within 14 days after notice given them. And about
three days past, a pilgrim passing by my cell, told me of this Edict, and that
it was upon allegiance. So I being his subject (though serving him to no other
purpose, but praying for him) thought it my duty to make my appearance. and to
depart without delay.


Secu. Sir, I am right to have intercepted you (whether you be travailing to or
fro the Court) because this day is appointed for hearing and determining many
controversies, and censuring sundry sorts of people: And some of these
differences beyond my learning. You therefore come very fitly to aid me. And
this whole affair being principally for peace making, and ending debates
without suite of Law* you may not refuse to join with me in a work of so
great charity.


Her. In very deed Sir, every ought to yield his best help to such works. And
although I have already recorded my appearance at Court, and licenced to
return to my poor home* and would willingly spend some hours with you to so
good a purpose; yet ( Alas Sir) I am like to prevail very little with any
body, wanting both acquiantance and authority among them whosoever they be:
therefore I entreat my fruitless presence may be spared; but I will not be
wanting to you with my prayers for your success.


Secu. Sir, for your authority and acquaintance it shall not skill. All that I
have both those ways, s^albe conferred upon you equally with my self. If they
despise you, they shall contemn me also. Only I entreat your company panie
this day, and then I cease troubling you further whatsoever need require
hereafter.


Her. Sir I expect no entreaty, neither will I wrong you so much as to make
further request to my poor self. I stay willingly and am at you^ service in
all things.


Secu. No servant of mine Sir, but my friend upon equal ^earmes.


They both sit down in chaires some distance each from other. ACT. II.
SCENA. I.
Enter Rustico, Hortano, Acuto, and Vulcano. Neighbor Hortano, I have
considered of the great coile we had the last Sabouth after evening prayer in
the verstrie about putting down the Holy Days. It hinders our business much.
And me thinks this praying in a Church among those of high degree is nothing
pleasantable, and blushing takes away my devotion. I can pray a great deal
better, and with a more comely grace when I whistle at plow. And me thinkes't
were a goodly matter if every man in's calling might follow his focation, and
there do such devotion as his stmacke stands to.

Hor. Faith, neighbor Rustico, I am even of your mind. For I Will bide by it, I
ha more weeds grows in one Holyday, then in three workie days.


Rust. O, you are a Gardner, it becomes you well to agree with the Husband man,
if we two hold together, we shall be ^oo hard for twenty fools.


Hor. Indeed it were a gay thing if we could put down these Holy Days, as you
say. Me thinks' twer an easy matter as well as we ha put down the
Fasting-dayes pell mell, hand over head. An we wood hang together it were soon
done, but when some are so arseward 'twill never be.


Acu. You talk you know not what. There were no reason in it: for that were
the way to break all order, and give our minds altogether to toil, and never
serve God. For you would not s^^y ^here neither if you had your will, but the
Sondayes should shortly go down for company. You will leave nothing standing.


Rust. O, you are a Tailor, you speak for your profit* For an 'twere not for
Holy Days, which require fine clothes, and much change, you might beg your
bread.


Vul. You hit the ^aile on the head neighbor Rustico. We Will put them down an
you will keep stroke with me.


Acu. Nay Sir, if any man hit the nail on the head, it should be you,
because you are a Smith* but soft, you are so hot with your rip rapping, that
you miss the nail and An^yle also. For my part although I do boldly work on
Holy* days as other taylers use Christmasse day and all, yet would I not miss
the Holy Days for any good, nor would I break the order without necessity.
But is it so easy a matter to put down the Holy Days think you? And will
you do it with the furious fire-forke? And you Master Gardner that will rake
up Holy Days and Fasting-dayes like weeds, and bury them all in a rrench, you
are both both fowly deceived. For neither have you put down the Fasting-dayes,
because still they are bidden in Churches, nor is the case alike* for Fasting
is private, and cannot so well be punished, but if you come not to Church, up
you go not to Church, up you go for a Recus^^t an you were my father.


Rust. Why for all that ^hud we be troubled with so many holydaies? wood not
fewer serve the turn as well? I do not think our auncetrums were so pestred.


Acu. Yea, and with many more; and kept the eues half holy.


Rust. How didne a then for doing their business? sure a were all beggars. And
yet twood anger me that my graundsir should be a beggar. I it wood.


Acu. Not so neither. They lived very well: and had not the twentieth beggar
that we have: and were great housekeepers every man almost. They built all the
Towns, Colleges* and Religious houses.


Rust. Didne a so indeed? I cha hard my grandsir, and grannam tauke much of
those things. Sure but I think they went to plow and cart on the workydaies,
and built those things you tauke on upon the holydaies, or else it cood never
be.


Acu. No, no. They suffered no kind of lighter works to ^e done in those
days, much less such pain^full labors as they were.


Rust. Why were the Saiuts days kept holy at all? Tell me some reason for it.


Acu. They did in those days give great honor to such as suffered death for
Christian religion, although the men were as poor as Christ's fi^shermen. And
therefore the days of their martyrdom they kept holy, and came to Church to
glorify and praise that God, for whom those Saints died, there were people
exhorted to do the like.


Rust. But I mislike the very ground, and cause of those holydaies which (you
say) is suffering death willingly. Do not we die fast enough (think you)
against our wills, but we must set up a trade of dying with a good will*


Acu. Thou speak against reason. For if thou must needs dye, first, or last,
were not better to die for a glorious cause, so to be sure of heaven, and
willingly in perfect memory, then against thy will wrestling with death, and
overcome in the end with great pain, and perhaps past thy senses.


Rust. Reason me no reasons* I speak as I think, I protest from my heart I
had rather do any work in the world then dye. What? never come home again to
my wife, and my pretty barnes? Why, I have a boy, his name is Jack; he has a
face as welfavor'd as any great turnippe root, with a crack in the midst,
which is the very proportion of his mouth. I will not willingly leave that boy
for all the deaths in the world. No I will not. But if I must needs dye whether
I will or no, I wood have death take me asleep, that I may not see his face,
for if I did I would run away as hard as ever I could for my life.


Hor. Mr Acuto talk with me, he speaks like a fool. I have more wit then
twenty such loggerheads.


Rust. Nay, then I have more wit then thou can get* for I can make my horses
turn up the ground, and thou must do it with thy hands and feet, else thou
can earne no money. Come neighbor Vulcano, we two wise men will leave these
two to play the fools here until our ^urne come again.


Exeunt Rust. and Vul. Hor. Now Acuto* let us two conclude what shall become of
these holydaies, and as we agree, I warrant it shall go. And thou have almost
persuaded me to let them stand. But let us go and read a book I have at home
of the lives of Saints to furnish us with stronger reasons against our next
encounter with these Dunce^, and then we will end this controversy.


Exeunt. Secu. How think you by this S. Hermito? would you have imagined that
such plain fellows as these be, should call a business of this nature in
question? By this you may may guess what stirring heads we have to deal
withal, and how easy a matter to keep them in order.


Her. It is somewhat strange. And the more unlearned the men are, the harder to
be satisfied. But he hope is, that as mad men do best service when some of
their like are most unruly, so these men being alike unskillful will soon
confound each other, and so give over the business.


ACT. II.
SCEN. II.
Enter Antonio at one door* Proberio and Simplo at another. It is not unknown
to me that very many do censure my deeds as wicked and not beseeming a
Christian. But this is the iniquity of the time, because they do not
distinguish between persons and seasons. For my actions being not ordinary, are
not to be judged by ordinary, but refined wits. For now your down right
dealing is exploded, as too subject to every mean capacity.

Pro. Yonder is thy master that shall be ( Simplo*) thou shall lose no time,
we will to him suddenly. Segnieur Antonis. All hail to your person. Here is a
man desires to serve you; to be your pupil; to imitate your actions so near
as his vessel can hold the print. And he will do well. For he is made all of
wax, very pliant, empty of all thing* (...) a little money and a tenement or
two of land lying next your freehold on the south side, worth 10l per annum.


Ant. He is welcome. Have you given him any principles, such as you know are
necessary? and is he docible^*


Pro. He is ready for your hand Sir. I will not commit such an error (knowing
you as I do) but lay the foundation. You may work upon him as you list I
warrant you.


Simp. Sir I hope you shall find me di^igent, and according to your heart.


Ant. Thou have a good stern countenance, I like thee well: if thy mind be as
untoward it will be suitable.


Simp. I warrant you Sir, no man shall get any thing of me, but I will know
how he comes by it, except your self, whom I will trust withal I have. Deal
with me as you please.


Ant. I thank you. Nay, if I deal not well with you, I wish no man should
deal ill with me. I hear you have land lying near me, I would have you be a
good husband, and keep it. Let me lay up your writings safe least some deceive
you of them.


Simp. That you shall Sir* here they be. They shall be in pawn to you for my
good behavior: for I think no man will give his word for me.


Ant. Thou art the fittest man for me that ever I met withal: nor any man (I
think) will undertake I shall be a good master to thee.


Simp. It Is no matter sir, I will stand to your gentleness.


Ant. Well said: and I Will even deal with thee thereafter.


Exeunt Ant. and Simp. Pro. Thou have a service a dog would not have it, except
his tail were already so short cut to his breech that no more could be spared.
I warrant thou has^ seen the last of thy writings. They will pull thy land
after them. And that is but law.

Transit terra cum onere. Exit. Pro.
Enter Hortauo and Acuto. Is it true that you told me ( Acuto) at our last
parle here that there were ^^ch valiant people in times past that willingly and
chee^efully went to their death when they might have in^oyed life longer.

Acu. There is no question of it except we should discredit all
Historiographers, who make honorable mention of them i^ all ages before us. And
in our own time and memory there have been many ^uch men.


Hort. I p^otest it is a wonderful courage these people have, and in mine
opinion far beyond the stoutnes of the soldiers. For they go to kill and
contend, not meaning to dye, which only they strive against, and avoid by all
means they can* and provide above all things to be well armed for safety of
life. But the martyr with not resisting, conquers death, and fears not that
which is feared and shunned of all others. Therefore I think them worthy of
great honor and p^^petuall memory. But who are they (say you) that give
testimony of them? me thought it was a very fine word.


Acu. They be Historiographers.


Hor. O Histornoggerfers. a brave word. I Will make a knot of these letters.


Acu. No, Historiographers man.


Hor. Now I have it Histriagerfers.


Acu. Not so neither: you must mark well, and pronounce it just as I do.


Hor. That I will be sure to do.


Acu. Thus then. Hi-sto-ri.


Hor. Stay there. Now gape (he gapes and Hortano looks in his mouth) lets tell,
how many teeth ha you? 22. hough, whoos within there? a pair of pincers.


Acu. What to do?


Hor. Why to pull two teeth out a your mouth for I ha but just 20.


Acu. And what of that?


Hor. Mary because you will ha me say it just as you do, and that I cannot except
you and I have the like number of teeth. I, and I Will measure your tongue, that
if it be longer then mine it may be cut even: for it is my duty being a
gardner, to do all b^ line and level.


Acu. That Is no matter: so that you utter the sillables full as I do.


Hor. Yes I make no question, though I lack a few teeth but I can swallow a
sullebub as full as you.


Acu. A sullebub. I did not speak of a sullebub.


Hor. No? that you did. I Will be judged by all this company.


Acu. No such matter. I said you must observe every syllable.


Hor. Go too then* I wool: up with it once again.


Acu. Can thou tell what a syllable is?


Hor. No, not I more then my dog.


Acu. How will thou observe them then if thou know not a syllable?


Hor. Let me alone for that: I Will make a shift. Do you say the word, and if
there be ere a one there, I Will find him I warrant you.


Acu. Ere a one there man? why the word is framed of many sillables.


Hor. Very well: how shood I miss them then? turn me loosse. I Will take it as
soon as it peeps out of thy mouth as parats do bread and butter.


Acu. Come then mark well* His-to-ri-o-gra-phers.


Hor. I Will lay ten pound to nothing, I Will not miss a straws breadth,
His-to-ri-o-gra-fers.


Acu. That Is right indeed.


Hor. Law, did no^ I tell you so? Nay you never had an apter scholar in your
life then I am: twool do you good to teach me.


Acu. I am glad of it: this was soon learnt indeed: now put together, and
speak it short as I did.


Hor. I will: but you need not doubt that it is safe, and will never be lost.
But to satisfy you I Will do it, and that quickly, Histor-cockafurrs.


Acu. Whoo: the longer the worse.


Hor. This is your faut: that wood ha me say it so fast: and ^is a very s^urvie
word to hit, except a man have a mouth made thereafter.


Acu. I think you are fasting to day* and that hinders your speech: go play
and fill your belly* and we will at it again soon.


Hor. Thanks gentle Master: and the next time you teach me, we will do it very
closely ant please you. For I do not mean to be very lavish of my learning,
when it shall be at the biggest in no company but yours.


Acu. So do all cunning folks: be dainty of your skill* or else you shall
never be entreated at first, nor thanked at last.


ACT. II.
SCEN. III.
Enter Vulcano and Rustico. Hortano: ^ou have been a great while prating with
that pricking fellow and make no reckning of my neighbor Rustico and m^*
Belike you think to ingrosse the honor of the wholle business to your
selves. But I tell you plainly, if you have termind to put the Holidaies down
you shall not cosen us so: for it shall be well known that I helped to knock vm
down as much as any man in the parish: and that I gave the hottest stroke
about it.

Hor. Sir you are much mistaken. The Tailer is an honest man, and a true man,
(although it be impossible) and we are fully agreed they shall stand, and be
kept as holy as they were the last year.


Vul. Are you so Sir? you are but a treacherous fellow for your labor, and a
coward too: for I warrant thou had rather be at a good dinner then a battle:
were not we two worthy to be of the council? Well; I Will be even with thee
for this trick* I Will swear, I Will not say a prayer this twelue-month upon any
holidaie that shall do any living creature good.


Hor. What a villain is this? then thou will not pray for thy self?


Vul. No, goodman woodcocke? as though I were a living creature.


Hor. Yes; a man would think so; art thou not?


Vul. No that I am not. And I Will prove it by an argumen, and a sluttegim too. I
tell thee, I can chop Logic an I list. I can prove thee an Ass, or any such
h^rne beast with a trice I learnt it at Sturbridge fair, the while I was
selling hobnailes: there was such argenication among the scholars there,
whether my nag which I gelt the year before were now a horse or no* I set um
all one such a froth with spouting one against the the other, that some of the
slauer lighted on my face, and yet I had my nag between them and me for fear
they would fight, and pull me under their feet. But an they had fought I never
meant to part um. To be shor^* with gaping upon them, I swallowed so much
Logic as will serve me the longest day of my life* And now I Will practice upon
thee to prove my self no living creature.


Hor. What a goose art thou? Is it possible thou can speak, and yet be no
living creature? prove this and prove anything.


Vul. I will prove this* and I will prove any thing by Logic: what a maime it
is for a man to be ignorant of the virtue and power of Logic. I pity thee,
and all such as be unlearned like thy self. Why man: I will prove by Logic
that he which was the last year an^ yet lives, is not.


Hor. That were strange. How? He that was the last year and yet lives, is not.
I cannot devise how this should be: for if he live, how can he choose but have a
being?


Vul. Now it shall appear how short you are with want of Logic. But I Will
teach thee a little. He that was the last year (yea and the last week) an
honest man, an^ yet lives, is not now an honest man.


Hor. This may be. For I have heard an old saying (and I think it be true)
that a man may as soon depart with his honesty, as with any thing he has.


Vul. So then. Do not* thou think now, that I am as well able to prove my
self no living creature?


Hor. I promise you I am in some doubt of it now: go on.


Vul. Every living creature loves some other creature. But I love no other
creature. Ergo I am no living creature. Now Hortano take all the herbs of thy
garden and still their water to powder, thou can never wash out the strength
of this ^rgomen* I make it just as they did theirs at Cambridg^ about my nag. I
remember the words, and shall do as long as my nag lives. For one of them
spouted thus. Every horse has stones: but this beast has no stones; Ergo he
is no horse. And I clapped him on the back and told him that he spoke truth.
For I gelt him the last year, and eat his stones to my breakfast. But I had
like to have marred all by saying so. For there was a nimble-headed Scholar
that stood by, (and yet had nothing to do with the question) went about to
prove me a horse, and thus he began. Every living beast, or Animal, that has
in him horse stones, is a horse. But this Animal, (meaning me) has horse
stones in him, Ergo he is a horse. I was stricken in such a maze (knowing that I
did eat the horse stones) that I was like to sink where I stood, and even
presently to congeale into a horse. But there was by chance an honest Scholar
by, who saw my color quite gone, took pity on me, and bade me be of good
cheer, I shood not be a horse. And told the the other to his face, that there was
a flacy in his argumen. And then fetched him about with a R^cumbentibus, and
proved that the horse stones which I had eaten, were consumed, and became such
stuff as I cannot tell you without Sir reverence of your teeth; and that they
did not grow in me as they do in horses: Ergo the case was altered. Then upon
this point of growing, and not growing, there was such a stir, that all the
horse-coursers in the Fair came about us. One said they did grow, another
denied it* and such part taking on both sides, that in the end I was content
(being desirous to make them friends) to be searched in the open market, and
so was cleared before them all to have no more stones then I shood have. And
glad was I that I was not a horse. Had not I (think you good cause to remember
Logic? Yes, I shall never forget it if I should live 100 years.


Hor. Go to then: if you be such a scholar I will not dispute with you about
the Holy days, but my neighbor Acuto has been a scholar as well as you,
and he is able to show you many reasons why they ought to continue. And he
has fully converted me.


Vul. I will not be judged by Acuto, nor by a better man then he. Why, I tell
you my neighbor Rus^ico and I, think our selves as good men as A^uto and you,
and we are two to two. We Will never yield while the Plow and chains hold, and
that will be a good long time; for as fast as they wear, I can mend them.


Acu. Will you refer it then to judgment of indifferent men? we are all
neighbors, let us not fall out about things that none of us have skill in.


Rust. Yes, we will be judged, but not by any brave people; for they will all
take part with the Tailor that makes their parell gawdie, and with the Gardner
that makes them pleasant waukes and knots.


Acu. We Will give you the choice, so that you name none of your own trade, and
an indifferent man.


Rust. You say honestly, Nay truly we are desirous to have an end of it, so
that none of us be his own carver. Here sits a country Gentleman, a plain
man, a good housekeeper, and peacemaker among all his neighbors: he is no
Justice of peace, so there is no fear to speak our mind before him, nor
need we any minerator to him, he is very courteous.


Acu. We Will not refuse him, nor any that is honest.


Rust. God save you Sir. Here is a great controversy between four
neighbors, two against two. Reasons are alleged on both sides, and neither
part will agree to other. In the end we accorded to refer the matter to you,
we beseech you to consider, and order it as you please, and then so shall it be.


Secu. The controversy is beyond my skill, it being matter of divinity; but
mine opinion is, they ought still to be kept. For I persuade my self, that
our Auncetours (which did all things well) had special reasons for these days
to be kept holy. What their reasons were, I take not upon me to set down:
there ^its a Religious man, he is more like to quench your thirst, and resolve
your doubts then I am.


Vul. Most Reverend Sir, though we be strangers to you, we are bold to ask
your counsel in a business of weight.


Her. You are welcome whosoever you are: no marvel though you be strangers to
me, who have estranged my self from all the world: but what counsel can you
expect from me, who am not like to give wordly men any satisfaction, since I
have already given the world with all his business an utter farewell.


Acu. Sir, our business is not worldly, though it concern worldly men, even as
your life is not worldlike, though bodily you live on earth.


Vul. Nay M. Acuto, stand aside, or I Will have you taken away, for you mar the
paly, you are very forward to take the tale out of my mouth, as if you had more
wit, but I think not so. I began first to speak unto this man, therefore I will
have the last word. Sir, our business with you shall be short* for I am a hot
fellow, and I strike thick and short. This Tailer takes long and wide stitches,
and draws out the time to make his work seem much. Our difference is for the
Holy Days as they stand in the Calendar, whether it were fitter they should be
retourn'd into working-daies as they were at the first, or remain to the
worlds end. If you judge they ought to stand, we are content, and will work
harder at other times. If you will have them down, do but say the word, and
hold up your finger, we will maule v^ to the ground at a blow.


Her. Your question is not hard to decide, and fit enough for me to deliver
mine opinion in. It is true, they were all working days at the first. For
which purpose it is said, such work as thou do, work it in those six days,
and not on the seventh day. Yet God did never forbid any of those six days to
be kept holy* And the Christian Church has appointed many days to be kept
holy in memory of Saints which suffered dive^se torments for Christ's sake, who
suffered all for them, and for them all. And those to be kept to the worlds
end, that their facts and fame might never die, but enco^rage others to tread
their bloody but Heavenly steps. Therefore since the Church of God and
custom of Christian countries have so ordered it, let no man's private rashness
presume such alte^ation, as to make away or put out the Holy Days, but with
due reverence to observe them.


Vul. Gods blessing on you Sir, you have quite confiscated my conceit. I Will
kill him that would have them down. Such a sermon every day would make me
keep all the ^est of the week holy. Gow neighbor Rustico, you and I will
hang together, and change together. I Will never meddle with any matter out of the
length and breadth of my Anvile, fall back, fall edge while I breathe* Me
thinks I am good enough with this little teaching, I shall never need to mend
hereafter. I could find in my heart to go to hanging presently, and be a
martyr, if I might have no time to think of the pain, but go alive to Heaven.


They all make obeisance to the Hermit, and turn asid^. Acu. I told you so
much before, you never needed to have troubled the good man.


Vul. Thou told me so? what care I for thy telling? If thou told me my father
were dead (though I knew he be buried) I will not bleeue thee. And yet I would
not for forty pound he were alive again. This is a grave man, and his ver^e
countenance speaks truth. Tauke no more o^t, I am quite dissolved they shall
stand fast: and I Will keep them very devoutlie. And I Will persuade all the Parish
to do the like.


Acu. Thou teach all the Parish. Will thou turn preacher?


Vul. No preacher Sir, but I hope all the Parish comes to my shop for one thing
or other. And cannot I then give vm part of my tal^nt as well as the Cobblers
are wont to do, and I am sure it will become me as handsomelie as them.


Execunt Vul. Acut. Rust. Ho^t. ACT. II.
SCEN. IV.
Enter Antonio, Simplo. Go Simpl^ to Mistress Sylvester in Sheerelane, desire
her ^o lend me a pair of sheets, a p^^lowbeere, half a dozen of ^apkins, and
a towell.

Simp. I will Sir, (he steps forward* and suddenly stoppes) but now I remember
me Porber^^ told me you have linen enough of your own.


Anto. He was the more fool to tell you so* but you must not use to cross me
thus. Do as you are bidden. Will not out own la^t the longer if we wear of
other folks sometimes? when we have gone through all our friends so often that
none will lend us, then it is time enough to wear our own.


Simp. I understand the conceit now. I Will tell her you lo^t your key.


Anto. Best of all. Do so. I perceive thou need'st no broker.


Simp. No Sir, no; such a tuitor as you will serve turn well enough.

Exit Simplo.
Enter Proberio. Anto. Friend Proberio. You come in good time. I was beholding
to you in my gre^test necessity: And I purpose to requite all your deserts. At
this present an accident is fallen, which will be beneficial to you with a
little diligence had. A messenger of mine received a hundredth pound by my
direction from a serivener in this town, and ran away with it into Ireland,
find him out, and get the hundredth pound, I give it you.


Prob. I thank you Sir, but it is a thousand to one I shall never find him;
and if I do, I know not the man, and the money perhaps spent.


Anto. If this fail I Will give you another as beneficial as it*


Pro. That Is easily done. For I think this is little worth.


Anto. I have an employment for you, one Sir Retlaw, and Master Eloc, his
father-in-law are bound with me in diverse bonds, I for them, and they for me.
The whole sum is a thousand pound, the greater part they are to pay. I have
their counter-bonds for all. What they have for my debt I know not. I would
have you be perfect in the accounts as they stand in my book, and then demand
of them a reckoning between us.


Pro. Well Sir, this shall be done with effect.

Exit Prob.
Enter Simplo. Sir I have brought the linen, she lent it willingly. So I saved
the lie; she desires you to suppe with her to night.

Anto. Ha, suppe there? with all my heart. But how shall I do with my two eggs
at home? they will be too stale, remember soon to carry them to the
Al^-house, but measure them well in your hand with griping.


Simp. I will Sir. I would desire your counsel in a matter concerns my self.
One Frith, a neighbor of yours desires to buy my land, whereof you have the
writings, and will give me more then it is worth. What will you advise met to
do?


Anto. I think it not amiss to take his money, and put it out to use, and
therein I can pleasure you. My scrivener shall do it as for me, and he will
get good men for your money.


Simp. I thank you Sir: then I will absolutely bargain with him, and send him
to you for the writings.


Anto. Do so: but be not long: for I have business instantly for you.

Exit Simplo. What an Ass is this? does he think I will let any man buy a
thing so near my nose, but I will lay hold of it with my teeth? I will have
his land do what he can. And I will have it one 40^ the cheaper for this
trick, that he will offer to sell it from me. He thinks belike to make a
porter of me to carry his writings from Lawyer to Lawyer; but if I be, I will be
well paid for my pains. I have a device in my head, which I will extend to the
uttermost, seeing he puts me to it. Trust? there is a trust with all my heart to
serve other men's turns. No, I never Iou'd that. I remember to have learned
that charity begins with it self. And a Cook licks his own fingers before
he di^hes the meat for others. Do they not know what it is to get writings
out of my hands? It seems they never entered bond to me. If they had, they
would not presume thus. If nothing else would serve to hold them, yet this I can
allege, that they are my security for his good behavior (although I care not
six pence for any security, because I never mean to trust him for a crowns
worth of any thing. And I have all you to witness, that for his good behavior
he pawned them to me.

Enter Frith. I am glad to meet you here Sir, your man and I have bargained
for his land not far from me, but very near you.


Anto. Welcome neighbor Frith. Let me speak with you a^ide. Take heed what
you do. His title is naught, else I would have had it my self, and you know it
lies ^it for me. But let him not know I said so.


Frith. I were much to blame if I should Sir: no, I warrant you. I thank you
for this caveat. I might soon have lost my money so.


Enter Simplo. Anto. Stay awhile, you shall hear more to his face. Come hither
Simplo. This honest man tells me, he is in speech with you about your land, and
I was content to ^et you run (...) your course. But do you forget that it is
pawned to me for your good behavior?


Simp. Sir, such a thing there was. But my hope is you will not be my
hinderance.


Anto. Your hinderance. No; but if this be true (as you cannot deny it) have
you not forfeited your land and w^^tings by your evil behavior, offering to
sell it ^o a strange^ and not to me?


Frith. That Is a plain case Sir. I Will not (...) with hi^ land, nor any of my
neighbors shall, for I will (...) them all^ Nay, I may say to you Sir, I am
told he has no good title to it.


Anto. Were you told so? Well, farewell neighbor Frith. Exit Frith. How now
Simplo. To keep your land* no man will be your Tenant? and to ^ell it, who
will dea^^ with you? Did you not hear him say it is reported you have no good
title? Well; in hope you will do me true service, I will help you out of
these briars. Tell me true* What should he have given for your land?


Simp. Indeed Sir he should have paid me 150^. And if you help me not I am
undone.


Anto. It had been worth 150^. if it had not been thus disgraced, but now
it is worth little. Well, if I give you 100^. for it, what will you say?


Simp. If you will give me 100^. for it, I shall think my self much bound to
you while I live. And so I doubt not but you will keep the land safe. For the
title was as good as could be until you had my writings. It may be they took
wet in the last great rain, and so they did shrink.


Anto. I will give thee 100^. And no rain will shrink the money: the Sun
will do it most hurt: for it will melt very fast.


Simp. You know how to keep it from melting better then I. Let me entreat you
to order it as your own*


Anto. I will give thee my credit for that.


Exeunt Anto. Secu. It* is much to be feared that this greedy griper will
utterly spoil this poor man both of money and land, h^^ mind is altogether
upon dece^^ and ruin of others. Tispitie any ^onest body should have to do
with him that ^^^dieth nothing but mischief.


Her. I am sorry to see so much wickedness in one man as appears in him, he
is able to infect a whole country. And it were a happy thing if he were
banished the commerce of all Christians.


ACT. III.
SCENA. I.
Enter Sperato with hanke and spaniels. Spurco with hounds and Gulato. Of all
the music in the world there is none like to that which is found in hauking.
For, the questing of Spaniels, the spring of pa^^ridges, the gingling of Hawks
bells, and thundering of horse heels is the best consort, and pleases me above
all delights.

Spur* Your Comparison is too general. Had you excepted hunting I might have
joined hands with you against all others, but now I am become your adversary.
For it is confe^^ed of all sorts, that the mu^icke in hunting, both for
con^inuance of the sport. for a delightful exercise contenting the ear, and
gentle-men-like pastime the world cannot compare with us* and so we hunters
carry the Bell away.


Sper* Indeed you hunter carry the Bell, but not for any good doing, no more
then you do by carrying the horn to very man's house. What time and order your
hounds observe with their natural harmony, I will not dispute (they and their
keepers being seldom in order) but of this I am sure, that there are few
kennells of hounds in England* but while some are in chase after Hare, or Fox,
others are killing sheep in full cry of the poor harmless beast: whereupon
is grown that proverb. The Foxkills the lambs* and the hounds the old sheep.
But I cannot endure you should challenge hunting to (...) better with a
gentleman then hauking. Every Clown can keep a dog, and ^he more carrion he
eats the more egregiou^^^ he smells: but the hawk ador^eth a kings (...),
besides the admirable conquest the faulkner makes in a ha^kes nature, bringing
the wild Haggard having all the earth and seas to scowre over uncontrollable,
(...) attend and obeie her keeper so, that at his very voice she turns
toward and stoupes to his glove. Hounds are so prejudieiall to the
commonwealth, that I dare undertake to prove, that (next unto drunkards) they
are the greatest spoilers of poor men's bread.


Gula. I like all well enough but the last words of yours (Sperto) for me
thinks it is as good sport to hear the Falconer and the Hu^ter fall out, as
for thieves to appeache one an other* Good fellows take their liquor quietly
without any of these faults, and help to hold up tillage by the swift
utterance of the surmounting grain.


Spe. The immoderate and excessive disorder in drinking, and more then swinish
swallowing, that neither belly nor head can contain, but must recoile by the
way it entered in, is the most pernicious inconvenience that this kingdom
suffers.


Gula. Your invective against good companions (for so I must needs call them
that love drink) is ^o be refelled rather with a Cudgill, then with reason.
When had you any gallant Captain, or man of resolution but would drink health
after health, until themself were past health and help?

Who was more valiant then Captain Shinke?
Yet moore then he, who loved drink?

Spe. Like matter, like patron was his valor in his drink? or was he best able
to perform a noble exploite, when his legs failed his giddie head*

No, he was ever like a Swine,
When strength of drink^ closed his ^yen.

Exeunt ^mnes. ACT. III.
SCEN. II.
Enter Insatiato with his page Infaelicto. Boy, a pipe of Tobaccho What is it a
Clock?

Infae. It is almost eleven.


Insati. I doubt it be no more indeed. I am so sleepie still: go see if
Monsieur Parvagracio be stirring. Exit Inf^l. I am very melancholicke this
morning whatsoever I aile. I care not if I send for my Physician: or whether
the cause be that I lost all my money yesternight, and now know not where to
get more until I have conferred with my Agent for discommodities, nor wh^re to
dine scot-free in the mean time.


Enter Infael^^^. Infael. Sir, he was asleep when I came to his chamber, but
his page waked him. He remembers his love, and desires you to beat his chamber
an hour hence, then his Barber comes, as he does every sunday in steed of
prayers. He charged me to tell you that he has an ounce of the most
transcende^t Tobaccho that ever crossed the salts, sent him by a Lady of his
secret knowledge and yours, with whom you both must dine this day. The
property of this Tobaccho is to yield a porringer full of Rheum every
pipefull: and procure ventositie conveniently to descend very odoriferous, and
secure from audibility. She reserues store of it for her own special use in
times of necessity, as of attendance in Court, hearing of Plays, ^itting at
Cards, and the like. Further, that a little of it taken pill-fashion, will
diffuse and disperse mixion, so that a Lady may abide in company forty eight
hours, not disposed to evaporation. Besides he willed me to tell you* that
this Lady yesterday has received a book from a friend of hers that went over
with Sir Rob^rt Sherley in^o Persia, entitled de flatibus separandis ac
dividendis, cosque emittendis; not forward at the face as gamers use to do in
wars, but a^e^e, as Iacke-an-apes delivers squibs, written by a learned
Physician doctorated by the magnificent order of the Mountebankes there, she
will anon at diner entreat you two to lay your heads together for translating
this book into English. And where you find any sent worth the nothing* you
will make stoppes upon it, and deliver your opinion by way of comment for the
better undertaking the fence, with the particular causes and effects of every
several and distinct ^ume produced thereby. And hereafter at better leisure
she will have the subject of the whole book Anatomatized by her own Surgeon,
and set forth in due proportion and colors, and give it a convenient room in
her gallerie.


Insat. This is good news; shall we dine there? and snuff this dainty
Tobaccho? that is excellent. here is a shilling to drink (he feels in his
pocket, and finding no money there, says) go too, it is no matter now: the next
time I have a good hand a dice I Will give thee two shillings. Why now I feel my
self well again. Go boy, tell my Physician he shall not need to come.
(Inf^licto is going.) Stay, I have not sent for him ^ow I remember me.


Exeunt. ACT. III.
SCENA III.
Enter Antonio Proberio and Simplo. Have you done my business ( Proberio) with
the Knight and his sonne-in-law?

Pro. I have cast up these accounts exactly, and your share is to pay 200^, and
no more. I have often visi^ed them* and put them to such a plunge as you never
saw: for they say you ought to pay 400^. and yet they cannot avoid but they
must pay 800^. They have lost their notes, their servants be changed: and they
are so pusled as you never knew men: they desire respite a week. I gave it
them, and so it rests.


Anto. Ha, ha, he. And did the fat Knight fret so? let him fry too. I will
stick close to my counterbands.


Pro. Sir I thought good to put you in mind of one thing. You have my bonds of
eight or nine score pounds in your hands* discharged ten years since, I pray
you let me have them up.


Anto. O, take no care, they shall never hurt you.


Pro. But I wish I had them up, we are all mortal.


Anto. The next time, I light on them I will cancel them.

Simplo go you to Mistress Boe* desire her to lend me half a dozen eggs
until market day, look you choose the fair^st. Exit Sim^^^. Proberio, I would
feign do somewhat for you. A friend of mine wants a good Steward, I will help
you with the place: or there is a widow worth 400^. I think I can make the
march for you*


Pro. I thank you Sir, either of them I will accept. (he turns to the
people.) This is like his 100^. offer which his messenger ran away withal.
It will come to nothing; but now I know he has some business for me.


Ant. I would feign have your opinion in a bargain of land I have made with one
Pohssib, to the value of 7000^. drawn into articles with both our hands to it.
The chief motive of our bargain is a marriage between two young children. I
pray you calculate whether the bargain be gainefull or no.


Pro. If you ha^^ bargained already, it i^ too late for me to deliver my
opinion.


Anto. Not a whit too late. There is nothing done but the land assured to me,
and 3000^. of money paid. If I find It not fit for me, I Will rend the bargain
all to shivers. What? two words to a bargain.


Pro. Why. I know you can do it if you list, you can play fast and loose
as well as any man. Well, you shall soon know how I like it.

Exi^.
Anto. I never finished any bargain yet, nor do I mean this shall be the first.

Redit Simplo. Go to the Lawyer, and ask if the writings be ready for your
land, that you may receive your 100^. Exit Simplo. I have a couple of followers
most unfit for my humor. Proberio is so full of scrupulosity, that nothing
passes his fingers that savers not of conscience. Such a man would I deal
withal, but not dwell withal. Such a man would I have deal with me, but not
deal for me. Simplo, he is diligent, but alas his brains want salt.


Redit Simplo. Sim. Sir, the writings are done, when you please I am ready to
seal. I think the Lawyer is a very honest man, he has made them reasonable
me thinks: for I am but to warrant it from all men, I have nothing to do with
women.


Anto. It is well. We will go presently. But I must stay until Proberio
come: for I do not well know where I am until he have done a business of mine.


Sim. Sir I met him in Chauncery Lane, he promised to be here before me, but I
made great haste to tell you the writings were ready. I would so feign be a
sealing. I am wonderfully fallen out with my land.


Enter Proberio. Pro. Sir, the bargain with Master Pohssib is the worst that
ever was made: for if he or his wife do live 30 years, (as by probability
they will) you lose 17000l. by the bargain at least. And if they die sooner,
you shall save little. Therefore my advice is, that either you buy it absolutely
for ready money, or yield it back with reasonable consideration for your
money lent, so shall you be free from exclamations.


Anto. I thought so, I warrant thou art as fearful of exclamations, as of
thunderbolts: there is nothing with you but exclamations, imputations,
infamy, reports, discredit, and the like. A rush, a rush, and they are all
one to me. Well, I thank you for your pains. Now ply the Knight and his
Father-in-law about the 1000l. account.


Pro. I will. (he turns to the people) then until the next need I am
cashiered.


Exit Prob. Anto. et Simplo. Secu. What is your opinion sir Hermito of this
man's disposition?


Her. Alas, I could wish the poor man would consider better of his souls
state. He seems to have a great wit, which he bends wholly to gather
worldly wealth, not regarding how he gets it. We that have put riches in the
last place of our care, or rather fly from them as pernicious do indeed,
condemn for folly all the carking and study to increase our own hurts as
they will prove to be, especially gotten by indirect means.


Secu. Do you call him poor, who is reckoned very rich, and full of money to
put out for gain? such men are now-a-dayes highly esteemed, much sued unto,
and among their praises that is chief, that he excels others in money at
use. And in the country among plain fellows it is a special mark or token
that he is a good man (as they call him) if he have 100^1. or tow at use, and
without that he is not counted sound, or out of debt.


Her. More is the pity. It was wont to be a thing odious among Christians,
and used by none but Jews* And therefore we call such men poor, as being
needy of goodness and grace, have they never so great abundance so gotten as
they make their owners beggarly for grace.


ACT. III.
SCEN. IV.
Enter Insatiato. It Is a marvailous toil and trouble that we courtiers are put
to, and little considered by the world abroad: for it is commonly midnight
before we can be showed our chambers. There we lie like dead persons until
next day at noone. All this while no body comes at us, nor prouides us any
supping, nor so much as moanes us. Then are we forced to ri^e for stark hunger.
Thus tied to our dinner till two of the clock: from that time until four, we
must not stir from our seat, one discourse after an other holds us fast.
Then go we on visitation from chamber to chamber: and before we know
perfectly how every one had their health since yesternight, and exchanged our
complementall terms, the clock strikes seven. Then duty calls us to Court
our most respected and perfumed Mistress, whereof we are not discharged till
nine. Now supper bids every one repair to his mess, which commonly continues
no longer then ten. And so after a crash of two hours in play, we are
driven every one to his kennell at midnight, as I said before. And this
miserable life we lead, and yet are we envyed to have all the pleasures in
the world. But I think no wise man will so judge if he felt that we know.

Exit. Enter Gulato and Sperato. Master Sperato. I have much desired to debate
with you the matter of drinking, and necessity thereof, because at our last
meeting here you were so bitter in speech as if worme-wood had been all night
steep't in your stomach. Therefore I sent for you once again to try if I can
persuade you to recantation of your error.

Sper. That you may easily do Gulato. For if singing the same song over again
may pleasure you, I can do it with much addition of voluntary.


Gula. Is it even so? then I see thou want breeding, that art ungrateful
for a kindness offered; and ignorant, not sensible of the salutiferous operation
of well brewed Ale: which for thy edification, I will manifest and demonstrate
by a very familiar and apt similitude: and within the circumference of thy
feeble comprehension, whereunto I will now accommodate my whole oration.


Spe. You are grown very eloquent of late. I think the Ale has oiled your
tongue.


Gula. Why, thou art in the right. I tell thee I am at this instant so inflamed
with the spirit of malt, and my wits so refined with the manifold
reverberations, and continual posting correspondence between the residence of
that liquor in my stomach, and the quintisencicall receites in my head, that
no particle of time passes, but whole streams of exusflations, and
insufflations ascend to the brains, and there work wonders. By reason whereof
it were not hard for me to furnish Ryder himself with 2000 new words not yet
seen in his Dictionarie. I could turn Astronomer* and give names to any
stars that want. I can pass for a Physician among many fools, and kill as
many as the best Doctor of them all. Finally, what would I not undertake as now
I am armed? But to return to my druggicall similitude, from which thy way
wardnes has diverted me.


Spe. Nay, let that alone until an other time. I understand already as much
as I need for that matter: I must be gone.


Gula. You shall stay to hear it; and let me have your judgment, whether I
might not with a little reading prove a perfect vrinal^st.


Spe. You are so troublesome when you fall into this case that I cannot skill
of your company.


Gula. I tell thee it is the best Physic that ever thou had.


Spe. I believe it beforehand. What need you more?


Enter Spurco and Insatiato. Gula. O Master Spurco, you are welcome: speak
your mind freely: do not you think it better to sit merrily a whole winters
day, and most part of the night by a good fire, and command (like men of
authority) the Tapster to fill us an Ocean of drink if we lift, and there
among good fellows to hear more news then all the world knows to be true,
then to toil and trash in the dirt without conversation, seldom coming near
one another as Hunters do.


Spur. No certainly. I hold it a beastly thing to sit besealing upon a bench,
and suck in drink, as pigges do dregs in a trough: which custom although
some base Huntimen, and Falconers use, yet if I did think that Hunting were as
odious and displeasing to God as drunkenness is, I would soon dispatch my
dogs.


Insat. And I will free the Court from the foul and loathsome custom of
drunkenness. For seldom and with very few it is used there. Officers, and
order forbids it as unseemly for a Princes palace. I wish we were as clear
from Idleness, pride, disdain, envy, lechery, covetousness, flattery,
lying, cosenage, oppress^on, and unthriftiness, as we are from drunkenness.


Secu. Mary Sir, these are vices enough. And except you were guilty of all the
deadly sins, and breach of every commandment, I know not what you could add
to these.


Her. The delights of hunting and hawking, as also of other exercises, were (no
doubt) ordained by God to comfort man in his banishment here, and to give him
a taste of the unspeakable pleasures in Heaven, (our own c^untire) but the
excess and abuse of any pastime, argues the receiver unreasonable, and turns
the benefit into detriment.

Of drunkards I say shortly and sharply; they deprave Gods blessings, rob and
murder the poor, undo the Commonwealth, bring Gods curse upon the country;
deprive themselves of Heaven, and merit Hell.

The Courtier (who ought to be the square of the country by his civil
example) pulls upon himself the ruin of millions, and sins much with doing
little.


Gula. I am crushed in the head: no more drinking; farewell good Ale.


Insa. Give me thy hand. We are all in little better case for any thing I
hear by the judgment of wise men.


Exeunt. ACT. IIII.
SCEN. I.
Enter Antonio, Proberio, Simplo. I have had such a stir with this same
beggar Pohssib, his wife, and his friends: and so many complaints they have
made to the King and Council, and turn themselves into all shapes and faces
to force me either to go through with the bargain or give it over, that
diverse of my friends are brought to favor his part for stark equities sake.
But do all what they can I will have it, and not have it: I will hold it, and
not hold it. And I will none of the purchase, and yet not give it over.

Pro. I told you Sir, what an intricate business it would prove to be, and
full of slander: therefore I wished you to end it by yielding the bargain
back, for that will be the end of it.


Anto. Thou know not what will be the end of it, nor I my self; but I can
best guess, because I know his poor estate. I have made a privy search into
his debts; and some creditors I have pulled upon him sooner then they meant.
And in writing I have every sum he owes to neighbors, to workmen, and to
his very servants. And this is the plummet I sound withal. This must bring the
fi^h into my net Proberio. But what have you done with the Knight and his
Father-in-Law Master Eloc, for the 1000l. account?


Pro. Sir, that account goes otherwise then you would have it; for they prove
that there was 1200l. taken up, and of that you are to pay 400l.


Anto. Are you sure of that?


Pro. I am so sure, that I am ashamed ever to have spoken in a matter so
contrary to good conscience.


Anto. You are so spic'd-conscienc'd, that there is no dealing with you. Will
you demand if they will swear in Chancery, that so is the account.


Pro. That I will do, and I am sure they will not refuse it. (he turns to the
people, and says) this is but to color his dishonest meaning, he knows the
truth as well and better then they.

Exit Prob.
Anto. These fellows are so rash, that a little thing will satisfy them. I am
partly persuaded the accounts be as he speaks, but it is good to be sure.
Thus thou must do Simplo in like cases, if thou will be a wise, politic and
wary fellow.


Simp. I hear it well Sir, and have locked it up safely in my memento. I give
you many thanks for the 100l. you gave me for my land, and for your careful
putting out the money as your own. I again for my part have sealed the
writings, and am ready to do any thing else for making it sure to you. It Is a
good hearing that Master and man agree so well as your worship and I do now.
Now they say it is a good title, and they will not make question of it, since
you have gotten it.


Anto. No, I think not: for all their babbling they will not easily begin
sui^e with me to recover it away.


Simp. Fear nothing of that Sir, I can tell you news. They say now your title
to it is as good as any man has to his land. And that you will keep my 100l.
as safe as the land; and that is good for me.


Anto. That Is no news. You may see now what it is to be circumspect in my
dealing, and to have a name to hold fast. Learn this against the time that you
have more land.


Exeunt. ACT. IIII.
SCEN. II.
Intrant Rustico et Hortano. Did you ever hear (neighbor Hortano) such a
broyle between man and wife as yonder was between Porco and his wife? you and
I did very wisely to come away. For sure they did strive before us for their
credit sake to get the victory of each other by scolding; now we are gone
perhpas they will give over. Me thought it was very noy some to hear such
unseemly words pass from married folk.

Hor. Sure their bitterness passed the bounds of humanity. They make me
afraid of marying, if such jarres fall out between those that be one flesh.


Rust. Let it not discourage you more then it repents me that I am married: for
it lies in your power to have all well and quiet if you chance to mary even one
of the short rib^ of the great Devil.


Hor. How can that be neighbor Rustico? if you can teach me that, you do
much. For I have heard many say, that it is impossible to tame a shrew by any
means, except by having no woman at all.


Rust. If you talk of taming by violence, you say well, it cannot be, for the
more you strive to break their stomach* the more it grows; like camamile, the
more you tread it, the more it spreades; and like a tree felled, where will
grow 40 springs. But take a twig by the top* and gently bend it by little and
little, it will grow in what fashion you will. A wasp is a shrewd stinging beast
by nature, but if she light upon your face and hands, and creep up and down,
let her alone, and take her pleasure, she will do you no harm, and quietly
pass away. So if your wife will meddle with all things, give her liberty to
do what she will, you shall have her merry else she were worse then the Devil.


Hor. I think this is very likely: but who can endure his wife to do what she
lists at all times?


Rust. That can I, and that must you, or else you ar^ not wise; for if you may
have peace upon any conditions, is it not your fault if you ^buse to be jarring?


Hor. But I have heard say* it is better to have honorable wars, then
inconvenient peace.


Rust. That is among strangers and enemies; but among friends, and with your
self, what peace can be dishonorable?


Hor. How come thou to be so cunning in this kind of argument?


Rust. Even as you may if you will take the course that I do. I have a wife,
the best creature that ever you saw in the order that she takes with me. But if
I should be churlish, as perhaps you would be, and cross her never so little,
she would rage like a fury of Hell. She speaks, and I give ear; she gives
counsel, and I practice; she commands, and I obey; she chides, and I hold my
peace; she preaches, and I believe; thus we live as lo^mgly as Master and
Scholar.


Hor. But who could abide his wife to teach and controlle him?


Rust. Every man that loves his ease. And if all wives be (...) mine is, she
shall be thrice happy to obey her. For she is the best woman to bring up husbands
that ever was borne. She will so instruct them in the wonderful virtue of
patience, that if they will be ruled by her monitions, they shall be as good as
martyrs, a great deal better then living Saints. I thank her heartily, she is
my Pilcatory in this world, I shall go straight to Heaven whenever I dye.
Therefore left I should lose the benefit of the blessed state I stand in by
any misdemeanour of mine. I dare not offend her in the least matter. O it is a
great blessing to have such a wife.


Hor. But for all this it should be long before I would choose such a wife,
which did desire to carry such a hand over me as she does over thee.


Rust. O neighbor Hortan^, that thou did but taste of the fruits of
patience! Intrat Lamia his wife with a cudgill of an ell long, and
counterfeiting to be a Puritan, lifting her eyes upward.) Look where my wife
is; I know her by the sign of the Bible. See how devout she is. She never
looks lightly lower then the Element. You may say what you will now, she
cannot hear a word, her meditations be so fervent.


Hor. Why does she carry that cudgill while she is praying?


Rust. (She opens her Bible, and makes show to read, and many times turns
her eyes with the white upward.) That is her rod of discipline, and a strange
thing it is which now I tell you. She is never so rapt up in her devotions, but
if I commit the least fault (as wretched man that I am many times I do, and my
best actions are abominable) she perceiues it presently (and yet is deaf to
all other noise) and she come^ to me fiercely in the heat of her charity, and
corrects me very handsomely with that wand.


Hor. But will she correct her servants with this cudgill?


Rust. O no, very seldom, she does not love them so well) except it be a
very great fault. But in me (for the entire love she bears me) she will not
suffer the least sin unpunished, lest (as she says) any might remain to be
rebuked by hell fire.


Hor. But I had rather be her servant, then her husband, if she strike with
such twigges.


Rust. Had you so? but so had not I. For by this I am made sure of my election,
when I do patiently endure so great correction.


Hor. How does she bring up thy son Jack?


Rust. Admirably well: for lest he should prove an Idolatour she will not let
him ask blessing upon his knees. And lest he should abate of his mettle and
stomach, he must never put off his hat to us, nor be denied any thing he calls
for: so that being now but six years old he will fight, scratch, and tumble
himself upon the ground, crying until his heart break if he may not have his
will in every thing. Then is there no way but give it him, or else he will die
with skreming. O, he will prove a man of outrageous spirit. It makes me
sometimes doubt he should not be my child, he has so noble a stomach, far
beyond mine. And, but that I know his mother to be a very religious
professor, I assure you it would trouble me much, he discovers s^ much fury
in his fashions, and such might by his madness, that I think many times some
giant got him when my wife was asleep, for I am sure she would never suffer it
waking.


Hor. Nay, nay, if your wife be a woman of that command as you describe he^ to
be, and as she makes show of no less by her part, it may well be, the Boy
takes his courage from her, and his outward personage from you.


Rust. You say well neighbor Hortano, that may be; but I do half mistrust my
own worth in getting such a child: but yet I love him as well as if he were my
own.


La. I came hither to seek a kind of husband that I have. He wants government
and discipline (I am sure) ere this time: for I have not seen him these three
days past: the poor man will be undone, if I light not on him shortly.


Rust. O, she seeks me. What a good woman is this? I must needs go to her.
Stand by neighbor* and note how zealously she will edify me. How do you good
wife? I knew it was you so soon as I saw you any thing near me. May I be so
bold as to ask where you have been these two or three days? My boy Jack and
I think long until you come home.


La. Why should you ask so foolish a question? you know that I must frequent
my contemplation: in which I cannot be less then two or three days: the
fervor of spirit is such among the elect that they may not depart in short
time from their meditations, especially having such learned Teachers among us,
that are never wearied, and willing to accompany and conduct us in the darkest
dangers. O the delights, pleasures, and sweet delectations that we feel during
the time of these contemplations, that we think no time contentedly spent but
when we are employed in these exercises. I think verily my goodly boy Jack
was begotten and conceived in these deep contemplations.


Rust. What wife; and I not there?


La. Alas man, why should you trouble your self with these matters which be so
far out of your reach? was it not enough if my spirit did wish you present?
or that in conceit you were with me? what if you were asleep at that instant,
and so it were revealed to me by the spirit? or if you had been present, and
my spirit should inwardly testify unto me that a teaching Saint must be
preferred, ought not you to give place? I pray you husband give over to mu^e on
these hidden secrets, for otherwise these thoughts man make you ^orne-mad.


Hor. How can you defend that to be lawful to be gotten with child by any but
your husband?


Rust. Inde^d wife I cannot but think this reason good that you say, but I
would have been glad to be father to my own child if it had pleased you.


La. What do you talk of reason? it is beyond reason. It is matter of
predestination, and preordination. Where is now your obedience and pati^nce so
often inculked vn^^ unto you? I perceive it is ready to fly out by your
exterior parts, but I will chastise this rebellious flesh, and make it subie^^
to the spirit.


(then she beats him soundly.) Hor. Where learned you to beat your husband?


La. It is lawful and possible for me to extract tears from his f^^nty heart
with this rod of discipline, correcting him as the spirit moves me.


Hor. But how shall he know that a good spirit moves you to correct him?


La. That appertains not to him to examine. It is sufficient that his wife
has that inward testimony which enab^eth and emboldeneth her to do her
function, and to minister disciplinary documents. And this he is firmly to
hold, or else he loses his election.


Rust. Nay wife; rather then I should not be one of the elect I pray you beat
me again.


La. You are not to inform me when I shall strike. It is the lively spirit
which directs me: and now it tells me you need not at this time more to
be humbled. Go in peace, and be patient.


Rust. O Gods blessing on thy kind heart. See how favorable a spirit she
has. I cannot choose but weep for this love.


Then he weeps and howles with hands before his face. La. Lo now Hortano the
virtue of this rod, which brings so plentiful tears from this Rock^^
stomach of his.


Hor. But for all this I see no ground or proof you have, that a wife shall
take upon her to teach and correct her husband. You allege Scripture as far
as Rome is from Rockingham, and expound it at your pleasure, and frame it to
your own fancy: but if I were your husband I would cudgill you well, and by
the word maintain it better.


L^. What not yet vnderstand'st thou the text? O fool, and slow of belief! If
thou were my husband (Then she shakes the cudgill at him) I would ding it into
thy brain in another fashion then by proofs. I pre thee tell me, must not
men be taught and instructed?


Hor. Yes: but what, shall women do it?


La. Who else I pray you* shall beasts do it? Although women may not speak in
the Church (which is great pity) yet we may preach in chambers, and men are
tied to hear us.


Hor. No, nor sluts neither: but men shall instruct men.


La. Iump. And so womnn instruct women, and none of them shall come to other.
And how shall there then be procreation of the holy ones, and the Israel of
God be multiplied?


Rust. Nay neighbor Hortano, I warrant you my wife will prove any thing she
says one way or other. But good wife, let me entreat one thing at your hands
(if your spirit consent, that is, that I may call your son Jack my boy for my
credit sake. And that he may know no other but he is mine, and then shall I be
quiet in mind, and think you deal very justly and liberally with me.


La. With all my heart. And I profess unto you that he shall never know
otherwise by me: but I doubt his generous spirit will not suffer him (after a
few years of discretion) to tarry long in that error, but that he will
heroicallie disdain to have you otherwise accounted of then his reputed
father: and that he is rather the son of some zealous brother, who never sees
the Relikes of Charing-crosse, but wishes he were on horseback with a
lance in his hand, in full speed to bear it down. And yet his mother
extreme honest for all this.


Rust. All this I stedfastlic ^wprd^. And I am afraid my own weakness will be
the first discoverer, and plead not guilty to getting of such a son.
Nevertheles (good wife) I cannot choose but thank you much for your kindness,
that he shall be called my son, that men may think so nobly yet of me to do
such a deed. And for you wife) I will swear you are a very honest woman for
all this.


La. No husband. You shall not swear so rashly. I thank you as much as
though you did. Your says shall save you without swearing.

Exit Lamia.
Rust. Was ever man more blessed with a wife then I am? (Then he holds his
hands before his face, and falls to a silent meditation a prery while, at last
fetching a great sigh, he says) The Lord make me thankful. (Then he h^des
his face with his hands again, and so stands a while sighing and sobbing,
^ntill Hortano shake him by the arm, saying).


Hor. How now Rustico, what will thou do: kill thy self with this same
foolish zeal? pluck up a good heart, and live to see thy boy a man.


Rust. A man. He is a man already at six years age by his great stomach; and
I think in my conscience I am not half his father. But I beshrew you for
troubling me, you have done you know not what: for I was even melting into ^
martyr.


Hor. A martyr. How can thou be a martyr?


Rust. O yes, and I shall die so patiently, that I dare not call for a posset
how sick soever I be for fear of sinning, till the very point of death. And
now I begin to be hart-sick.


Hor. If you find your self so sick indeed, I wish you to make your will, and
dispose of your estate.


Rust. How? make my will? that's the next way to die in earnest.


Hor. Not a whit nearer death for that.


Rust. O yes. A will, and a toling bell are as present death as Gods tokens.
No: ^le none of that.


Hor. Let me persuade you (neighbor Rustico) to make your will. I assure you
it is superstition to think death to be ^erer you for that cause.


Rust. Superstition. The Lord defend me* I had rather not ^o observe order in
any thing then to be thought superstitious. I agree to you neighbor, and
thank you for your gen^le persuasion. I will presently do it while I am in
perfect memory.


^ First, for my soul; I will not bequeath it to God, but let ^t go even as
it is predestined.

2 My body may be buried if my executor will pay for it, or else let it alone,
and be patient, as I was when I lived.

3 At my burial I de^^re my wife to preach, and no body to hear her but my
sweet boy ^acke and I.

4 Forty shillings I give to any man that shall put me into the book of
Martires.

5 My wit, and such like moueables I leave as an heireloome to my son Jack
(then lifting his ^ies upward) upon whom my desire is that the firmament may
power down as many joyful lots as there are hears upon his fingers ends; and
that his seed may multipli^ like mice in a maltheape.

6 All my breeches I bestow upon my beloved wife.

7 My land (if any be given me after my death) I freely bestow upon him that
shall marry her to amend his bargain.

8 The rest of my goods and chattles which cannot be found I will shall be
equally divided (at my executors discretion) among the poor of the parish
wheresoever I shall die.

9 And of this my last will and testament I make the longest siuer in London my
sole executor, because I will have no fighting, nor suits in law for my goods.

10 And you neighbor Hortano I make overseer of this my will, and for your
pains to be taken therein, I give you all that shall be overplus after
execution of the same,

Now my sight fails. Lead me, lead me good neighbor home: and to bed, and so
farewell, and good night.

Exeunt. ACT. IIII.
SCENA III.
Intrant Antonio, Noverindo, and Proberio. Here is more work for us Noverindo
(and we will not work for simple fees though foedum simplex be a good
tenure) a friend of mine wants 2000^1 and I must have it for him within these
two days or he seeks elsewhere.

Nov. In any case hold him in, let him not escape, he shall pay for his
expedition. I Will about it, and I Will have it for you within 24 hours, or I Will give
you my head (heegoes forward a little, and suddenly steps back saying) I had
almost forgot a matter of weight: you are entreated by the whole company of
our sort, that some order may be taken to check^ the sauciness of diverse
mean persons that enquire for moneys to be taken up. They make no more ado,
but with hats on their heads, ask the question thus: have you 100^ to lend
upon good security: what a malepertnes and abuse is this? Of my honesty Sir.
(what a villain was I to swear so deeply?) there be many knights, and some
Lords that have not always 100l to lend upon an instant. And then what reason
is there, that we which have it at all hours should be so sle^derly regarded?


Anto. You say well Noverindo: I wish it to be redressed: bu^ what would the
company have me to do?


Nov. This Sir: you are acquainted at Court: they entreat that you would use
your friends to get a grant under the broad seal (whatsoever it cost) that we
may erect an office with a master and clarks belonging to it, to the end that
every one which wants money may repair thither, and upon request to the under
clarks speak with the master of the office, and ^hence take directions how to
proceed, and so obtain money. This will make them know themselves, and yield
duty to them that it appertains: when they shall come by degrees to the worth
of money.


Anto. This I like well; but it will be a great charge to maintain master and
clerks in an office, so shall we loose much out of our gain.


Nov. Sir you mistake it quite. The company has argued that case to and fro.
The master and clerks will pick out a living well enough I warrant you out of
them that take up m^hie, and this will free them from other brocage. As you
know all offices are maintained by the suitors, not by the granters of the
place.


Anto. Right: but who shall be at the charge of the patent?


Nov. That must be done by the company. But we will lose nothing by it. For we
are determined to let no money go but one way or other we will get 30 in the
100. And if we give commodities we will have more: and it is reason too. The
worse the bargain is, the more they must lose that take it. And there is
another thing that we will be at the charge of Sir. Wherein we must crave your
help also. And that is: some arms from the king of Heralds appropriated to
our company alone, and hanged up behind the master of the office: this will
give honor to the place, and cause suitors to understand they enter into a
court of command and authority.


Noverindo whispers Antonio in the ^are while Proberio speak^s thus to the
people. Pro. O, I could fit these fellows to a hair. I could devise them a
crest as fit as a fan for a for^horse.


Anto. Proberio: here is Noverindo has a piece of imploiment for you, and
thinks you can discharge it well if you list. And I Will see you well considred.
It is this. That you move the Heralds to give the company. Crest with the due
circumstances. And go in my name they will do it the more freely.


Pro. Sir I am the only man for such a business. If the Herald cannot aptly
conceive it, I can instruct him. I Will undertake to have it speedily.


Nov. Thanks Proberio: and thou shall not travail for unthankful persons.


Exit Anteni^. Pro. Sir, it will cost 10l besides somewhat for expedition: and I
must have it ready to pay: for I will not come from him till I bring it.


Nov. Here is 10l and a piece for expedition: and another for thy pains:
study hard to have it exactly done, thou shall have two pieces more. (Proberio
makes have away, but Nov. calls him) stay, one word before you go. Let it be
somewhat terrible to the beholders: we will make them do^ ( that same) in their
breeches.


Pro. But so you may scarre them quite away, they will come there no more.


Nov. I warran: thee: if they were sure to go to prison within a while after,
they will come again for money. They are very ventrous: nay desperate: nay
foolchardy. O, monic is money, and they must have it.


Pro. Say no more, I Will be your warrant, it shall be fearful enough. (Exit
Nov.) and make some of you stain the place you stand in, and look backward
what drops behind you. Let me alone, I Will dress you as you should be trimmed 30
in the 100. I Will not forget that upon my word.

Exit.
ACT. V.
SCEN. I.
Enter Malingua the La^yer. Mureto the Merchant, and Granato the Fariner. It is
even high time the world were at an end, for I think all trades are decaying:
when my father put me to the Innes of Court he advised me in any case to
study, so that I might be called to the bar, and then (says he) fear not
to live in all plenty and credit. But I find it otherwise, for now that I am
exalted thither, my law serves me not to get my commons. I wish I had been
bred a Tapster: that trade is now more gainefull with froth then ours with all
our words. And for any thing I see it is like to last to the worlds end, whereas
ours can be good no longer then people be contentious. And that is a special
argument the ale. sellers use against us, saying that we gain by falling out
of neighbors, and friends but they grow rich by meeting of good fellows, and
sitting together lovinglie. There are so many hindrances grownevp of late
that it is impossible our reign should long continue although it be true (and
we complain not) that malice is as great among men as ever it was, and can be
wished: but the mischief is, their money fails, and they grow wiser.

Mure. I marvel what will satisfy your greedy desires. have you not the
whole kingdom at your service and beck? what Lord, Knight, Gentleman,
Merchant, Husbandman, or other sort of people is not attendant at your study
doors, with paying and praying? and glad that the fee which he gives is of
that glorious operation, that it breeds no wrincles in your forehead, but is
cheerefullie received? What co^gees, and submissiue requests to peruse their
case with a little care? What troops conduct you to the bar? What venison
sent to your feafts? What respect and entertainment if you vouchsase to visit
their country houses? And finally, what honor and homage can be done to
subjects, but you have it in all fulness, and yet you whine as not contented. I
perceive you would murmr if you were so handled as poor merchants are, that
unless we turn Usurers, we cannot live.


Mali. You complain without cause Mureto. Your case is far better then ours:
for if one country or commodity afford not gain, you can go into another,
and choppe and change as often as you list. We are tied to one country and
place. You may offer your wares* and are sure to have traffic as the times
and prices be. We may not tender our service to any, but sit gaping in our
chambers, as melancholicke as mice, until some body chance to knock at the
door.


Gra. It is merry when fishermen complain of Heringmen. Surely the world
might well spare of both sorts of you a great number. Concerning you Master
Mureto, it is clear that you play the merchant with us, who bite and whine at
your impositions. although you lose nothing; but the whole burden thereof
falls upon them who spend the commodities, and must ere they buy, pay the shot
of your impositions whatsoever it be.

And for you Master Lawyer, that grow fat with the drops which falls from other
men's brows, and be merry with the frets that gall the Clyents hearts: whose
grief is always to hear of peace and charity; and rejoice with the Fox, that
the hens fall out for their perch: what faul^ find you with this world that
was never so rich with envy, and full of suits? You are like the bo^e among
gamesters, which gains whosoever lose. But if all men were of my temper, I
would make you leap a yard high for a groate.


Mali. What, a whole yard? what if I were never at the dancing school, and
cannot caper so high?


Gra. Then thou should have but two pence.


Mali. Nay; I know a trick worth two of that. For if our craft fail, I Will
turn minister: and that I am sure will not deca^.


Gra. Woe be to that P^^ish that shall have a Lawyer to their Pastor* some be
already troubled sufficiently with citations; they need no common Law writs.
And without a capias vtlegaium, a Lawyer can never preach.


Mali. Who can endure this filthy Farmer to rail as he does at us two Mureto?
Let us set upon him. Are you so free without fault Master Granate, that you may
throw your stones so thick at others? Belike no complaints are made against
you for hoording up co^ne against a dear year, for selling to badgers at a
dear rate, and not serving the market: for mingling bad corn with the good,
and foul dressing of the best. For deceitful plowing your neighbors ground
that hires you at a hard rate, which makes the poor man weep at harvest.
Besides many other country tricks which breed new cases among old Lawyers,
which I could argue upon an hour together, if I were not presently to go to
the hall to move in the Kings beneh upon an e^ectione firm.


Mure. By lakin (Master Granato) you had been as good held your peace as
buckl'd with a Lawyer. I swea^e he has in few words touched you to the quick,
and done you no ^rong neither in mine opinion: but we will adiourne this
disputation until our next meeting, and in the mean time provide your self
for a better defense.


Exeunt. ACT. V.
SCEN. II.
Intrat Proberio and Antonio at several doors. Sir, Master Eloc and the
Knight have given me a copy of their account, and according to your charge, and
their defense I have drawn bill and answer. I have showed it them; they liked
it, and wish it should be engrossed, and put into the Court, they will depose
the answer is true.

Anto. Is it so? well, give me them. If I find them in that forwardness I will
take their word, and end it with kindness. Proberio, you must remove your
trunkes and stuff presently. I will clear my chambers from all men but my
self.


Pro. What? just so soon as I have done all your business must I be gone, you
might have suffered me until you go out of town, if then you will needs
have me remove. You were wont to let me lie here a week after, or as long as
I needed. Mary now I find the cause of that to be, that you had then some
business for me to do.


Anto. Yes; but I purpose to sell my lodgings, and I must have them out.


Pro. Where shall I lie this night, being suddenly unprovided? and whither
shall I carry my stuff?


Anto. You shall have a bed at the Inn where my horses stand. And your stuff
may be put in the out room, near the garden.


Pro. There they may be stolen; but I must be content, (though not pleased)
if there be no remedy.


Anto. You owe me six pound; you must provide it presently, or else I will
arrest your sureties.


Pro. That six pound I do not owe, although you got my bond for it by a very
hard and undue course. And to this I will depose. And if I did, I hope you will
not exact it, having received such kindness heretofore from me when I was
able, and you in extreme need thereof, and now doing you so many services.


Anto. Tell me nothing of that; you have been satisfied in your diet and
lodging to a better value.


Pro. In lodging? I am ashamed to hear such a word, (though you be not to
allege so base a reckoning) I had always my own sheets, except sometimes
when mine were finer, you would change with me for worse. And the great diet I
had was sometimes a piece of chief, and one egg; for which benefits, I have
travailed like a Porter, and written like a Clarke. Is this your gratitude for
good turns past? and are all your promises thus performed?


Anto. How? gratitude? every beggar talks of gratitude. It is for such as you
to ^ue for mercy, not to talk of gratitude, which is among equals.


Pro. These were not your words to me, when you were a beggar, and a borrower
from m^e, and had need of the poorest help; but then you found no beggar of
me, but your best friend.

Exit.
Anto. A proper reckoning. This fellow looks for recompense. Why, he had my
countenance which made him many times respected. And I could yet be content to
speak for him, but does he expect farther? why, the fellow knows not the
world. Simplo, tell him that if my word may do him any good, he shall have it:
but if he love his liberty, let him challenge no deeds at my hands. He never
had more of me then my word for that he now claims. And does he think to
build castles upon my word? if he do, they shall come down apace. Now he is
gone to remove his stuff, bid my Attorney take out execution against his
surety.


Simp. This is cold comfort for me. Sir, you make me half afraid, you will
turn me off at the worst time of the year. I am not able to deserve so well
at your hands as he has done, and yet so lightly regarded. That is very
hardly done.


Anto. Do^t thou fear turning off? it comes with a fear, and ends with a
fever. Thou may go as soon as thou will after him.


Simp. If it please you to give me my 100l. I will take my leave now.


Anto. Soft a while, where is your witness that I have 100^. of yours? And if
I had, thou were content I should use it as mine own. But go to, I Will pay
thee. There was a knave ran away with 100^. of mine, I Will change with thee;
seek him out, take the money, and hang him* that is interest.


Simp. (t^rnes to the people.) This is a poor help for my 100l. for all this
I Will not leave his service until I get my 100l. or somewhat for it. I wood I had
my land again at a venture.

Exit Simplo.
I^trat Proberio. Sir, I have removed my stuff into your garden room; but
there it is not safe from robbing. And at your Inn I can have no lodging. I
must sit by my stuff all night.

Anto. It will be so much the safer.


Pro. I hear besides that my surety is in execution at your suite for the
six pound.


Anto. That may be. I cannot help it unless I be paid.


Pro. You know I owe you nothing of that money.


Anto. I know not that.


Pro. Will you have my oath?


Anto. No.


Pro. Will you refer it to friends?


Anto. No.


Pro. To your own brother?


Anto. No.


Pro. I protest upon my faith no penny of this money is due. And yet to save
my surety I offered a fine mewed Gosse^auk^, which before good witness you did
accept, and caused me to keep a whole Michaelmasse ^ea^me in London: but at
the end of that very teat^me unknown to me, you sneaked out of town leaving
order to have my surety arrested, and so followed, that now he is ^ execution
upon that only suite. I say no more, but demand judgment in this case.


Anto. Proberio, I have done thee the grace to hear thee to the full. And it
ioies me much, that either he shall die in prison, or I shall have that money.

Exit.
Pro. Was there ever any so hard hearted? Twenty years past, when I was in
prosperity, and he at point of death, by rigor of Law, I took many costly
journey to Court, laboring for his pardon. I did him all the good offices that
a true friend could do for another. And I left nothing undone that might do
him good. Besides, I lent him 50^. gratis in those times, my self paying
interest for that money. At which time what vows and promises he made me, I
let pass, as ungrateful to my heart in repeating, and serve to no other
purpose but for a warning, and a wonder that so much ingratitude should harbor
in an English man. And now you are all witnesses of my reward.

Exit.
ACT. 5.
SCEN. 3.
Enter Mureto, Granato, and Malingua. Now Granato, if you be content to yield
the victory unto Master Malingua this Lawyer, and confess to have wronged us
merchants with the petulancy of your prating; you may perhaps have your
punishment extenuated if we be your Judges, and so quietly shut up all among
our selves.

Gra. I am so far from any such confession and submission, that I offer to
maintain every word spoken in our last contention. And for judgment I appeal
from you both; and know that I am your ancient from the time that Adam dug
the earth for his living.


Mali. Then purge your self Granato from the crimes we charged you withal:
and the end will try if you had not done better to take penan^^ for your
faults at our hands.


Gra. For the high prices of corn (which falsely and absurdly you impute unto
husbandmen) if you had either wit or honesty you would soon grant that there
are two maine reasons for it which lie not in our power to redress, but in the
States wisdom to help. One is, the uncontrolled and improvident liberty for
all sorts and degrees to marry, so that many are grand-mothers at 30 years
old. The other is the multitude of Enclosures and decay of tillage. And if we
corne-men did not till all the ground we can get; how dear (think you) would
corn be shortly? Many other Reasons for brevity sake I omit, but these will
hold argument against you for term of both your lives, and after your decease
to your heirs males lawfully begotten.


Mali. Believe me Master Mureto, this Farmer has made for himself a
reasonable good Apology, and put us a hard case. It seems he has studied
well since our last parle. But what say you Granato to your evil words
lauish'd out against Lawyers? therefore you must yet crave pardon.


Gra. Not I truly. For I gave you no worse speeches then you give one another
at the bar, nor so evil. For there you fall out like any skoulds: but the
worst is, you will be friends at dinner, yet never in charity I think. And I see
no reason I should stoop to either of you, considering the goodness of my
cause. For I will be judged by any indifferent man, if I, and such as I am, be
not honester and better then both your factions.


Mali. Since thou have offered it, thou shall not escape until that be tried,
Here sit a couple that seem very wise by their silence, we will be judged by
them. What say you Mureto?


Mure. With all my heart. For we can not be worse then we are howsoever we
speed.


Gra. A match. I Will refuse no man's opinion that is not of your ranks.


Mali. Gentlemen. We need not report the causes of our reference unto you. All
our jarres, and wrangles you have heard. We entreat you to finish them with
your doom.


Secu. To deal plainly with you all, mine opinion is, that the world is
generally more wronged and abused by the Lawyer and merchant, then by the
Farmer, who though he have faults, yet gets he his living more honestly, and is
of necessity to be harbored. But Sir Hermito I must refer the full decision
of their cause to your censure.


Her. That one of them is better then the other, I do not see; therefore me
thinks the question should rather be which is the worst. The Farmer that
deceiues so far as his capacity will carry him, is condemned by his intention
to do worse if his skill did enable him.

The Lawyer is a necessary member of the commonwelth to find and determine
every man's right. But if willingly he oppugn right, and be enemy to peace,
he is the Devils agent, and Christ's enemy.

Likewise a merchant which causes commerce and amity between severed nations
is a man commendable. But if he use fraud, then is he pestiferous, and
deserves banishment where no society is.


Malingua, Mureto, and Granato, make obeisance unto Securus and Hermito, and
turning together, say. Mure. I told you Master Malingua, we could not lose by
the bargain. Now the Farmer is as bad as we. What say you Granato to this
gear?


Gra. I say little. Why? I can be content to be as dishonest as you. I am not
proud of my honesty, nor do I love to be singular.


Mali. But now thou see we may be as honest as you, if we will our selves.


Gra. Who denies that? I stand not much upon that neither.


Mali. But has this Hermites preaching done thee no good? can thou be
content to mend if we do so too?


Gra. Yes, with all my heart. And I Will be good before both you if you mend not
the faster.


Mure. Content. Let us all amend: for I think in my conscience it is even high
time.


Mali. All our hands we will join together in manner of a vow that it shall be
so.


Exeunt omnes. ACT. 5.
SCEN. 4.
Enter Proberio, bringing a cloth, wherein is pictured an Usurer bare-headed
with a purse in his left hand, on the outside of which purse is set this
inscription: 30. p. pr^ 100. And behind him the picture of the Devil, with
his arms stripped up, and white halfe-way, like the hangmans shirt sleeves,
putting on a halter about the Usurers ^ecke, and showing it to the people,
says, Now, could I meet my merchant Noverindo, I have here a whole library
for his learning. Here he may study while he spend his heart-blood with
struggling, yet never reach the depth with his petitoes.

He rowles it vp-againe. Enter Noverindo. How long I think until I meet
Noverindo. All is ready at our office, but the Blazonrse of our coat of Arms
to be set up, and for want of that we lose many hours. For there be store of
suitors without, that think long to seal they care not what. But we will not
open the door until we furnish it with that gashefull spectacle to affront
them. Yet time is precious with us, who must account to an hour, else I Will not
give a fart for a monie-monger that shall lose a minute negligently.

Pro. This catiffe is careful of losing time in his wrathheaping gain; but
that this time be well spent, he takes no care^at all. Well Sir, you shall not
complain of me for keeping you too long from the Devil, the sooner you go,
the better for the country you live in. Noverindo: why fret you your self? I
have more need to be chollericke for staying here this hour, waiting your
leisure, while I might have gotten 20^^ by other employments.


Nove. I cry you mercy Master Proberio. I am sorry for that. And I thought
you had not dispatched our business. I pray you let me see it. All our occasions
are at a stand until it come, for it must be set up before any be admitted
thither, or else the world will think it to be a new devised trick, and not
appendant to our corporation.


Pro. None but fools will think so when they view it well, they shall be caught
to acknowledge that it was due to you long since, even from your first
denomination.


Nove. Well said Proberio, so would I have it appear indeed. Unfold, let me
see it quickly. I am with child till I see it.


Pro. With child? with the Devil you are. But soft Sir, is there no more in
the case then you make show of? what presently see it, and have it, and set it
up?


Nov^. No. Why should there be any more circumstances used? is it not ours, and
belongs to us only?


Pro. But Sir, have you forgotten my two pieces you promised me upon finishing
the business? I warrant you I have deserved it you need not grudge me.


Nove. If I like it, I will perform your two pieces. Will you not trust me for
44. shillings?


Pro. Why should you ask me such a question? Is there any man in Christendom
or in Kent, that you will trust for 40. shillings without good security?


Nove. No. But you have good security: for you have the thing it self in your
hand, which you may keep.


Pro. Yes, I have, and will keep you from sight of it until I have my money.
For what can I tell? you may be so ouer-ioyed with the sight, that you may
run mad upon it. And then what guardian of yours while you live, or
administrator when you die will pay me 44. shillings, especially being due for
a thing that put you out of your wits? Therefore satisfy your self, you
shall not see it until I have every penny of my money.


Nove. How shall I know that it is done when I have paid you?


Pro. Even as I know that you will pay me 100^. when I and my sureties
haue-seal'd the bond to your use before I receive a penny.


Nove. You say well. Come, here is your money.


Pro. Now you shall see it. (Then he sets it up with some device upon a staff.
that with turning it all the spectators may view it, and says) Look here
Sir, here is rods in piss for the villains.


Nov. Noverindo looks earnestly upon it a long time, and then fetching a great
sigh, says. What Tiburnist is this? And what is the mystery of all this
picture?


Pro. Sir. this Tiburnist, or hangman is the Devil. And this fellow that has
the purse is Judas. the figure of 30 with p-ioin'd to it signifies 30 pence,
for which he sold his master. That which follows is meant of Christ, worth a
hundred worlds: for which fact the Devil put a halter about his neck and
hanged him. So shortly this is the sum of all.

Judas who for 30d sold Christ infinitely greatest
Was hanged by the Devils help, and reputed with the basest.
Before you saw the history,
Now you hear the mystery.

Nov. It Is a good exposition. But I wood I had my two pieces again. I do not
like it very well, for many ignorant people will take it far otherwise: as
thus, 30. p. 30^. for a hundredth. And he that takes 30^ in the 100. is to be
hanged by the Devil.


Pro. It Is true. many may think so: but your Clarks must inform them in the
sense. No man can put a secret in figures but it may be diversely interpreted.
And so be all oracles taken in sundry senses.


Nov. But I wish it were made plainer to the understanding: for the more part
will take it as I did at first sight.


Pro. Why should you think so?


Nov. Because I cannot imagine any other meaning so proper to those figures as
that I conceived.


Pro. That Is because you are parcel ^ guilty. But I will gather two other
conceits as proper as that of yours.


Nov. If you can do so I am satisfied.


Pro. Thus 30^ pro 100. that is, he that gives 30 in the 100 is worthy to be
hanged.


Nov. That judgment is very prejudicial for us, and may force from us many
Clients.


Pro. I do but guess at this for variety sake, And then another is this. 30^
in the 100. he that will not give 30 in the 100 is worthy to be hanged.


Nov. O this; this. none like to this. Now I like this riddle excellent well
that yields so many, and so witty co^structio^s.


Pro. Nay here one more comes flowing in. I tell you it is a very copious
theme. ^ could keep you here this hour with voluntary variety. I remember
them as fast as they come into my brains by huddles. 30 in the 100. and the
hangman by: that is, he that will not give 30 in the 100. shall be hanged
before he get any money there.


Nov. And so he shall ^ warrant him. This is as good or rather better then the
other. I commend thee Proberio. either of these will serve our turn.

Here, thou shall have one piece more. I Will be bigger to thee then my word.
Thou will make all our worships hearts merry with this device.


Pro. I thank you Sir. And if you knew with what alacri tie, and willingness
I went about it, you would think it well bestowed.

Exit Nover. Let him go, he carries his own rod. No man that has his
senses will conjecture otherwise then himself did at first. videlicet.

He that takes 30 in the 100 and not a penny under,
Is worthy to be pendent till the hemp crack^ asunder.
Exit.
ACT. V.
SCEN. V.
Enter Antonio and Simplo. I bad you go to M. Thompson for my rent, have you
brought it.

Simp. Sir, he has sent your rent all but 30 shillings which he abated for 80
caudles at 4^ the caudle.


Ant. What an ass art thou? I sent thee for my rent, no^ to pay for caudles.


Sim, Why sir, he deducted it, then how could I help it? it were a great shame
not to pay for your diet in the account.


Ant. You should have left the imputation to me.


Sim. So I did nevertheless: but for my credit sake that fetched them every
morning I thought reason to discharge your score.


Ant. Score? what score? is my hand at it? or did you keep a tallie?


Sim. I kept no tallie but he is a very honest man, and his wife chalked them
up behind the do^e.


Ant. I am as honest as they. but yet I never use to keep reckning of caudles
when they be eaten half a year before and the taste washed from my throat. If
he cannot afford his Landlord 100. caudles without money, he is no Tenant for
me. What; no less then 30 shillings in caudles taken out of my rent at a clap,
who did ever hear of the like? And the price too is monstrous: groates apeece?
why, it were enough for a supper at my chamber. Indeed they were very sweet and
good, but what of that? a man may buy gould too dear. Tell him from me, I will
not allow him a penie for caudles, and yet I will have my rent.


Simp. Sir, there stands a poor gentlewoman called Mistress Richardson at the
door, and desires to speak with you.


Anto. A poor woman, what have I to do with poor folks? bid her come in,
she shal^be never the richer for me.


Exit Simpl^. Intrat Susanna Richardson, makes cursie with a paper in her hand,
and a seal to it, says, Sir, a kinsman of yours and mine, a knight, when he
went to travail had no money to spare, but bestowed on me 10^ which you owe
him by this your bill. I beseech you to pay me, for now I am in want.

Anto. Let me see the bill. If it be mine I will discharge it. She gives him
the bill, and after well viewing, (...) off the seal, and says* I owe him
nothing, nor will pay thee any thing.


Susan. Why do you tear the bill ^ if you will not pay it.


Anto. Did not you say it was my bill? if it be mine, why may not I do with it
as I list my self?


Susan. But you promised to discharge it; and doing so, it is at your pleasure
to tear or burn it.


Anto. Have I not discharged it think thou? I warrant thee ^is sure enough
for ever charging me agai^e.


Susa. O heavens! was there ever such a monster hatch'd^ what age but this
could have fostered so degenerous, so shameless, so frontlesse a beast as thou
^^t? It had been happy for many that have had to do with thee if that
Skin^r^ this had been flead from that impudent face of thine.


Anto. Be gone; Thy tongue is left thee to rail at large, but thy means be
short to revenge thy self by law. Therefore feed upon thy woes, and tears,
money thou gettest none of me.

Exit Anto.
Exit Susanna ^ contrary way wringing her hands. ACT. VI.
SCEN. I.
Enter Furioso (...) soldier, with his company ^orraso the Intelligencer, and
Phantastico the Musician. Courage my companions. Pluck up your hearts, me
thinks I hear the sound of trumpets and drums within my breast. Whether I
wake or sleep nothing but Alarums beset my thoughts: wars cannot be far
off. Every thing prognosticates stirs and broiles. The very children ^ufler
in the streets. We have lived a great while like meta^orphised men. It is such
a sight for soldiers to walk in Pawles with long cloakes and grave attire as
if they were turned Civilians. Why should we alter our proper habits being
ensigns of honor? Has not the whole need of us by turns, and fits? And to
one place or other we are still invited. We succor the besieged, and relieve
the distressed. We restore kingdoms, and set captives at freedom. We ^osse
and tennis Crowns and Monarchies, and bestow them at pleasure. Finally we
make the earth tremble, and discolor the running streams.

Some few faults we have, but not worthy to be so generally condemned.

Corra. The life of a soldier as now adays it is used, is of all occupations
the worst: and in a word is the high way to Hell.


Furio. You need not bend your self so stif^y against any sorts of people, ^e
they never so wicked, being your self one of the basest and most unnecessary
fruitspillers that ever made themselves mercenarie. An Intelligencer, a spy,
an Euesdropper is hated, and shunned of all the world.


Corra. As true as I live, it were a good deed to apprehend you. I Will lay my
life you are an enemi^ to the state.


Furio. Yes to your state. do you kick already? nay I Will gale you better yet.
with thy borrowed braverie thou perkest, and insinuatest thy self into the
best company, and vnderminest their thoughts with thy lavish and warranted
impeaching of states proceedings. And if any perhaps second thee in thy fained
murmurin^ him thou pursuest, and becomest first his animater, and then his
accuse^. such a one was D. Pary until the snare he laid for others compassed
his own neck.


Corra. Sir, you do us insufferable injury: we are busied only in our
Countries service, and certify all things offensive to it.


Furio. That's the intent of your mission, and cause of your entertainment. But
you (to seem diligent) attend ma^^e times to bables and toies, and the better
to pack awa^e paper you send your own surmises when waightier ^ffaires either
happen not, or escape you. And so least you seem to neglect your service, you
return tri^^es.


P^an. For any thing I see you are both pernicious members, and never to be
nourished but in cases of necessity. We Musicians are fortunate who hurt none,
and covet to please none. We drive away melancholy, We recreate the mind, and
reviue the benumbed spirits, and are welcome to all sorts. Such soldiers as
you are Segnieur Furioso I make no more account of, then of so many foul
thistles in a medowe at Midsommer, whose heads every child will whipp off with
a wand And I will have a still, plain, temperate lad shall break thy bones
with his blow, when such ay^e beaters will ^carce pierce the skin. I will my
self be one of the six Musicians that with the help of a few unarmed silly
folks shall kill 100 such soldiers in an hour: and yet we Musicians will
have no weapons but instruments of music.


Furio. How shall this come to pass, I desire to hear for my learning?


Phan. Thus. I will assemble a few falre women as honest as I would have them,
and wine enough. You shall have your bellies full of all your desires. They
shall dance you faint, and kiss you weary. And when you cannot feel a
needle thrust through your noses they shall cut your throats with ease. And we
musical mates will celebrate your Infernalls with bells upon our fiddles.

Now with you Sir ^ecke. ^^pper, or M. Corraso (if so you be styled) I will be
brief. While you do your prince and country good service, I wish you
rewarded: but the first time you be treacherous you should be well guarded.


Furio. What now foolish fiddler, do^t thou think freely to carry away these
exorbitant and opprobrious t^armes? I Will have thee banished all howses of my
acquaintance. It is not long since you were teaching the lute to a pretty wench
and witty, and were fingring her frets unfit for your di^tie. Its best for you
to be quiet, least I tell the rest which I know.


Sec^ Sir Hermito* If you be no^. I am weary with hearing such variety of
vice. The soldier that was wont to be^ the honor of every country he came
in, and a glory of his own, is now become odious abroad, and intolerable at
home. The intelligencer might do good service if you could devise to keep him
from doing hurt, which is as hard as to restrain a man of war having letters
of Mart from robbing his own country men.

The Musician that ought to present nothing evil founding, is now the setter
of all unsavory sonnets. His office was to teach the measures and daunces of
order and comelines, not the lofty L^valto and tricks of ^ntemperance.


Her. I assure you Master Securus those things are as distastefull to me as to
any other. And I am so much the safer that I live from their sight and
knowledge. The Soldier, the Spy, and the Musician have their several abuses
much degenerating from their first institutions; if any man can persuade them
to repair unto my cell, I will do my best to reform them.


Exeunt Furio, Corraso. and Phantastico, doing reverence to Securus and
Hermito. ACT. VI.
SCEN. II.
Enter Antonio. and Simplo at several doors, ^^amping, chasing and throwing
down his hat. How now Simple, what is the news now?

Simp. Marry I was never in such a scurvie case in my life.


Anto. What is it? have thou the pox?


Simp. No, it is worse. that is but a toy, it is the plague. I am so pestred with
yonder woman Susanna Richardson. She says you did tear lier bill of 10^. she
scoulds, she tails; she threatens to dwell with you, to lay her child at your
door, and set up the cause upon your gate: and every thing ^hee will do
until she be agreed withal. She makes me weary of my life: she follows me
like a ghost: and now she stands at door. If you had not been here she had
never left m^^, but she cannot abide to see you.


Anto. All this I little care for; but there is a thing in it. I fear the
Sta^-cha^^er because she has wi^nes (or else I would not care neither) I must
agree with her, bid her come in.


E^^er Susanna, makes (...). You showed me an old rotten note the other day. It Is
not worth two pence. What would you haue^ I owe you nothing.

Sus. The note was worth 10^ till you fl^gred it, now it is not worth a
halfe-penie indeed: but if you will give me nothing, I will tell the King. I am
a poor^ widow, he will help me.


Anto. The King woman? Alas, he has great business, never trouble him with
this toy. I Will give ^hee somewhat in charity, but not a penie of duty.


Sus. Charity? that would I feign see from you. Pay first the 10^ which is
due, and then bestow your charity.


Anto. Well, woman, here is 50 shillings with a good will: take this, or get
more any way you can.


Sus. I should have had an ounce, here is but a quarter. I am poor, therefore
I am constrained to take this, but I leave the rest upon your conscience still.

Exit.
Anto. Nay, then I care not, we^'l do well enough with conscience Simple. I am
glad it is at an end in Law.


Simp. So am I Sir, now I shall be quiet. An you marked Sir, I never entreated
you for conscience sake to give her any thing, but for my trouble. Nay I have
learned to stretch a conscience with any man since I came to you. And it is soon
learned if a man will give his mind to it: for the good will of a jade^^ all.
What a fool was I that began no sooner to study it ^

But I have more news to tell you Sir. As I came by the Chancerie office I was
called in to see a ^^rie foul bill, put in against you ^t M. Thompso^s suit,
for things which you did take (not altogether steal) out of his house. And for
a lease parell he challenges from you: and there a^e also your fourscore and
ten cawdles in a row: in every line a Cawdle, spic'd and sweet, and as hot as
ever they went down your throat: and some say they shall be still upon record
in perpetuam rei memoriam, if it be true, it shall go hard but ever^e morning
in term times as long as I live I Will spend my penie at one of them.


Ant. Has he served me so? well. it is a maxim with me Simplo to be ashamed of
nothing (as thou know) but yet I Will be even with him. He shall out of his
house whatsoever it cost me.


Simplo. There is also another bill against you by your wives near cosen,
wherein you are charged (not directly with stealing, but taking without the
owners privitie or consent) a picture, a map, and other household stuff.


Ant. I make no more reckning of that imputation then of the rest. For if the
worst fall I shall have them as they be praised.


Sim. Nay, if you care not for the manner of taking the^, the matter is not
great otherwise.


Ant. Not a rush Simplo, sa^e and think what they will, I am sorry ^ took no
more.


Sim. But one thing made me laugh hartelie, and in my conceit it was a witty
trick that was told me lately, that you borrowed 100^ of a gentlewoman called
Mis^ris Fer^ers Gratis, and put it out for 10 in the 100. And after a year and
a half with much ado^ paid her: and so you got 15^ handsomelie. I would I
could tell whereto borrow two or three 1000^ in that sort. Me thinks I have wit
enough to thrive on this fashion.


Ant. It Is a fine way indeed, and cleanelie (so that a m^^ look to his
security) And comes in without stoc^e of his own: a very beggar may grow
rich thus: and every paultrie knave may thrive so, if he take heed. Millers
use this trick to lend a bushel of another man's corn ground into meal to be
paid again in wheat, so he takes tole twice of one bushel, and no cost of
his own, It is but making the first (...) ^ay so much the longer.


Sim. There are yet two other things objected, but both of our nature therefore
though it were a huddle, it makes but a single game. One was this that you
picked the first le^ter out of a truncke full of linen, (the letter for the
surname serving your name as well as the owners youle^ stand) and put on A.
instead of R. which was picked out. And this was Mr. Rellips linen. The other
was that you marked pillowes, and other stuff o^ a noble man's with your own
mark, and ^sed them as your own. I forgot the noble man's name but it sounds
like a port town toward the sun when it is at the highest. They had much of
their stuff again, but some ^^ucke in your finger^. And reason too I think:
shall a man take pa^nes to mark another man's goods for nothing? A halter for
him that has no better wit then so, to thrive by.


Ant. There was such a speech of this marking, but I deny it.


Sim. And what then? will that serve the turn?


Ant. It must serve. for they shall never prove directly that I did or causd it
to be done.


Sim. But they were found in your possession. and then how can you avoid the
discredit?


Ant. Discredit? they may be glad to have their things ^gaine. who can tell
but they be mine? I am sure they na^^ my mark. And how shall a man know his
own but by his mark? And howsoever these things are, time will wear them out
of memory.


Sim. All these are well answered. What sa^e you Sir to the taking of a
conveiance out of a painted box in your father in laws study* by means of a
keye with pretense of another business?


Ant. Tush. I said it there again when I saw they kept such a stir about a
paultrie piece of parchment. I will not be beholding to them.


Sim. What an unkindness was that, tha^ your father in law did threaten to sue
you for 700^ you owed him? Alas Sir I see you have been much wronged among
them. Hang such a father.


Ant. I but I dealt well enough with him: for I sent him word that if he did
sue me I would bring him in more trouble then twice so much money could excuse
him for other matters.


Sim. And reason too I think. shall they make a man pay money before he be
willing? twood make a man do that awood not, when they go to extremities. I
have done for this time Sir. the next time you call for news I hope I shall
have as much more. But now I remember me there is one thing more. Your lawyer
asked me for a fee for your last business: shall I give it him?


Ant. No. I am sure he did not ask you. I brought a cosen of mine the other day
to him that gave him a fee. Indeed I told him that he should go to my lawyer
and give him no fee. But when I had him there, and he put his case, I whispered
my cosen in the ear to offer him a fee: But I did not whisper my lawyer to
refuse it. and so very honestly he took it: and I know therefore he will
expect no fee for my own business.


Sim. Then belike I mistook it. perchance he thanked you for bringing your
cosen to give him a fee without cause, being well resolved before by other
Council. Well now Sir I hope you will bestow my freedom upon me. I desire no
more cunning then now I have, and I Will serve you still, and set up for my self:
for I had rather be a double knave then a single fool.


Ant. I will not stick with thee Simplo: go to the Chamberlain there it must
be done.


Exeunt. Ant. and Simp. ACT. 6.
SCEN. 3.
Enter Insatiato and Inf^licto. What say thou boy? me thought we had but a
short dinner to day with yonder dainty Lady and tarried so long for it. How
fared you in the hall?

Infae. We had very short commons. and I am hungry s^ill: we had no meat but
your revertion, and the scraps of your trencher when I changed with you.


Inf^. Alas we left nothing but bare bones. we had but a quarter of a neck of
mutton between three, and Paruagracio and I eat^ no meat nor bread since
yesternight at 10 ^ clock: and from my trencher thou could get little but
the fat squiz'd from the flesh which I eat. I was so hungry that me thought I
could have eaten that small Lady, and her great cheer all at a meal. Here go
thou to dinner at some ordinary (he puts his hand in his pocket but finds
nothing there) stay till I have money: thou can fast a little, can thou not?


Inf^. Yes a little, if I can get no meat.


In^rat Pestifero. Insa. Yonder comes Pestifer^ my brother. He could never have
come in a better time: for I have neither money nor clothes to paw^e: but boy
not a word of our wants: we will seem to be very flush: the offer shall come
from himself, else we shall have him very coye and deer^.


Pest. By your favor Sir I am bold to see as you do. I heard you were evil
(he snites his nose) at ease with melancholy.


Ins^. Welcome Pestifero: indeed I have been a little trobled in mind. but
now I am very merry.


Pest. In good time Sir, I am glad of your worships amendment. I doubted least
you lack't money, and were sad upon it. I came to pleasure you, if that had
been your disease.


Insa. Thanks for thy good will Pestifero: but I am prettily stored at this
instant: I know not how soon I shall want, for all things are uncertain in
this world.


Pestif. Very true Sir, many changes in this age. wilt please you then to
make provision against a raini^ day, and take this while it may be had?


Ins^. I, but then you know interest will run on it is no good husbandry to
take it so long before the time it may be I shall not need it this seven night
yet.


Pest. Way Sir, if you be so provident that you ^eckon of we^kes. it is time
for me to be gone: I have other friends to pleasure, that scorn to stand upon
two months past before the sealing, from the time of the first be speaking the
commodity resting from them until their security were provided. I Will see you
some other time.


Insa. Nay ftaie: I am not covetous. I hate it with my heart: if it may do
th^e a kindness I can be content to accept thy friendly offer, so thy
commodity be vendible. I know thou come in good will.


Pestif. Vendible Sir? yes that it is: and you will say so soon: no man will
suffer it long in his house.


Insa. What stuff is it?


Pest. Of diverse sorts: I know not my self: but they are finely pack't up.
I saw a car unloading with such ware even now as I came, it is a commodity
more sought for by day and night then any I know. I tell you it troubles the
Lord Mayor, and all the Justices to keep the people in order that gather these
wares, they are so eager in catching at them.


Insa. Of what value is the commodity?


Pest. You may have 100l worth, or half, as you please.


Insa. What will 100l worth yield to be sold?


Pest. At a word it will yield you 60l readily: I Will not dissemble.


Insa. What security?


Pest. Your self and your friend such another.


Insa. What say you M. Parvagracio? you know him.


Pest. I know him well I warrant you he shall be taken.


Insa. What will content you.


Pest. What you please Sir, 40 shillings, I Will not ingrate upon you,


Insa. Now let me cast up my account. 40l lost out of the principal at the
first 10l the interest. 40 shillings the broker. All this is but 52l in the
100, it is reasonable as the world goes now: here is my hand. As I am a gentleman
I Will have it upon these terms, so that the bargain be no worse then you
speak of, put the bands to making. Now tell me what call you the commodity?


Pest. The commodity Sir, is old rags, such as are found in street d^^ghills
with raking day and night as I told you.


Insa. What a villain art thou? old rags? how durst thou presume to offer me
old rags?


Pest. Why Sir, I tell you they are ready money at the paper mills.


Insa. Paper me no mills. I Will not foul my fingers with them.


Pest. You shall not need Sir, I will take order for selling them* and I hope
you can abide to tell the money when I bring it. I wood your worship had 1000l
worth of them, as filthy things as they be.


Insa. So would I: but it shall never be said for my credit sake that I took
up a commodity of old rags or doublets. I have heard of many scurvie
bargains, but never the like to this.


Pest. Why sir, it is but your fancy. And now you cannot go back: here is
witness enough you engaged your honor to have it. take the less and save
your reputation.


Insa. I did so indeed, the more fool I to pass my word before I felt their
stink. I cannot abide to think on them. But to save my credit go to,
dispatch. I Will have the whole 100l since I must have some. I Will never give my
bond for ^ little.


Pest. Well sir, it shall be done.

Exit Pestif.
Insa. Now boy, was not this well handled? I must have had them upon any
terms: but he never perceived it. Did thou mark how ^ee entreated me
with respective terms, and pinned the bargain upon me? Those be always the
best penie-worths. It is a goodly thing to be wise. Remember boy when thou
come to years, to take this course o^ thri^ing.


Insa. Indeed Sir you carried this business admirabli^^^ the end. I would
rather then 40l for my mind sake my old master your Worships father had st^od
in a corner, and had heard, and observed his sons wisdom. I warrant it had
been worth 1000l to some body.


Insa. Well. Now we want nothing for getting this* th^eescore pound but
Par^agracio to seal. Go ^eeke him out, and we will be merry.


Insa. I go fetch him.


Exeunt Insat. and Infael. Secu. I think the air is infected, that such
contagious caterpillars swarm abroad in this age to destroy vouth, that scarce
one fruit among 100 comes to be ripe but is first rotten. Such as this broker
is are nourished by the Devil for no cause but to waste young men in old
prisons. And these cormorants which set them a-worke to entise youth to these
pestilent adventures me thinks they can have no hope that he which receives so
little money upon great bonds, does ever mean to pay them. For he deals not
with one of these gripers, but with as many as he can find will be content with
his own security. Therefore when he comes to be arrested he is buried alive
for all, and pays none.


Her. I wish they were all so served. then the loss of the money on the one
side, and the sharp rod of imprisonment on the other side, would bring both
sorts to repentance, ^ bethink themselves of using ^ good conscience to
deceive on neither part. But if your Chancellor hold on his course i^
allowing the extortioner no more but the bare money made of such commodities
that will shortly end the abuse. For this E^ops dog will learn to hold the
next piece better* then to be deluded with a shadow of double ga^ne.


ACT. VI.
SCEN. IV.
Enter Antonio, Simplo* Purgato all booted. Stercorat^ the bostler. Camerado
chamberlain. Ostler. Take heed to my horses* that they be well walked stuffed
and dressed.


Stere. I warrant you Sir, and your Worship may have provender of all sorts.


Came. Will it please you to see your chamber?


Anto. Yes* but I must have the best in the house.


Came. You shall Sir. What wilt please your worship to have to suppe^?


Anto. First bring me a crustie manchet, and a single pot of beer.


Came. It shall be done Sir (turns to the people) here is a hot guest I perceive
by the single pot.

Exit.
Simp. What will you have to supper Sir, that we may bespeake it for we are
very hungry?


Anto. It is not wisdom to eat a meal when you are hungry, for then you
eat too much and surfeite. Even as it is not good to fight or correct
scholars when you are in choler, for then you will do it beyond measure. I
am as hungry as you, yet I will eat but a manchet, and drink twice of one
pot.


Pur. What Sir? will you take up the best chamber, and spend but two pence for
your part. And this at Croyden so near London?


Anto. No more. And but for the best chamber I would spend but a penie, a pint
of beer and a half penie bread.


Pu^. What a shame were this if your friends should hear it?


Anto. Leave the disgrace to me. I can bear it. Pass^^ graviora.


Simp. Come Purgato* thou and I will bespeake our supper. 20d a piece we will
spend to stop this current of rumor.


Exeunt. Intr^^ Camerado. Here is a delicate manchet Sir. what meat to your
supper?

Anto. This is not crustie enough. Change it.


Came. But we have no better in the house.


Anto. I will have it changed.


Came. Well Sir, I will do my best. what shall my Mistress provide for your
supper?


Anto. When thou have changed the manchet thou shall know.


Exit Camerado. A long journey have I ridden, and all day fasting, except a
breake-fast at my friends house. Now if I should fill my belly, two shillings
will not serve in sheere meat for me^ and my two men. This way yet I s^ue
somewhat: for these hungry knaves out of their own purses ^pend three
shillings two pence: for I will allow but pence a p^^ce. I hope they will not
compare with me to ask two pence a piece as I spend. O to morrow, to morrow
at dinner will I carry in for fear of foul weather, when I come to Master
Rem^af his house, my continual host and friend, whom I cannot bauke, he is so
conveniently in my way, and keeps good cheer. Oh, by that time my stomach
will be tanquamignis accensus, a flaming fire, dispatching all meats it
touches. And it is Phys^cke sometimes to keep a stomach so fiery: for it
will consume the very worms if any crawle up to the stomach for lack of
nutriment in the maw.

Intrat Camerado. Sir, I have been with all the bakers in the town for a
crustie loaf.

Anto. Thou have done well. this is as it should be.


Came. Now Sir, what to supper? my Mistress stands at gaze until I tell her.


Anto. My friend. I have a very evil stomach, it will endure nothing toward
night but bread and drink, my men I think will have something.


Came. (Turns to the people, and says) Here is a customer for Paltocks Inn,
but we will nicke him well enough in his horse-meate, and scurvie sheets.

Exit.
Anto. I hear the knave well enough, but I Will watch you for both. My horses
shall have but little provender. I Will call at some Farmers house to morrow, and
^ate a p^^ke in his stable* and for sheets I Will lay them by, and change with my
men*

Exit.
ACT. ^.
SCEN. 4.
Intrat Insatiato and Infaelicto. Sir, have you found Parvagrac^^? when will
he come*

Inf^. To tell you the naked truth Sir I have been asleep till I heard you
call for your g^lasshes: for I was so hungry, that if I had not slept I (...)
committed Burglary somewhere to get victuals: Now I Will find him out. (^ee steps
forwards, and turns again* say^^g) but I pray you Sir remember to give me my
two sh^llings you promised me for bringing news of your dinner. Now you shall
have money, I speak before it be gone.


Insa. Yes, and before it be come. why do thou tarrie^ the Scrivener will
think v^^ong; and a worse matter; perhaps we shall give them too much time to
enquire of our states.


Infae. I can soon have him if all other things were ready: you know where
you left him at the Ladies, where you both dined. He said he would follow you.
I marvel he is so long. But I warrant they are up to the noses in the new
book de flatibus. It is best for me to know if the bonds be ready before I
fetch him, lest he be angry to leave the Ladies company before need require.
Intrat Parvagracio. But look where he is come alone without carrying Sir* you
saved me a labor. I was sent for you. Can you smell out good bargains? you
come without calling. When thrift is ^n the market you are ever in the way?


Par. What good bargain crack is toward me?


Infae. My Master shall have money, and you must be bound with him.


Par. Is that a good bargain wagge? well, I have such an other a-bruing for
your Master to be bound with me. but where is he?


Infae. Here, at hand. Now to the s^rivener and broker go I.

Exit.
Par. I am glad to hear of your good furniture toward, and I come to prostrate
my seal and service at you^ worthy feet.


Insati. Sir, with all complements for such kind love, I receive your
readiness. And do reciprocally promise to be ever at your beck.


Intrat Infaelicto. Infae. Sir, the bonds be ready for the seal. I have seen
the commodity of rags, and I like them well. They never dustie you except
they be stirred. But they are foul and heavy. I wood we had sold them by gold
smiths weight for so much in silver. I did see a fellow lift a bundle of them
up to a carre, and he grunted hard; he made me remember my Ladies book de
flatibus. For I looked ever when he would have let fly.


Insa. Well lets go seal the bonds, and lose no time.


ACT. 7.
SCEN. I.
Intrat Levitia cum Pedisequa. her periwigs of dogs hair^ wh^te, and a yellow
band about her neck, a glass, and powder of an old post in a box or paper.
And is very busy in trimmin^ her self, and casting dust upon her head until
her time come to speak. Ins^tiat^ goes on saring, But what have we here? I Will
see this sight for all the haste.

Par. Why it is a woman. Do not see what it is?


Insa. A woman? it is not a woman. The head is a dog. it is a maremaide, half a
dog, half a woman.


Par. No it is but the hair of a dog in fashion, pulled from these Island dogs.


Insa. In fashion? there is a fashion for a fool. What Is that she casts upon
her head?


Par. That Is the powder of a rotten post.


Insa. A tale of a tub, the powder of a pudding: will you make me believe that?


Par. Do thou think it so strange? upon my credit I know some are spoken
to for providing such powder by Ladies. I am in earne^t. I assure you it is very
common.


Insa. I think they be common indeed that be dressed with dust. (he goes
prying on both sides of her, saying) not ^ dog say you? the head is a dog. The
chiefest part is a dog. well, say what you will, you shall never make me
believe but it is either a dog, or a dogged woman.


Par. Be she what she will in conditions, I warrant thee it is a woman in sex,
or never trust my judgment again.


Insa. What Is that about her neck? a pancake, or a tanzie?


Par. It Is a band yellow starched* how can thou think it to be a tanzie?


Insa. Because it looks so yellow. Marie it is not so well I wish it were, for
then I would eat it up, for I have not half dined.


Par. No. twere pity to devour her* me thinks it is a very pretty creature.


Insa. Do thou like her so well? I Will go woo her: she has no impediment,
but I may marie her, may I not?


Par. Not that I know, except she be honest.


Insa. Is that an impediment? nay, the honester the better. I Will to her
instantly. I see no reason but I may fall in love with her on the sudden.
And happy is that wooing that is not long in doing: but stay, are you sure she
is a woman? I am in some doubt. And I would be very loath to mary her except
she prove a woman.


Par. I warrant thee she is a woman. why should thou fear it?


Ins^. Have I not cause to fear it? for if I should be married to a beast, or a
jade, I were utterly undone. is it not good to be sure?


Par. Mistrust not that. thou may know by her speech and voice whether she
be a woman or no.


Insa. Cannot her tongue deceive me?


Par. Yes like enough, but not in this case, And if the worst fall you may
easily know the first night you I^e together.


Insa. I thank you for nothing when it is too late.


Par. Why too late? thou may be rid of her presently, and be parted the next
day.


Insa. I could like that well enough so that I had her portion, but is there
such a course to be taken, that they cannot be tied so fast, but they may
easily be undone?


Par. No question but the marriage is void.


Insa. That Is an excellent trick. I wish I had a grant under the great seal
to vnmarrie all those that would feign be parted. I would purchase Lordships,
Towns, and Countries.


Par. If you had, yet must you use discretion in it, and devide none but such
as are indeed no marriages at first, but had impediments not dispensable.
Otherwise you might be cause of great sin, and inconvenien^^. You must
examine the reasons, and proceed iudiciallie, before you sever them rashly.


Insa. Never tell me, let them look to that at their own peril. It would take
up too much time if there came to me^ but 100 in a day to examine them all.
No. no. if they were willing to be sundred, I would uncouple them: let them
range afterward which way they will for me. Well upon thy word that I may be
livorced from her if she prove not a certain woman I Will upon her whatsoever she
be. And I Will catch her upon a sudden for fear least it be a dog and bite me.


(he goes stealing toward her with his hands forward. Par. A way cocks-combe.
I am ashamed on thee: come back, what do thou mean?


Insa. O that same is a very suspicious head. I am afraid of it.


Par. Afraid of a dead dog? what a cowardly thing is that?


Insa. A dead dog? marry perhaps the hair is upon ^ cu^ster snapper then
the right owner was.


Par. Be ruled by me; I Will stand between thee and al dangers. go orderly to her,
take her by the right hand as if thou would dance with he. He daunceth toward
her and sings.


Insa. Hey niny. nony no. Hey niny n^. Hey noniny nonin^* Hey ninyno. So he
daunces toward her.


Par. What a fellow art thou? a Courtier? a Cowdriuer, come hither once again.
Do thou think to speed and go about It so like a Clown* Thou must woo
her, as you court your ladies in the palace.


Insa. O, must I so? I thought she had been a country gentlewoman, and that
the more plainly I had dealt, the better she would like me. But all is well
enough yet, for no body saw me.


Par. Thou art deceived in that: for they are as fine and ^urious as any Lady
in Court, though they be not proud a whit.


Insa. Is It so? well, then I can fit her, she shall have courting enough. And I
am glad you tell me of it; for I was in earnest to have loved her beyond
measure, and so might have fallen mad, and marred all: but now I Will do even as
we do at Court, make many shows of love and service, and intend nothing
less. But yet thus honestly I Will deal with this woman (because she is a
stranger) that if I love her, and like her, I Will love her until I leave her.
Well, it is time to be doing, for my love begins to cool very fast: I must
kindle it again. (with a conge he takes her by the left hand, saying) Fair
Lady, it becomes not gentlemen of good breeding to talk of the weather, or
time of the day, or use such idle impertinent speech: therefore, (all preambles
and digressions s^t aside) I come to understand if you be pleased to admit me
into the list of your devoted servants.


Lev. Indeed Sir, it seems you have been well bred, else you had never grown
to this stature.


Insa. (He turns from her toward Parvagracio, and says) Did not I tell you
what I should find of her? she snarles already. I Will lay my life she will
prove currish, her looks make it plain, come sweet Lady, what answer to my
question?


Lev. Nay first I had need to answer your complaint to your friend, that I am
so cursed and churlish. What uncivil term did I give, deserving so sharp a
censure? women know not how to speak. If merrily, then our jest is termed
s^offing, and quipping. I^ soberly, then our modesty is counted coyness, and
want of courtesy. So that unless we say nothing, we commit error. And yet
silence is not clee^e: for then are we sheep ( alias) fools.


Insa. How could you hear what I said to him, since I turned my mouth from you?


Lev. But you turned not mine ears from your mouth.


Insa. Pardon this fault good Lady. I will be more careful hereafter.


Lev. No doubt you will: to have me further off when you say the worst.


Insa. I mean not so. but rather to speak the best of you in all places and
companies as your merits (I know) will enforce me.


Lev. Nothing comes from you (I see then) but by constraint.


Insa. O that you would give over rebuking, no man shall reform himself
before me. Forgive what is past. If I offend again, deny me all favor.


Enter Pestifero, and whispers Insatiato, to whom he says, Tell them I will
come anon.

Exit Pestifero. Lev. Sir, it is against nature to remit injuries, therefore
your request is unreasonable. But for his sake that gave the counsel, I will
for give my greatest enemies: yet you must know it is lawful to reprehend your
misdemeanors.


Insa. (Turns from her toward Parvagracio, and says) This comforts me much,
for she may be a Christian for any thing I hear yet.


Lev. You that content your self with no habitation but a Princes Palace, and
will serve no less creature then Caesar: that no sooner pass the Porters
lodge, but li^t up your legs and lips, as if you had commission to control
the country, to breathe nurture from your nostrils, and be patron to poor
people: whose gate and gesture give testimony to your hearts haughtiness: and
whose countenance must outface all encounterers, how could you be so grossly
ouer-shot, as to cast your self unacquainted, vnfriended vncommended, and
vnpresented into the company of a gentlewoman of fashion?


Insa. I cry you mercy. Of what fashion are you that I might not do as I did
without offense?


Lev. Why Sir? are you a courtier? and ask of what fashion I am? do you not
see that I am of the newest, and ^ea^est fashion? who sees my band and
perrywig, and doubts of that: I am persuaded you will prove a counterfait^, and
no courtier, that are ignorant in so general a knowledge?


Insa. It was not the newest fashion the last year, and no Cronicle make*
mention of (...). Therefore if any man had written. Nihil factum est quod non
fuit factum prius. I would have given his Proverbs the lie. For this saffroning
was never used but in Ireland for bodily linen, to dissipate the company of
creepers. And for such torturing of these Izeland Impes, with ^radicating their
fleeces, thereby to enjoy the roots, which best will abide the basting, it has
need to be new, for it is noy some, and makes your pretywig nothing handsome.


Lev. Sir, let it suffice you that it is the newest fashion this very day. And
if the sight and smell of it offend your nose, you know the ordinary remedy is
to remove your nose. Yet I suppose by your palenesse you use to take Tabaccho,
then which, nothing is more fulsome.


Insa. Indeed, I want color in my face, and wish I had the art to get so
rosy a cheek as you have.


Lev. You do but guess that I use art to give grace to ^y feature, so it is
easy for you to be deceived: but I will tell you a certain rule to know if
any woman be painted.


Insa. Let me be beholding to you for this cunning infallible.


Lev. If you suspect it, take a pin, and scratch her cheek pretty deep to the
bone, and if it b^^ed not, assure your self she is painted.


Insa. I see now you are disposed to be pleasant with me. I bear all kindly.
Now I entreat you to proceed with publishing my other faults, that when I
know them all, I may amend, and so appear perfect in your sight.


Lev. Secondly, I charge you with flattery, at every word calling me Lady:
which you are very sure I am not, seeing me come hither on my own feet,
whereas if I were a Lady I must of necessity be at my Caroach with 4 horses,
or else my honor is in the dust in summer, and in the mire in winter. This then
is an inexcusable sin of yours.


Insa. Alas. what should I call you not knowing your name? And you of all the
women that ever I knew are angry for giving you more then your due. But rather
then I will displease you that way, I will devise some other Epitheton of
courtesy, until you determine to take Ladyship upon you, so well as it would
become you.


Lev. Nay, I would not have you think that I am exceedingly angry for
mistaking my present condition. It was a fault, but very venial. Your other
errors I will conceal for this time, as unwilling to oppress you with
penance, sithence I find you so freely to offer satisfaction.


Insa. Then now vouchsafe to receive me into your service, sithence no man
shall carry himself more dutifully.


Lev. If I were fit to receive one of your sort, how could you serve me and the
king too? can you serve two masters?


Insa. No. but one master and a mistress may both be served without breach of
fidelity, and with great facility.


Lev. Very hardly, respecting the persons inequality: but if I should be so
minded, what can you do?


Insa. All, that is not done before I come.


Lev. Can you, and will you do whatsoever I ent^eate or command you without
grudging?


Insa. Yes, with all readiness and alacrity, and without exception.


Lev. Then I request and command you to let me alone, and never hereafter
speak to me.


Insa. That Is an unreasonable request, and iniust commandment. There ought to
be justice and possibility in every commandment; but this has neither of
them.


Lev. I will prove it has both, or else I release your word.


Insa. Prove that, and I Will perform your will: for I have vowed to serve you,
and it is injustice to break it. And I am in love, and it is impossible to
limite it.


Lev. I thought so. draffe was your errant* but drink you would have. you
seek a service, but you mean to be master: this trick will fail you: for I
have vowed beforehand, and I am bound to keep it.


Insa. You can make no vow contrary to mine, because you never knew my
intention, nor person before this day.


Lev. Yes, contrary enough, as white is to black. And to hold you no longer
in suspense, my vow and purpose is to be a Nun.


Insa. A Nun? There was never Nun with such attire, and in such a Cloister.


Lev. O Sir, I can quickly cast off this attire, and get a Nuns habit. If the
mind be changed, the apparel will soon be altered.


Insa. Of what order (if you speak in earnest) that I may visit your Cloister?
for love has gotten such dominion. that I cannot so part with you. And yet to
this cross I know not what to say: for it takes from me all liberty to move
further.


Lev. What will it avail you to know my Cloister, and walk without the wall?
for there, all access and intercourse is barred.


Insa. Let my love yet be so far requited, as to know your name and or^er
you enter into. It will ease my mind, that none other inioies you. O, this
love is like a quarterne ague, and a suite iu Law! A good day, and a bad: now
hope. ^hen despair. To night co^^ort, tomorow morning al dashed.


Lev. Sir I must crave respite to answer you directly to these questions: for
I must have my friends advice before I resolve. And so for this t^me I take
leave.

Exit Lev.
Par. Now, let us go seal these bonds in the mean space, and by that time
perhaps she will come again.


Insa. Bonds? I am in bonds enough I think, bound hand, foot, heart, mind,
wit and will. He that is in love needs no other chain to hold him* he is
fast in prison, and locked sure enough for ^scaping. O Parvagracio! do thou
talk of going? whither should I go? Is it not enough that my love is gone,
and that all is gone with her? my heart is gone with her, and she is gone away
with my heart: whither can I go without my heart? And whither she is gone, and
(...) ^he has carried my heart I know not. Sealing. what ta^^ (...) thou of
sealing? I have set my hand, my ^ele, my har^ and all to the love of her. She
is gone away with this deed of gift. It is deliue^ed before witness. It is
^nroll'd. I have acknowledged a fine. I have suffered her to recover against
me; and delivered her peaceable possession. The Law is at an end* what else
would you have me seal? I can give her no further assurance. her counsel
cannot devise it. why do you trouble me with unnecessary requests?


Par. O my good friend Insatiato recall thy self like a wise man. thou
speak like a man distracted. go with me, and take a little rest. It will not
be long before she come to this place again. We will send your Page to find
her.


Insa. A little rest I warrant you. Go? you are still upon going. Go whither
you will, I will not stir a foot from hence. What if she come in our
absence, and go away discontented? then shall I never see nor hear her
again. No^ here I lost her, here I will find her, or lose my self.


Par. But you will trouble and hinder other actors that have parts here to
play as well as you.


Insa. Actors. what actors? Is this a stage? Is this a play? no. it is a game in
earnest. it is no jest, it is love in sadness. Let them come that come will: if
any come but my love, I have nothing to say to them. Do you as you think
good.


Par. Nay, if you stay, I will not go. I will not leave my friend so.


Act. 7.
SCEN. 2.
Intrat Antonio, Simplo, Purgato with a cloake-bag full under his arm, all
boo^ed, spurred, and riding rods. Have you locked up all the doors, and
delivered the foul linen to be washed*

Sim All is safe, and every thing done.


Anto. Have you given the Cobblers wife the 7 eggs we left at breakefast?


Sim. She has them.


Anto. This is but ill husbandry to lose 7 eggs at a ^^ap, and my belly not
very full.


Sim. Sir, they are well bestowed, they will do the poor woman good, and you
have eaten pretty well.


Anto. I have not eaten so well as you think for. And they are not fit meat
for her mouth: some grosser meat would do her more good.


Sim. I warrant you Sir, she can eat an egg without surfeiting, as well as
the finest Lady in this Land.


Anto. Come on, since it is done, let them go: but (he steps forward, and they
follow, but presently comes back, and says) I cannot ride my journey
contentedl^e until I have these eggs. Simplo, fetch them again. Tell the
woman, she shall have as many or more another time.


Sim. turns to the people, saying. Now must I fetch these eggs from the poor
woman against my nature. Exit and cito re^it with 7 eggs. Anto. takes them and
exit. Simple goes on saying, I was never ashamed of a master before. There are
few times that we ride forth, but a roasted Rabbet, a piece of chief, or a dry
breast of mutton is trussed up in the cloak-bag, especially when we lie at an
Inn the next night (as now we shall.) And but for fowling the cloake-bag, and
his clothes, we had carried these eggs now.


Pur. There is no such stuff now in the cloake-bagge I trow? If I thought
there were, I would throw it to the dogs rather then it should ride behind me.


Sim. Is there not? it is a great chance then; and I am much deceived if there be
none: for there were some scrappes left yesternight, and I find them not in
any room in the house.


Pur. That shall be tried by and by. Be these his tricks? though I be his
horse-keeper, I Will carry no coals nor bones neither I trow. (he undoes an
end of the cloake-bag, and there takes out a napkin full of pieces of bread, a
quarter of a breast of mutton, a piece of boyl^d beef, a pudding, a bone of a
loine of veale: that he vnpinneth, and lifting it up by one corner, lets all
fall, and presently catches at them with his hands upon the ground, scrambling
every way as he would ca^ch at a Rat, saying.) What Is become of her? take
heed gentlewomen she get not up. I swear, I had almost caught her. Was there
not a Rat there? Masters, you below, came she not that way?


Sim. Langheth, and says. How now Purgato. What, art thou at span-counter with
Rats? I perceive thou would have fought with any Rat in London rather then
she should have be guil'd thee of thy provender.


Pur. My provender? the dogs shall ^ate it, before any bit shall come in my
mouth. How came he by these scraps, and what would he do with them?


Sim. Thou art but a novice Purgato. and had as much wit when thou suckedst
(I think) as now. And besides for that thou came to him but yesterday (in a
manner) art ignorant of his fashions. I will instruct thee. The night before he
rides from London, he will invite some of his acquaintance to supper with him
(at their own charge more then his) then the remnant he packeth up thus. And
at the next Inn he lodges in (if it be two days thence) he ^ates these ^ates
under the color of a little joint there dressed. And by this means he is
counted at his Inn a very small meateman, but everie-where else a tall
trencher-man. But thou must understand the chamberlain and tapster are sent
down when these dainties are in devouring.


Pur. But do you eat any of this dainty trashe with him?


Sim. Or else I must go hungry to bed, and ride empty the next day.


Pur. As true as I live, he shall never bring me to this gear. And the next
time he makes such a mess, I Will provide sauce: for I Will put a fresh horse-turd
in the midst. And my trotting horse will soon season it all alike.


Intrat Ant. Anto. Come away, I have eaten four of these eggs, the rest I
have put in branne to preserve against the nex Term: but what is here? how
came this meat here? me thinks I should know these pieces.


Pur. It may be so Sir, but I did never see the like.


Anto. Why so?


Pur. As I had the cloake-bag under mine arm, I felt a thing stir within it:
and in searching* I found these scraps, and among them an huge Rat. And she
went away invisible: for I am sure we could not see which way she ran, nor
could I catch her, do what I could, and yet I scambled at her with both my
hands.


Anto. Why do you not gather up the meat, and put it up again?


Pur. What? and the Rat had pissed on it for fear, and it stinkes too bad.


Anto. How can thou tell that a Rat had pissed on it, when you confess you
did see no Rat?


Pur. No, not which way she ran away. But if yonder boy had gaped wide enough,
he might have caught her in his mouth: and do you think I saw not a Rat? I
am sure there was a Rat, for my mind gave me so. And further, I had like to
caught her. All this company can tell what a course I had at her, if you will
not believe me.


Anto. Go to, go to. You are a fool. Put them up and let us away.


Pur. I were a fool indeed, and a beast too, if I would put them up.


Anto. I bid you put them up like a fool as you are.


Pur. I cannot put them up like a fool, nor I will not.


Anto Thou shall put them up, or serve me no longer.


Pur. With all my heart master, I Will turn you off at this instant. Here is
witness enough I have giuen^ you lawful warning.

Exit.
Anto. Gather up this meat Simplo, thou and I will fare the better. It Is but
sending this knaves horse down by the Carrier. Or else I Will drive him with his
load, he shall be the sumpter horse.


Simplo gathers them up, and puts them in the napkin* and pinnes them up, puts
them into the cloak bag. Exeunt Antonio and Simplo. ACT. 7.
SCEN. 2.
Parv. How like thou this sport Insatiato? has it diver^ed thy thoughts a
little?


Insa. It was some recreation I must needs say: but my fit is coming on
apace. Intrat Levitia. And loo^^ where she comes. Now I tremble with fear of a
deadly doom; but I must speak howsoever I speed. Welcome sweet Mistress.
Now kill, or keep me alive with your answer.


Lev. Your questions ^ir (if I forget not) were, what was my name, and what
order I purpose to enter. My name is Levitia. And my desire is to be a Nun of
my mothers order. But if my virginity were not of full age; and Maidenhead a
dangerous burden, I would be a Nun of a straighter order.


Insa. Your mothers order? what order is that? I never heard of a Nun have a
child, no husband, and yet continue in Cloister, and a Nun before she had a
child.


Lev. My mother vowed chastity, and after that had a child by her husband.


Insa. Why Leu^tia? this is a riddle, and a wonder to me; yet this English I
pick out of it, that you may have a husband as your mother had. And then if it
please you, I may be your ghostly father after the fashion of this c^untry:
but how, or why your mother or you should vow chastity, I see not, no^ would I
be married to such a Nun.


Pur. Alas Insatiato, I perceive thou art simple in this business, or else not
yet come to thy self again. Levitia speaks well, but thy capacity is very
muddie. Would thou not have thy wife vow chastity, but be an harlot? there
is chastity and continency among married folk, so long as they be faithful
each to other. But virginity goes further: and that is sequestered continency
during life, not admitting company for procreation.


Insa. I understand it now (thanks to thee Parvagraci^) but this creature would
have delayed me longer, and dulled my wits without mercy.


Enter Pestifero, and whispers Insatiato, to whom in anger he answers, either
let them stay, or tear the writings, I cannot yet come. Exit Pestif. But I
thank her yet for the kind order she has made to be of her mothers order. I
hope (sweet Mistress Levitia) you will hear no motion to overthrow this order
again. And now tell me, what say you to my vow, which in all equ^tie must be
performed. You see I was content (though much against my mind) that you should
have kept your vow of virginity, (if so had stood your resolution) now I
appeal to your own court for Justice, and hope you will give as good way to
the fulfilling of my vow, which is never to leave your service and company.

Lev. I heard you talk at Randon of such a thing. Many such (I doubt not) you
have made, and quickly brok^n; and this of the same mettle, and so will prove
as bri^le. Courtlers vows of this nature are but words, a little more stiffly
blown out of their mouths, then the rest of their speech, but come no nearer
their hearts. The gunner puts a little more powder in the gun to make it carry
the shot further, but hits the mark no whit the righter: So they drive their
vows with a little stronger breath, but their intention i^ not the streighter.


Insa. Indeed I confess that I have sometimes done as you say: but now my
heart is right, and my meaning direct.


Lev. How shall that appear to me?


Par. I dare vandertake (Lady Levitia) he means justly by you: for I have
seen him in a dangerous passion when you left our company, which if you had
heard, standing in some secret place, you could not but have compassion on him.
or else you were very d^sdain^ull and cruel. Besides I know it is a great
matter that would stay him so long as he has talked with you from dispatching
a business of great importance, as you may partly perceive by the messenger
coming so often in the mean time to have him away.


Lev. Sir, a s^conder of a tale makes many times an incredible thing believed.
And for your testimony, I give him credit the better, and perhaps I was within
^^ght and hearing too, when this gentleman was so loue-sicke as you speak of,
which made me in very pity come the sooner in to relieve him. And I would not
have you think Parvagracio that I am disdainefull, for that wins nothing but
hatred: nor am I cruel, for that is ever paid home with extreme misery. Now
yet am I proud (which vice you touched not) for that is derided of all wise
people, but my fear and doubt was always to be deceived.


Insa. Here is my hand I will never deceive you.


Lev. Here is my hand I will never leave you. But what a fool was I? I should
have agreed for maintenance and joincture before I had been handfast.


Insa. That Is no matter, I Will perform as well as if I were bound hand and
foot. I will allow you 10l a year for pinnes, 5l for shoes, 15l for
stockings, garters, bodies, and g^rdles, 50l for gowns, peticoates and such
like: 20l for all sorts of linen and new fashions, this is 100l a year, and
is as much as my living will afford. And for performance of this any friend of
yours shall have a statute upon all the land I have. And for your joincture, I
will give good assurance, that the longer ^iuer of us two shall possess all I
have, If I die not worth a groate.


Lev. I like all well but my allowance for pins: it is not enough: for it is a
base fashion now-a-daies to use cufhnets and save pinnes. The very warmth of
our bodies, will change their color in three hours, and they will be crooked
with pulling off, fie upon them: but I Will be a good huswife otherwise* and get
as much by other means as shall piece out this pension to make it serve.
Sir, I have skill in Physic, I can cure the (...) in any man. And if he
be never so lean, and rawbon'd, I can so diet him in half a year, that he
will be fed until he grow purse-sicke. And for thee (sweet heart) be of good
cheer, for thou shall never die (without a great chance) as long as I live.
For I can play a trick, that if thou be never so cold, or frozen almost to
death, I can make thee lukewarm in half an hour.


Insa. (Imbraceth and kisseth her) Ha may lively Levitia, we cannot choose but
thrive if thou have these trades. But is thy portion in sure hands?


Lev. Fear nothing of that, you shall have me and my portion at an instant,
all together ready bagg'd.


Insa. Best of all, then it requires no telling Here is a token for thee my
chicken.


Lev. What? knives? O, I will not take them in any wi^e, they will cut love.


Insa. No, no: if they cut any thing, they will cut away unkindness.


Lev. Pardon me (good Sir) you shall not give them me. If needs you will that
I wear them, do you lose, and I will find them.


Insa. That Is a toy of all toys. That were fitter for a stag^ then a wedding.


Lev, Indeed you shall not deny me this first request, I pray you lose them.


Insa. Well, it is no news to be made a fool by a woman. I Will do it, if it were
worse.


Then he walks about and dropp^s them d^^ne, and she comes after and takes
them up. saying. Lev. This is as it should be: now I have deceived desti^ie.


Par. This is Superstich my shoes, now he has fooled a fopperie. And you have
found a foolerie.


L^v. You mock this Parvagracio. I warrant you do^ not think it evil luck
if the salt fall toward you.


Par. But I do if no body overthrowe it.


L^. What if a Hare cross your way? is that nothing neither?


Par. That Is ^uill luck indeed if I have no dogs to course her.


Insa. Parvagracio. I prithee lead Levitia to my lodging. I must crave pardon
to go about a special business which concerns all my worth: but we will
dispatch quickly and follow. And meet me the next way Parvagracio we must have
your help. I Will go before.


Lev. In any case look to the maine chance, for now you have a clogge. It is
the first gift every wife gives her husband.


Exeunt Parv. and Levit^a. Insa. Now boy. we must about these bonds sealing to
put us in suits for this wedding We shall sure thrive now. Two such bargains
gone through in one day. A stranger for a wife* and rags for our wealth. We
cannot want after the^e matches. I could have found in my heart to asked her
some money and mist this ragg'd money. But what if she ^aue none? she says I
shall have her and all ready bagg'd. Perhaps she means that herself is ready
bagg'd to my hand I cannot tell* there be such tricks in the world. I doubt I
am utterly undone with this foolish match.


Inf^. Why sir, if you be let it not trouble you, I hope you shall have better
luck in greater matters, and yet if she have a good portion you are happy, if
she have none, yet you may be even with her if it please you al^hough she prou^
^ roaring girl.


Insa. Can thou tell which way to be even with her?


Inf^. Mary to have as little as she. And if I were (...) you I would serve her
so, teach her to come ^mptie handed to a man of your spending.


Inf^. Well: we must make the most of her that I can now ^ have her: and take
no care for any thing* that^ the way to live long and leave nothing.


ACT. 7.
SCEN. 3.
Intrat Simplo. Gentlemen (you two I mean M. (...) and Sir (...)) my master
entreats you both to come to his chamber for a short space, he will go twice so
fair for you any other time.

Exeunt Insa. and Infael. S^cu. Thank your master, we have dined already, and
can eat nothing: another time we will see him if we have ^o business.


Sim. O you mistake it Sir neither now, nor any other time for eating: there is
no meat: my Master does not vie to quilt his friends stomack^ with too much
meat. No, he would speak with you about a note he has caused to be drawn
he will (...) you to p^rvse it, and do him a favor it is in the nature of a
certificate.


Se^u. Truly he shall have no hand of m^ne to any wri^ing nor to any purpose,
nor for my credit sake will I come ^n his company. I do ^^agine what it is.
He knows that ^e hear so much evil of him that he d^ubts we will speak ^s
we find. And therefore he would have us give comme^^ations of him to some
friend of our^ in some small request which he never means to sue for. But this
our good repor^ he will keep by him par^ly to stop our mouths (hoping we will
not speak contrary to our testimony in writing, and pa^tly for his credi^ to
be showed upon every o^cas^on against all that have cause to speak evil of
him. Let him content himself we ref^se to come near him.


Her. Honest friend: I marv^ll with what conscience (...) ^^rue one that is
(...).


Sim. Mary Sir with as wide and large a conscience as any man has, and as
thoroughly tentered. My master and I are no niggards of our conscience. Besides
I am bound by my 100l to serve him.


Her. Thou were as good lose thy 100l at first, as at la^t for he will in the
end deceive thee of it.


Sim. If he do then I hope he will teach me cunning worth 100l to deceive
others. and so I may double my 100l. For I do not think but he has gotten
many 100l with art. And I Will never leave him tell I get all his tricks and now
he has made me free he will use me as his fellow.


Her. By that means thou will accompany him to ^ell.


Sim. Down the lane to the Devil. Nay an we go to no worse place ^hen Hell
I care not: for I do not think but my maste^ has craft enough for any Devil
on um all.


Her. But there he shall meet with his crafts master.


Sim. What? master my master in craft? that were somewhat strange, yet I Will
believe any thing but that. Well I shall tell him you will not come. And what is
the reason you will not come? I have almost forgotten.


Her. Mary because at our baptism we vowed to r^nounce the infernal Spirit.
And now upon our own experience and judgment we abandon al^ incarnate Devils.


Sim Abandon? what is that? if I can observe that word right* I shall ca^y the
rest well. I know what you mean by a carnation ^ivell.

Exit.
Her. What do you judge of these passages M. Securu^?


^ecu. Su^ely Sir* it is hard upon the sudden to deliver ^ ^rue sentence upon
so many contrarieties as this day we have heard. But b^eefly I think they
o^ght all to (...) duced unto two maine heads of Good and Bad. and of the worst
to choose the least: and of the be^te^ take the most.


Her. In part I dissent from y^u but in part I ag^ee. If we be constrained to
choose among things which are (...) best to permit the least: but if a man have
freedom (...) best choice is to refuse evil be it never so little. Among ^he
several discourses this day acted. I note many vices va^l^d over with froth,
and flourish of words, but the same again vnma^ked with substantial matter,
and laid naked to di^grace. So it (...) they are not propounded to imitate, but
(...) forth to be sha^ed. They are pa^nted in colour^ but in a map of (...)
some (...), but such as run to ruin. They are brought forth to be rewed; but
to manifest their ugliness. They come not here ^o be liked, but lothed; not to
be fau^red, but derided. Not ^llowed in private, but in public to be
condemned. S^ I ^ope that all wise hearers will a^oid the sins and abuse^
^ere touched (which are many) and follow good counsel ^f they heard any. Which
that they may do my part is to ^ray to the g^uer of wisdom. And so Sir,
wishing much pro peritie to your charitable endeavors, I take leave* and the
^ext way to my poor quiet Cell.


Exit and Securus sequiturwit* Intrat Proberio. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Exit EPILOGVS.
NOw that your pa^^ence has permitted us to bring unto (...) end this present
Dialogue, we stand in good hope of (...) c^^menci^, that no more offense will
be taken at any word (...) passed then we had meaning to gi^e, which we
protest (...) at all. For it were against reason and our own ends (...) drive
hence that company, which we w^sh rather ^oubled, then out of it one to be
spared. I^ rests that we render you very (...) and h^r^ie thanks. And that
all ^^r hearts pray for the King and his families enduring happiness, (...)

FINIS.

