THE CONSPIRACY, And TRAGEDY OF CHARLES Duke of BYRON, Marshall of France.

Acted lately in two plays, at the Blackfriars.

Written by GEORGE CHAPMAN.

Printed by G. Eld for Thomas Thorppe, and are to be sold at the Tigers head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1608.

To my Honorable and Constant friend, Sir Tho: Walsingham, Knight: and to my
much loved from his birth, the right toward and worthy Gentleman his son
Thomas Walsingham, Esquire.
SIR, though I know, you ever stood little affected to these unprofitable rites
of Dedication; (which disposition in you, has made me hitherto dispense with
your right in my other impressions) yet, least the world may repute it a
neglect in me, of so ancient and worthy a friend; (having heard your
approbation of these in their presentment) I could not but prescribe them with
your name; And that my affection may extend to your Posterity, I have entitled
to it, herein, your hope and comfort in your generous son; whom I doubt not,
that most reuerenc'd Mother of Manly Sciences; to whose instruction your
virtuous care commits him; will so profitably initiate in her learned labors,
that they will make him flourish in his riper life, over the idle lives of our
ignorant Gentlemen; and enable him to supply the Honorable places, of your
name; extending your years, and his right noble Mothers (in the true comforts
of his virtues) to the sight of much, and most happy Progeny; which most
affectionately wishing; and dividing these poor dismemberd Poems betwixt you,
I desire to live still in your graceful loves; and ever,

The most assured at your commandments GEORGE CHAPMAN.

Prologus.
WHen the uncivil, civil wars of France,
Had poured upon the countries beaten breast,
Her batterd Cities; pressed her under hills
Of slaughterd carcases; set her in the mouths
Of murtherous breaches, and made pale Despair,
Leave her to Ruin; through them all, Byron
Stepped to her rescue; took her by the hand:
Plucked her from under her unnatural press,
And set her shining in the height of peace.
And now new clens'd, from dust, from sweat, and blood,
And dignified with title of a Duke;
As when in wealthy Autumn, his bright star
(Washed in the lofty Ocean) thence arises;
Illustrates heaven, and all his other fires
Out-shines and darkens; so admird Byron,
All France, exempted from comparison.
He touched heaven with his lance; nor yet was touched
With hellish treachery: his countries love,
He yet thirsts: not the fair shades of himself:
Of which empoisoned Spring; when policy drinks,
He bursts in growing great; and rising, sinckes:
Which now behold in our Conspirator,
And see in his revolt, how honors stood
Ebbes into air, when men are Great, not Good.
BYRONS CONSPIRACY.
ACTVS I. SCAENA I.
Sauoy, Ronca^, Rochette, Breton. Sau. I Would not for half Sauoy, but have
bound
France to some favor, by my personal presence
More than your self, (my Lord Ambassador)
Could have obtaind; for all Ambassadors
(You know) have chiefly these instructions;
To note the State and chief sway of the Court,
To which they are employde; to penetrate
The heart, and marrow of the Kings designs,
And to observe the countenances and spirits,
Of such as are impatient of rest;
And wring beneath, some private discontent:
But, past all these, there are a number more
Of these State Critiscismes: That our personal view
May profitably make, which cannot fall
Within the powers of our instruction,
To make you comprehend; I will do more
With my mere shadow, than you with your persons.
All you can say against my coming here,
Is that, which I confess, may for the time,
Breed strange affections in my brother Spain;
But when I shall have time to make my Cannans,
The long-tong'd Heralds of my hidden drifts,
Our reconcilement will be made with triumphs.

Ro^. If not, your Highness has small cause to care,
Having such worthy reason to complain
Of Spaines cold friendship, and his lingering succors,
Who only entertaines your griefs with hope,
To make your medcine desperate.

Roch. My Lord knows
The Spanish gloss too well; his form* stuffe'lasting,
And the most dangerous conditions,
He lays on them with whom he is in league.
Th'iniustice in the most unequal dowre,
Given with the Infanta whom my Lord espousde,
Compared with that her elder sister had,
May tell him how much Spaines love weighs to him;
When of so many Globes and Scepters held
By the great King, he only would bestow
A portion but of six score thousand Crowns
In yearly pension, with his highness wife,
When the Infanta wedded by the Archduke
Had the Franch County, and low Provinces.

Bret. We should not set these passages of Spleen
Twixt Spain and Sauoy; to the weaker part,
More good by suff^ance grows, than deeds of heart,
The nearer Princes are, the further off
In rites of friendship; my advice had never
Consented to this voyage of my Lord,
In which he does endaunger Spaines whole loss,
For hope of some poor fragment here in France.

Sau. My hope in France you know not, though my counsel,
And for my loss of Spain, it is agreede,
That I should slight it, oft-times Princes rules
Are like the Chymicall Philosophers;
Leave me then to mine own proiection,
In this our thriftie Alchymie of state,
Yet help me thus far, you that have been here
Our Lord Ambassador; and, in short inform me,
What Spirits here are fit for our designs.

Ron. The new-created Duke Byron is fit,
Were there no other reason for your presence,
To make it worthy; for he is a man
Of matchless valor, and was ever happy
In all encounters, which were still made good,
With an vnwearyed sense of any toil,
Having continewd fourteen days together
Upon his horse; his blood is not voluptuous,
Nor much inclinde to women; his desires
Are higher than his sta^e* and his deserts
Not much short of the most he can desire,
If they be weigh^d with what France feels by them:
He is past measure glorious: And that humor
Is fit to feed his Spirits, whom it possesses
With faith in any error; chiefly where
Men blow it up, with praise of his perfections,
The taste whereof in him so soothes his palate,
And takes up all his appetite, that often times
He will refuse his meat, and company
To feast alone with their most strong conceit;
Ambition also, cheek by cheek does march
With that excess of glory, both su^taind
With an unlimited fancy, That the King,
Nor Fr^unce it self, without him can subsist.

Sau. He is the man (my Lord) I come to win;
And that supreme intention of my presence
Saw never light till now, which yet I fear,
The politic king, suspecting, is the cause
That he has sent him so far from my reach,
And made him chief in the Commission,
Of his embassage to my brother Archduke,
With whom he is now; and (as I am told)
So entertaind and fitted in his humor,
That ere I part, I hope he will return
Prepared, and made the more fit for the physic
That I intend to minister.

Ron. My Lord,
There is another discontented Spirit
Now here in Court, that for his brain, and aptnes
To any course that may recover him
In his declined and litigious state,
Will serve Byro^, as he were made for him,
In giving vent to his ambitious vain,
And that is, De Laffin.

Sau. You tell me true,
And him I think you have prepared for me.

Ron. I have my Lord, and doubt not he will p^ooue,
Of the yet taintlesse fortress of Byron,
A quick Expugner, and a strong Abider.

Sau. Perhaps the battry will be brought before him,
In this embassage, for I am assured
They set high price of him, and are informde
Of all the passages, and means for mines
That may be thought on, to his taking in:
Enter Henry and Laffin. The King comes, and Laffin: the Kings aspect
Folded in clouds.

Hen. I will not have my train,
Made a retreite for Bankroutes, nor my Court,
A hyue for Droanes: proud Beggars, and true Thieues,
That with a forced truth they swear to me,
Rob my poor subjects, shall give up their Arts,
And henceforth learn to live by their deserts;
Though I am grown, by right of Birth and Arms
Into a greater kingdom, I will spread
With no more shade, then may admit that kingdom
Her proper, natural, and woonted fruits,
Navarre shall be Navarre, and France still France:
If one may be the better for the other
By mutual rites, so, neither shall be worse.
Thou art in law, in quarrels, and in debt,
Which thou would quit with countnaunce; Borrowing
With thee is purchase, and thou seekst by me
(In my supportance) now our old wars cease
To wage worse battles, with the arms of Peace.

Laf. Peace must not make men Cowherds, nor keep calm
Her pursie regiment with men's smootherd breaths;
I must confess my fortunes are declinde,
But neither my deseruings, nor my mind:
I seek but to sustain the right I found,
When I was rich, in keeping what is left,
And making good my honor as at best,
Though it be hard; man's right to every thing
Wanes with his wealth, wealth is his surest King;
Yet Justice should be still indifferent.
The overplus of Kings, in all their might,
Is but to piece out the defects of right:
And this I sue for, nor shall frowns and taunts
(The common Scarre-crowes of all poor men's suites)
Nor mis-construction that does color still
Licentiate Justice, punishing good for ill,
Keep my free throat from knocking at the Sky,
If thunder chid me for my equity.

Hen. Thy equity, is to be ever banished
From Court, and all society of noblesse,
Amongst whom thou throwst balls of all dissension;
Thou art at peace with nothing but with war,
Have no heart but to hurt, and ea^st thy heart,
If it but think of doing any good:
Thou witchest with thy smiles, suckst blood with praises,
Mock'st al humanity; society poisonst;
Coosinst with virtue; with religion
Betrayst, and massacrest; so vile thy self,
That thou suspectst perfection in others:
A man must think of all the villainies
He knows in all men, to descipher thee,
That art the center to impiety:
Away, and tempt me not.

Laf. But you tempt me,
To what, thou Sun be judge, and make him see. Exit.

Sau. Now by my dearest Marquisate of Salusses,
Your Majesty has with the greatest life
Described a wicked man; or rather thrust
Your arm down through him to his very feet,
And plucked his inside out, that ever yet,
Mine ears did witness; or turned ears to Eyes;
And those strange Characters, writ in his face,
which' at first sight, were hard for me to read,
The Doctrine of your speech, has made so plain,
That I run through them like my natural language:
Nor do I like that man's Aspect, me thinks,
Of all looks where the Beams of Stars have carved
Their powrefull influences; And (O rare)
What an heroicke, more than royal Spirit
Bewraide you in your first speech, that defies
Protection of vile droanes, that eat the honny
Swette from laborious virtue, and denies
To give those of Navarre, though bred with you,
The benefits and dignities of France.
When little Rivers by their greedy currants,
(Far far extended from their mother springs)
Drink up the foreign brooks still as they run,
And force their greatness, when they come to Sea,
And iustle with the Ocean for a room,
O how he roares, and takes them in his mouth,
Digesting them so to his proper streams,
That they are no more seen, he nothing raisde
Above his usual bounds, yet they devoured,
That of themselves were pleasant, goodly floods.

Hen. I would do best for both, yet shall not be secure,
Till in some absolute heirs my Crown be settled,
There is so little now betwixt Aspirers
And their great object in my only self,
That all the strength they gather under me,
Tempts combat with mine own: I therefore make
Means for some issue by my marriage,
Which with the great Dukes niece is now concluded,
And she is coming; I have trust in heaven
I am not yet so old, but I may spring,
And then I hope all traitrous hopes will fade.

Sau. Else may their whole estates fly, rooted up
To Ignominy and Oblivion:
And (being your neighbor servant, and poor kinsman)
I wish your mighty Race might multiply,
Even to the Period of all Emperie.

Hen. Thanks to my princely coozen, this your love
And honor ^hewne me in your personal presence,
I wish to welcome to your full content:
The peace I now make with your brother Archduke,
By Duke Byron our Lord Ambassador,
I wish may happily extend to you,
And that at his return we may conclude it.

Sau. It shall be to my heart the happiest day
Of all my life, and that life all employed,
To celebrate the honor of that day. Exeunt.

Enter Roiseau. Rois. The wondrous honor done our Duke Byron
In his Embassage here, in th'Archdukes Court,
I fear will taint his loyalty to our King.
I will observe how they observe his humor,
And glorify his valor; and how he
Accepts and stands attractiue to their ends,
That so I may not seem an idle spot
In train of this embassage but return
Able to give our King some note of all,
Worth my attendance; And see, here is the man,
Who (though a French man, and in Orleance borne
Serving the Archduke) I do most suspect,
Is set to be the tempter of our Duke;
I Will go where I may see, all though not hear.

Enter Picote, with two other spreading a Carpet. Pic. Spread here this
history of Cateline,
That Earth may seem to bring forth Roman Spirits;
Even to his Geniall feet; and her da^ke breast
Be made the clear Glass of his shining Graces,
We Will make his feet so tender, they shall gall
In all paths but to Empire; and therein
I Will make the sweet Steps of his State begin. Exit.

Loud Music, and enter Byron. Byr. What place is this? what air? what
rhegion?
In which a man may hear the harmony
Of all things moving? Hymen marries here,
Their ends and uses and makes me his Temple.
Has any man been blessed, and yet lived?
The blood turns in my veins, I stand on change,
And shall dissolve in changing; it is so full
Of pleasure not to be containde in flesh:
To fear a violent Good, abuses Goodness,
It Is Immortallitie to die aspiring,
As if a man were taken quick to heaven;
What will not hold Perfection, let it burst;
What force has any Cannan, not being chargde,
Or being not dischargde? To have stuff and form,
And to lie idle, fearful, and vnus'd,
Nor form, nor stuff shows; happy Semel^
That died comprest with Glory: Happiness
Denies comparison, of less, or more,
And not at most, is nothing: like the shaft
Shot at the Sun, by angry Hercules,
And into shiuers by the thunder broken
Will I be if I burst: And in my heart
This shall be written: yet it was high and right.
Music again. Here too? they follow all my steps wi^h Music,
As if my feet were numerous, and trod sounds
Out of the Center, with Apolloes virtue,
That out of every thing his ech-part touched,
Struck musical accents: wheresoever I go,
They hide the earth from me with couerings rich,
To make me think that I am here in heaven.

Enter Picote in haste. Pic. Th^s way, your Highness.

Byr. Come they?

Pic. I my Lord. Exeunt.

Enter the other Commissioners of ^raunce, Belieure, Brulart, Aumall, Orange.
Bell. My Lord d' Aumall, I am exceeding sorry,
That your own obstinacy to hold out,
Your mortal enmity against the King,
When Duke du Maine, and all the faction yielded,
Should force his wrath to use the rites of treason,
Upon the members of your senseless Statue,
Your Name and House, when he had lost your person,
Your love and duty.

Bru. That which men enforce
By their own wilfulness; they must endure
With willing patience, and without complaint.

D'Aum. I use not much impatience nor complaint.
Though it offends me much, to have my name
So blotted with addition of a Traitor.
And my whole memory, (with such despite,
Marked and begun to be so rooted out.)

Bru. It was despite that held you out so long,
Whose penance in the King was needful justice.

Bell Come let us seek our Duke, and take our leaves
Of th'Archdukes grace. Exeunt.

Enter Byron and Pycote. Byr. Here may we safely breathe?

Py. No doubt (my Lord) no stranger knows this way*
One^y the Archduke, and your friend Count Mansfield,
Perhaps may make their general scapes to you,
To utter some part of their private loves,
E^e your departure.

Byr. Then, I well perceive
To what th'intention of his highness tends;
For whose, and others here, most worthy Lords,
I will become (with all my worth) their servant,
In any office, but disloyalty;
Bu^ that has ever showd so foul a monster
To all my Ancestors, and my former life,
That now to entertain it; I must wholly
Give up my habit, in his contrary,
And strive to grow out of privation.

Py. My Lord, to wear your loyal habit still,
When it is out of fashion; and has done
Service enough; were rusticke misery:
The habit of a servile loyalty,
Is reck^nd now amongst priuations,
With blindness, dumbness, deafness, scilence, death,
All which are neither natures by themselves
Nor substances, but mere decays of form,
And absolute decessions of nature,
And so, it is nothing, what shall you then loose?
Your highness has a habit in perfection,
And in desert of highest dignities,
Which carue your self, and be your own rewarder*
No true power does admit privation,
Adverse to him; or suffers any fellow
Ioynde in his subject; you, superiors;
It is the nature of things absolute.
One to destroy another; be your Highness,
Like those steep hills that will admit no clouds,
No deawe^, nor lest fumes bound about their brows;
Because their tops pierce into purest air,
Expert of humor; or like air it self
That quickly changes; and receives the sun
Soon as he rises; every where dispersing
His royal splendour; guirds it in his beams,
And makes it self the body of the light;
Hot, shining, swift, light, and aspiring things,
Are of immortal, and celestial nature;
Cold, dark, dull, heavy of infernal fortunes,
And never aim at any happiness:
Your excellency knows; that simple loyalty,
Faith, love, sincerity, are but words, no things;
Merely deuisde for form; and as the Legate,
Sent from his Holiness, to frame a peace
Twixt Spain and Sauoy; labored ^eruently,
(For common ends, not for the Dukes particular)
To have him sign it; he again endeavors
(Not for the Legates pains, but his own pleasure)
To gratify him; and being at last encountered;
Where the flood Tesyn enters into Po,
They made a kind contention, which of them
Should enter the others boat; one thrust the other:
One leg was over, and another in:
And with a fiery courtesy, at last
Sauoy leapes out, into the Legates arms,
And here ends all his love, and the others labor;
So shall these terms, and impositions
Expressed before, hold nothing in themselves
Really good; but florishes of form:
And further then they make to private ends
None wise, or free, their propper use intends.

Byr. O it is a dangerous, and a dreadful thing
To steal prey from a Lion; or to hide
A head distrustful, in his opened jaws;
To trust our blood in others veins; and hang
Twixt heaven and earth, in vapors of their breaths:
To leave a sure pace on continuate earth,
And force a gate in iumps, from tower to tower,
As they do that aspire, from height to height;
The bounds of loyalty are made of glass,
Soon broke, but can in no date be repaird;
And as the Duke D'Aumall, (now here in Court)
Flying his country; had his Statue tome
Peece-meale with horses; all his goods confiscate,
His Arms of honor, kicked about the streets,
His goodly house at Annet rac'd to the earth.
And (for a strange reproach of his foul treason)
His trees about it, cut off by their wastes;
So, when men fly the natural clime of truth,
And turn themselves loose, out of all the bounds
Of Justice, and the straightway to their ends;
Forsaking all the sure force in themselves
To seek, without them, that which is not theirs,
The forms of all their comforts are distracted;
The riches of their freedoms forfaited;
Their human noblesse shamd; the Mansions
Of their cold spirits, eaten down with Cares;
And all their ornaments, of wit, and valor,
Learning, and judgment, cut from all their fruits.

Alb. O, here were now the richest prize in Europe,
Were he but taken in affection,
Would we might grow together, and be twins
Of eithers fortune; or that, still embraced
I were, but Ring to such a precious stone:

Byr. Your highness honors, and high bounty shown me,
Have won from me, my voluntary power;
And I must now move by your eminent will;
To what particular objects; if I know
By this man's intercession, he shall bring:
My uttermost answer, and perform betwixt us,
Reciprocal and full intelligence.

Alber. Even for your own deserved royal good,
It Is joyfully accepted, use the loves
And worthy admirations of your friends,
That beget vows of all things you can wish,
And be what I wish: danger says, no more. Exit.

Enter Mansfield at another door. Exit Picote. Man's. Your highness makes the
light of this Court stoop,
With your so near departure, I was forced
To tender to your excellence, in brief,
This private wish in taking of my leave;
That in some army Royal, old Cont Mansfield,
Might be commanded by your matchles valor,
To the supreamest point of v^ctorie:
Who vows for that renown all prayer, and service:
No more least I may wrong you. Exit Mans^.

Byr. Thank your Lordship.

Enter D'Aumall and Oreng. D'Au. All majesty be added to your highness,
Of which, I would not wish your breast to bear
More modest apprehension: then may tread,
The high gate of your spirit; and be known
To be a fit Bound for your Boundless valor;

Or. So Oreng wishes, and to the deserts
Of your great actions, their most royal Crown.

Enter Picote. Pic. Away my Lord, the Lords enquire for you. Exit Bir.

Manet Oreng, D'Aum. Roisean. Ore. Would we might win his valor to our part.

D'Au. It Is well prepared in his entreaty here;
With all states highest observations:
And to their form, and words are added gifts,
He was presented with two goodly horses,
One of which two, was the brave Beast Pastrana:
With plate of gold, and a much prized jewel;
Girdle and hangers, set with welthy stones:
All which were vallewed, at ten thousand crowns;
The other Lords had suites of tapistry,
And chains of gold, and every gentleman
A pair of Spanish Gloves, and Rapire blades:
And here ends their entreaty; which I hope
Is the beginning of more good to us,
Then twenty thousand times their gifts to them.

Enter Alber: Byr: Beli. Man's: Roiseau: with others. Alber. My Lord, I grieve
that all the setting forth,
Of our best welcome, made you more retired:
Your chamber has been more loved then our honors;
And therefore we are glad your time of parting
Is come to set you in the air you love:
Commend my service to his Majesty,
And tell him that this day of peace with him
I Will hold, as holy. All your pains my Lords
I shall be always glad to gratefie
With any love and honor, your own hearts
Shall do me grace to wish expressed to you.

Ruis. Here has been strange demeaneure, which shall fly,
To the great author of this Ambassy.

FINIS Actus 1.
ACT. 2. SCE. 1.
Sauoy, Laffin, Roneas, Rochette, Breton. Sauoy. Admit no entry, I will speak
with none,
Good signior de Laffin, your worth shall find,
That I will make a jewel for my cabinet,
Of that the King (in surfeit of his store)
Has cast out, as the sweepings of his hall;
I told him, having threatened you away,
That I did wonder, this small time of peace,
Could make him cast his armor so securely
In such as you, and as twere set the head
Of one so great in counsels, on his foot,
And pitch him from him with such guardlike strength.

Laffi. He may perhaps find he has pitched away,
The Axeltree that kept him on his wheels.

Sau. I told him so, I swear, in other terms
And not with too much note of our close loves
Least so he might have smokt our practices.

Laffi. To choose his time, and spit his poison on me,
Through the ears, and eyes of strangers.

Sau. So I told him
And more then that, which now I will not tell you:
It rests now then, Noble, and worthy friend,
That to our friendship, we draw Duke Byron,
To whose attraction there is no such chain,
As you can fordge, and shake out of your brain.

Laffi. I have deuisde the fashion and the weight;
To valures hard to draw, we use retreates;
And, to pull shaftes home, (with a good bow-arme)
We thrust hard from us: since he came from Flanders
He heard how I was threatened with the King,
And has been much inquisitiue to know
The truth of all, and seeks to speak with me;
The means he used, I answered doubtfully;
And with an intimation that I shund him,
Which will (I know) put more spur to his charge;
And if his haughty stomach be preparde*
With will to any act: for the aspiring
Of his ambitious aims, I make no doubt
But I shall work him to your highness wish.

Sau. But undertake it, and I rest assured:
You are reported to have skill in Magic,
And the events of things, at which they reach
That are in nature apt to ouerreach:
Whom the whole circkle of the present time,
In present pleasures, fortunes, knowledges,
Can not contain: those men (as broken loose
From human limmits) in all violent ends
Would feign aspire the faculties of fiends,
And in such air breathe his unbounded spirits,
Which therefore well will fit such coniurations,
Attempt him then by flying; close with him,
And bring him home to us, and take my dukedom.

Laf. My best in that, and all things, vows your service.

Sau. Thanks to my dear friend; and the French Ulysses.

Exit Sauoy, Enter Byron. Byr. Here is the man; my honored friend, Laffin?
Alone, and heavy countinanc't? on what terms
Stood the insultation of the King upon you?

Laffi. Why do you ask?

Byr. Since I would know the truth.

Laf. And when you know it; what?

Byr. I Will judge betwixt you,
And (as I may) make even the excess of either.

Laf. Ah las my Lord, not all your loyalty,
Which is in you, more then hereditary,
Nor all your valor (which is more then humane)
Can do the service you may hope on me
In sounding my displeasde integrity;
Stand for the King, as much in policy
As you have stird for him in deeds of arms,
And make your self his glory, and your countries
Till you be sucked as dry, and wrought as leave,
As my stead carcass: you shall never close
With me, as you imagine.

Byr. You much wrong me,
To think me an intelligencing Lord.

Laff. I know not now your so affected zeal,
To be reputed a true hearted subject,
May stretch or turn you; I am desperate;
If I offend you, I am in your power:
I care not how I tempt your conquering fury,
I am predestined to too base an end,
To have the honor of your wrath destroy me;
And be a worthy object for your sword:
I lay my hand, and head too at your feet,
As I have ever, here I hold it still,
End me directly, do not go about.

Byr. How strange is this? the shame of his disgrace
Has made him lunatique.

Laff Since the King has wronged me
He thinks I Will hurt my self; no, no, my Lord:
I know that all the Kings in Christendom,
(If they should join in my revenge) would prove
Weak foes to him: still having you to friend:
If you were gone (I care not if you tell him)
I might be tempted then to right my self. Exit.

Byr. He has a will to me, and dares not show it,
His state decai'd, and he disgraced; distracts him.

Redit Laffin. Laff Change not my words my Lord, I only said
I might be tempted then to right my self:
Temptation to treason, is no treason;
And that word (tempted) was conditional too,
If you were gone, I pray inform the truth. Exitur.

Byr. Stay injured man, and know I am your friend,
Far from these base, and mercenarie reaches,
I am I swear to you.

Laff. You may be so;
And yet you will give me leave to be Laffin,
A poor and expuate humor of the Court:
But what good blood came out with me; what veins
And sinews of the Triumphs, now it makes;
I list not vante; yet will I now confess,
And dare assume it; I have power to add
To all his greatness; and make yet more fixed
His bold security; Tell him this my Lord;
And this (if all the spirits of earth and air,
Be able to enforce) I can make good:
If knowledge of the sure events of things,
Even from the rise of subjects into Kings:
And falls of Kings to subjects hold a power
Of strength to work it; I can make it good;
And tell him this to; if in midest of winter
To make black Groves grow green; to still the thunder;
And cast out able flashes from mine eyes,
To beat the lightning back into the skies,
Prove power to do it, I can make it good;
And tell him this too; if to lift the Sea
Up to the Stars, when all the Wind are still;
And keep it calm, when they are most enraged:
To make earths driest pallms, sweat humorous springs
To make fixed rocks walk; and loose shadows stand,
To make the dead speak. midnight see the Sun,
Mid-daie turn midnight; to dissolve all laws
Of nature, and of order, argue power
Able to work all, I can make all good,
And all this tell the King.

Byr. It Is more then strange,
To see you stand thus at the rapiers point
With one so kind and sure a friend as I.

Laff. Who cannot friend himself, is foe to any,
And to be feared of all, and that is it,
Makes me so skornd, but make me what you can;
Never so wicked, and so full of feends,
I never yet, was traitor to my friends:
The laws of friendship I have ever held,
As my religion; and for other laws;
He is a fool that keeps them with more care,
Then they keep him, safe, rich, and populare:
For riches, and for populare respects
Take them amongst ye Minions, but for safety,
You shall not find the least flaw in mine arms,
To pierce or taint me; what will great men be,
To please the King, and bear authority. Exit.

Byr. How fic a tort were this to hansell fortune?
And I will win it though I loose my self,
Though he prove harder then Egiptian Marble,
I Will make him malliable, as the Ophyr gold;
I am put off from this dull shore of East,
Into industrious, and high-going Seas;
Where, like Pelides in Scamanders flood,
Up to the ears in surges, I will fight,
And pluck French Ilion underneath the waves;
If to be highest still, be to be best,
All works to that end are the worthiest:
Truth is a golden Ball, cast in our way,
To make us stripped by falsehood: And as Spain
When the hot scuffles of Barbarian arms,
Smotherd the life of Don Sebastian,
To guild the leaden rumor of his death
Gave for a slaughterd body (held for his)
A hundred thousand crowns; causd all the state
Of superstitious Portugal to mourn
And celebrate his solemn funerals;
The Moors to conquest, thankful feasts prefer,
And all made with the carcass of a Switzer:
So in the Giant like, and politic wars
Of barbarous greatness, raging still in peace,
Shows to aspire just objects; are laid on
With cost, with labor, and with form enough,
Which only makes our best acts brook the light,
And their ends had, we think we have their right,
So wurst works are made good, with good success,
And so for Kings, pay subjects carcases. Exit.

Enter Henry, Roisieau. Hen. Was he so courted?

Rois. As a City Dame,
Brought by her jealous husband, to the Court,
Some elder Courtiers entertaining him,
While others snatch, a favor from his wife:
One starts from this door; from that nooke another,
With gifts, and iunkets, and with printed phrase,
Steal her employment, shifting place by place
Still as her husband comes: so Duke Byron
Was wood, and worshipped in the Archdukes Court,
And as th'assistants that your Majesty,
Ioinde in Commission with him, or my self*
Or any other doubted eye appeared,
He ever vanished: and as such a dame,
As we compared with him before, being wun
To break faith to her husband, loose her fame,
Stain both their progenies, and coming fresh
From underneath the burden of her shame,
Visits her husband with as chaste a browe,
As temperate, and confirmed behavior,
As she came quitted from confession.
So from his scapes, would he present a presence,
The practice of his state adultery,
And guilt that should a graceful bosom strieke,
Drownde in the set lake, of a hopeless cheek.

Hen. It may be he dissembled, or suppose,
He be a little tainted: men whom virtue
Forms with the stuff of fortune great, and gracious,
Must needs partake with fortune in her humor
Of instabilitie: and are like to shafts
Grown crookt with standing, which to rectify,
Must twice as much be bowd another way,
He that has borne wounds for his worthy parts,
Must for his wurst be borne with: we must fit
Our government to men, as men to it:
In old time, they that hunted sauadge beasts,
Are said to clothe themselves in savage skins,
They that were Fowlers when they went on fowling,
Wore garments made with wings resembling Fowls:
To Bulls, we must not show our selves in red,
Nor to the warlick Elephant in white,
In all things governed, their infirmities
Must not be stird, nor wrought on; Duke Byron
Flows with adust, and melancholy choler,
And melancholy spirits are venomous:
Not to be touched, but as they may be cur'de:
I therefore mean to make him change the air,
And send him further from those Spanish vapors,
That still bear fighting sulphur in their breasts,
To breath a while in temperate English air,
Where lips are spyc^d with free and loyal counsels,
Where policies are not rumous, but saving;
Wisdom is simple, valor righteous*
Human, and hating facts of brutish forces
And whose grave natures, scorn the scoffs of France,
The empty complements of Italy,
The any-way encroching pride of Spain,
And love men modest, hearty, just and plain.

Sauoy, whispering with Laffin. Sau. I Will sound him for Byron; and what I find,
In the Kings depth; i will draw up, and inform,
In excitations to the Dukes revolt,
When next I meet with him.

Laff. It must be done
With praising of the Duke; from whom the king
Will take to give himself; which told the Duke,
Will take his heart up into all ambition.

Sau. I know it (politic friend:) and it is my purpose, Exit Laf.
Your Majesty has mist a royal sight,
The Duke Byron* on his brave beast Pastrana,
Who sits him like a full-saild Argosea,
Danced with a lofty billow, and as s^ug
Plyes to his bearer, both their motions mixed;
And being considerd in their site together,
They do the best present the state of man,
In his first royalty ruling; and of beasts
In their first loyalty serving; one commanding,
And no way being moved; the other serving,
And no way being compeld; of all the sights
That ever my eyes witnest; and they make
A doctrinall and witty Hierogliphick,
O^ a blessed kingdom: to express and teach,
Kings to command as they could serve, and subjects
To serve as if they had power to command.

Hen. You are a good old horseman I perceive,
And still out all the use of that good part:
Your wit is of the true Pierean spring,
That can make any thing, of any thing.

Sau. So brave a subject as the Duke, no king
Seated on earth, can vante of but your Highness,
So valiant, loyal, and so great in service.

Hen. No question he sets valor in his height,
And has done service to an equal pitche,
Fortune attending him with fit events,
To all his ventrous and well-laid attempts.

Sau. Fortune? to him was Juno, to Alcides,
For when, or where did she but open way,
To any act of his? what stone took he
With her help or without his own lost blood?
What sort wan he by her? or was not forced?
What victory but gainstods? on what Commander
Sleepy or negligent, did he ever change?
What Summer ever made she fai^e to him?
What winter, not of one continued storm?
Fortune is so far from his Creditresse,
That she owes him much; for in him, her looks
Are lovely, modest, and magnanimous,
Constant, victorious; and in his Achieuments,
Her cheeks are drawn out with a virtuous redness,
Out of his eager spirit to victory,
And chaste contention to convince with honor;
And (I have heard) his spirits have flowd so high,
In all his conflicts against any odds,
That (in his charge) his lips have bled with teruor:
How served he at your famous siege of Dreux?
Where the enemy (assured of victory)
Drew out a body of four thousand horse,
And twice six thousand foot, and like a Crescent,
Stood for the signal, you: (that showed your self
A sound old soldier) thinking it not fit
To give your enemy the ods, and honor
Of the first stroke, commanded de la Guiche,
To let f^^e all his cannans, that did pierse
The adu^rse thickest squadrons, and had shot
Nine volleies ere the foe had once given fire:
Your troop was charged, and when your dukes old father,
Met with th'affailants, and their Grove of Reiters
Repulst so fiercely, made them turn their beards
And rallie up themselves behind their troops;
Fresh forces seeing your troops a little seuerd,
From that part first assaulted, gave it charge,
Which then, this duke made good, seconds his father,
Beats through and through the enemies greatest strength,
And breaks the rest like Billows against a rock
And there the heart of that huge battle broke.

Hen. The heart but now came on, in that strong body,
Of twice two thousand horse, lead by Du Maine
Which (if I would be glorious) I could say
I first encountered.

Sau. How did he take in,
Beaune in view of that invincible army
Lead by the Lord great Constable of Castile?
Autun, and Nuis: in Burgundy chaste away,
Vicount l'auannes troops before Dijon,
And puts himself in, and there that was won.

Hen. If you would only give me leave my Lord,
I would do right to him, yet must not give.

Sau. A league from Fountain Francois, when you sent him,
To make discovery of the Castile army,
When he descern'd it was it (with wondrous wisdom
Ioinde to his spirit) he seemed to make retreat,
But when they pressed him, and the Barron of Lux,
Set on their charge so hotely, that his horse,
Was slain, and he most dangerously engaged,
Then turned your brave duke head, and (with such ease
As does an Echo beat back violent sounds,
With their own forces) he, (as if a wall
Start suddenly before them) pasht them all
Flat, as the earth, and there was that field won.

Hen. Y^are all the field wide.

Sau. O, I ask you pardon,
The strength of that field yet lay in his back,
Upon the foes part; and what is to come.
Of this your Marshal, now your worthy Duke
Is much beyond the rest: for now he sees
A sort of horse troops, issue from the woods,
In number nere twelve hunderd: and retyring
To tell you that the entire army followed,
Before he could relate it, he was forc^t
To turn head, and receive the maine assault
Of five horse troops: only with twenty horse:
The first he met, he tumbled to the earth,
And brake through all, not daunted with two wounds,
One on his head, another on his breast,
The blood of which, drowned all the field in doubt:
Your majesty himself was then engaged,
Your power not yet arrived, and up you brought
The little strength you had: a cloud of foes,
Ready to burst in storms about your ears:
Three squadrons rusht against you, and the first,
You took so fiercely, that, you beat their thoughts
Out of their bosoms, from the urged fight:
The second, all amazed you overthrew,
The third dispersed, with five and twenty horse
Left of the fourscore that persude the chase:
And this brave conquest, now your Marshall seconds
Against two squadrons, but with fifty horse,
One after other he defeates them both,
And made them run, like men whose heels were tript,
And pitch their heads, in their great generals lap:
And him he sets on, as he had been shot
Out of a Cannan: beats him into route,
And as a little brook being ouerrunne
With a black torrent; that bears all things down,
His fury ouertakes, his fomy back,
Loded with Cattaile, and with stackes of Corn,
And makes the miserable Plowman mourn;
So was du Maine surchardgd, and so Byron
Flow d over all his forces; every drop
Of his lost blood, bought with a worthy man;
And, only with a hundred Gentlemen
He won the place, from fifteen hundred horse;

Hen. He won the place?

Sau. On my word, so it is said:

Hen. Fie you have been extremely misinformed.

Sau. I only tell your highness what I heard,
I was not there; and though I have been rude,
With wonder of his valor, and presum^d,
To keep his merit in his full carire,
Not hearing you, when yours made such a thunder;
Pardon my fault, since it was t'extoll your servant;
But, is it not most true, that twixt ye both,
So few achiu'd, the conquest of so many?

Henr. It is a truth, must make me ever thankful.
But not performd by him, was not I there?
Commanded him, and in the maine assault,
Made him but second?

Sau. He Is the capital soldier,
That lives this day in holy Christendom,
Except your highness, always except Plato.

Hen. We must not give to one, to take from many,
For (not to praise our countrymen) here served,
The General My Lor. Norris, sent from England:
As great a captain as the world affords:
One fit to lead, and fight for Christendom;
Of more experience; and of stronger brain;
As valiant for abiding; In Command,
On any sudden; upon any ground
And in the form of all occasions
As ready, and as profitably, dauntles;
And hear was then another; Collonell Williams,
A worthy Captain; and more like the Duke,
Because he was less temperate then the General;
And being familliar with the man you praise,
(Because he knew him haughty and incapable,
Of all comparison) would compare with him,
And hold his swelling valor to the mark,
Justice had set in him, and not his will:
And as in open vessels filld with water,
And on men's shoulders borne, they put treene cups,
To keep the wild and slippery element,
From washing over: follow all his Swayes
And tickle aptnes to exceed his bounds,
And at the Brym contain him: so this knight,
Swum in Byron, and held him, but to right.
But leave these hot comparisons, he is mine own,
And then what I possess, I Will more be known,

Sau. All this shall to the duke, I fisht for this. Exeunt.

FINIS. Actus Secundi.
ACTVS 3. SCAENA I.
Enter La Fin, Byron following unseen. Laff. A fained passion in his hearing
now,
(Which he thinks I perceive not) making conscience,
Of the revolt that he has vrdgd to me,
Which now he means to prosecute would sound,
How deep he stands affected with that scruple.
As when the Moon has comforted the Night,
And set the world in silver of her light,
The Planets, Asterisims and whole state of Heaven,
In beams of gold desending; all the winds,
Bound up in caves, chargd not to drive abroad,
Their cloudy heads; an universal peace,
Proclaimd in scilence of the quiet earth.
Soon as her hot and dry fumes are let loose,
Storms and clouds mixing; suddenly put out.
The eyes of all those glories: The creation,
Turned into Chaos, and we then desire,
For all our joy of life, the death of sleep;
So when the glories of our lives, men's loves,
Clear consciences, our fames, and loyalties,
That did us worthy comfort, are eclipsd,
Grief and disgrace invade us; and for all,
Our night of life besides, our Misery craves,
Dark earth would open and hide us in our graves,

Byr. How Strange is this?

Laff. What? did your highness hear?

Byr. Both heard and wonderd, that your wit and spirit.
And proffit in experience of the slaueries,
Imposed on us; in those mere politic terms,
Of love, fame, loyalty, can be carried up,
To such a height of ignorant conscience;
Of cowerdise, and dissolution,
In all the freeborn powers of royal man*
You that have made way through all the guards,
Of Jealous State; and seen on both your sides,
The pikes points chardging heaven to let you pass,
Will you, (in flying with a Scrupulouse wing,
Above those pikes to heauen-ward) fall on them?
This is like men, that (spirrited with wine,)
Pass dangerouse places safe; and die for fear,
With only thought of them, being simply sober;
We must (in passing to our wished ends,
Through things called good and bad) be like the air,
That euenly interposd betwixt the seas,
And the opposed Element of fire;
At either touches, but pertakes with neither;
Is neither hot, nor cold, but with a slight.
And harmless temper mixed of both the exstreames;

Laff. It Is shrode.

Byr. There is no truth of any good
To be descernd on earth: and by conversion,
Naught therefore simply bad: But as the stuff,
Prepared for Arras pictures, is no Picture,
Till it be formd, and man has cast the beams,
Of his imaginouse fancy through it,
In forming ancient Kings and conquerors,
As he conceiues they looked, and were attirde,
Though they were nothing so: so all things here,
Have all their price set down, from men's concepts,
Which make all terms and actions, good, or bad,
And are but pliant, and wel-coloured threads,
Put into fained images of truth:
To which, to yield, and kneel, as truth pure kings,
That pulled us down with clear truth of their Gospel,
Were Superstition to be hist to hell.

Laff. Believe it* this is reason;

Byr. It Is the says,
Of reason and of wisdom.

Laff. You persuade,
As if you could create: what man can shun,
The serches, and compressions of your graces.

Byr. We must have these lures when we hawke for friends,
And wind about them like a subtle River,
That (seeming only to run on his course)
Does search yet, as he runs; and still finds out,
The easiest parts of entry on the shore;
Glyding so slyly by, as scarce it touched,
Yet still eats some thing in it: so must those,
That have large fields, and currants to dispose.
Come, let us ioyue our streams, we must run far.
And have but little time: The duke Sauoy,
Is shortly to be gone, and I must needs,
Make you well known to him,

Laff. But has your highness,
Some enterprise of value joined with him?

Byr. With him and greater persons?

Laffi. I will creep.
Upon my bosom in your Princely service,
Vouch-safe to make me known. I hear there lives not,
So kind, so bounty full, and wise a Prince,
But in your own excepted excellence.

Byr. He shall both know, and love you: are you mine?

Laff. I take the honor of it, on my knee,
And hope to quite it with your Majesty. Exit.

Enter Sauoy, Roncas, Rochet Breton. Sau. La Fin, is in the right; and will
obtain;
He draws with his weight; and like a plummet
That swaies a door, with falling of, pulls after,

Ron. Thus will Laffin be brought a Stranger to you,
By him he leads; he conquers that is conquered,
That's sought, as hard to win, that sues to be won.

Sau. But is my Painter warnd to take his picture.
When he shall see me, and present Laffin?

Roch. He is (my Lord) and (as your highness willd)
All we will press about him* and admire,
The royal promise of his rare aspect,
As if he heard not.

Sau. Twill inflame him.
Such tricks the Archduke vsd to extol his greatness,
Which complements though plain men hold absurd,
And a mere remedy for desire of Greatness.
Yet great men use them; as they eat Potatoes,
High Coollises, and potions to excite
The lust of their ambition: and this Duke;
You know is noted in his natural garb
Extremely glorious; who will therefore bring
An appetite expecting such a bait;
He comes, go instantly, and fetch the Painter.

Enter Byron La Fin. Byr. All honor to your heighnesse,

Sau. It Is most true*
All honors flow to me, in you their Ocean;
As welcome worthyest duke, as if my marquisate,
Were circkl'd with you in these amorous arms;

Byr. I sorrow Sir I could not bring it with me*
That I might so supply the fruitelesse complement,
Of only visiting your excellence,
With which the king now sends me to entertain you,
Which notwithstanding does confer this good,
That it has given me some small time to show,
My gratitude for the many secret bounties,
I have (by this your Lord Ambassador)
Felt from your heighnesse and in short, to assure you,
That all my most deserts are at your service.

Sau. Had the king sent me by you half his kingdom,
It were not half so welcome;

Byr. For defect.
Of whatsoever in my self, (my Lord,)
I here commend to your most Princely Service
This honored friend of mine;

Sau. Your name I pray you Sir.

Laff. Laffin, my Lord

Sau. Laffin? Is this the man,
That you so recommended to my Love?

Ron. The same my Lord,

Sau. You Are next my Lord the duke,
The most desird of all men. O my Lord,
The King and I, have had a mighty conflict,
About your conflicts, and your matchles worth,
In military virtues; which I put
In Balance with the continent of France,
In all the peace and fasty it enioyes.
And made even weight with all he could put in
Of all men's else; and of their own deserts,

Byr. Of all men's else? would he weigh other men's,
With my deseruings,

Sau. I upon my life,
The English General, the Mylor' Norris,
That served amongst you here, he paralleld
With you, at all parts, and in some preferred him,
And Collonell Williams (a Welsh Collonell)
He made a man, that at your most containd you:
Which the Welsh Herrald of their praise, the Cucko.
Would scarce have put, in his monology,
In jest, and said with reverence to his merits,

Byr. With reverence? Reverence skornes him: by the spoil,
Of all her Merits in me, he shall rue it;
Did ever Curtian Gullffe play such a part?
Had Curtius been so used, if he had brook't,
That rauenons whirlepoole, pourd his solid spirrits,
Through earth dissolved sinews, stopped her veins,
And rose with saved Rome, upon his back,
As I swum pooles of fire, and Gullfs of brass,
To save my country? thrust this venturous arm,
Beneath her ruins; took her on my neck,
And set her safe on her appeased shore?
And opes the king, a fouler bog then this,
In his so rotten bosom, to devour
Him that deuourd, what else had swalloed him
In a detraction, so with spite embrewed,
And drown such good in such ingratitude?
My spirrit as yet, but stooping to his rest,
Shines hotly in him, as the Sun in clouds,
Purpled, and made proud with a peaceful Even:
But when I thoroughly set to him; his cheeks,
Will (like those clouds) forgo their color quite,
And his whole blaze, smoke into endless night,

Sau. Nay nay, we must have no such gall my Lord,
Overflow our friendly liue^s: my relation,
Only delivers my enflamed zeal
To your religious merits; which me thinks,
Should make your highness canonizd, a Saint.

Byr. What had his arms been* without my arm,
That with his motion, made the whole field move?
And this held up, we still had victory.
When over charged with number, his few friends,
Retired amazed, I set them on assurd,
And what rude ruin seas'd on I confirmed;
When I left leading, all his army reeld,
One fell on other foul, and as the Cyclop
That having lost his eye, struck every way,
His blows directed to no certain scope;
Or as the soul departed from the body,
The body wants coherence in his parts,
Can not consist, but sever, and dissolve;
So I removed once, all his armies shook,
Panted, and fainted, and were ever flying,
Like wandering pulses sper^t through bodies dying,

Sau. It cannot be denied, it is all so true,
That what seems arogance, is desert in you,

Byr. What monstrous humors feed a Princes blood,
Being bad to good men, and to bad men good?

Sau. Well let these contradictions pass (my lord,)
Till they be reconciled, or put in form,
By power given to your will, and you present,
The fashion of a prefect government;
In mean space but a word, we have small time,
To spend in private, which I wish may be
With all advantage taken; Lord Laffin.

Ron. Is It not a face of excellent presentment,
Though not so amorouse with pure white, and red,
Yet is the whole proportion singular;

Roch. That ever I beheld,

Bret It has good lines,
And tracts drawn through it: The purfle, rare,

Ron. I heard the famous and right learned Earl,
And Archbishop of Lions Peirse Pinac,
Who was reported to have wondrouse Judgment
In men's events, and natures, by their looks:
(Upon his death bed, visited by this duke)
He told his sister, when his grace was gone,
That he had never yet obserud a face,
Of worse presage then this: and I will swear,
That (something seen in Phisiognomy)
I do not find in all the rules he gives
One slendrest blemish tending to mishap,
But (on the opposite part) as we may see,
On trees late blossomd, when all frosts are past,
How they are taken and what will be fruit:
So, on this tree of Scepters, I discern
How it is laden with apparances,
Rules answering Rules; and glances, crowned with glances;

He snatches away the picture. Byr. What, does he take my picture?

Sau. I my Lord.

Byr. Your Highness will excuse me; I will give you
My likeness put in Statue, not in picture;
And by a Statuary of mine own,
That can in Brass express the wit of man,
And in his form, make all men see his virtues:
Others that with much strictness imitate,
The something stooping carriage of my neck,
The voluble, and mild radiance of mine eyes,
Never observe my Masculine aspect,
And Lyon-like instinct, it shaddoweth:
Which Envy cannot say, is flattery:
And I will have my Image promised you,
Cut in such matter, it shall ever last;
Where it shall stand, fixed with eternal roots,
And with a most unmoved gravity;
For I will have the famous mountain Oros,
That looks out of the Duchy where I govern,
(Into your highness Dukedom) first made yours,
And then with such inimitable art
Expressed and handled; chiefly from the place
Where most conspicuously, he shows his face,
That though it keep the true form of that hill
In all his longitudes, and latitudes,
His height, his distances, and full proportion,
Yet shall it clearly bear my counterfaite,
Both in my face and all my lineaments:
And every man shall say, this is Byron.
Within my left hand, I will hold a City,
Which is the City Amiens; at whose siedge
I served so memorably: from my right,
I Will power an endless flood, into a Sea
Raging beneath me; which shall intimate
My ceaselesse service, drunk up by the King
As the Ocean drinks up rivers, and makes all
Bear his proud title; Iuory, Brass and Goulde,
That thieves may purchase; and be bought and sold,
Shall not be used about me; lasting worth
Shall only set the duke of Byron forth;

Sau. O that your statuary could express you,
With any nerenesse to your own instructions;
That statue would I prise past all the jewels
Within my cabinet of Beatrice,
The memory of my Grandame Portugal;
Most royal duke: we can not long endure
To be thus private, let us then conclude,
With this great resolution: that your wisdom,
Will not forget to cast a pleasing veil
Over your anger; that may hide each glance,
Of any notice taken of your wrong,
And show your self the more obsequious.
It Is but the virtue of a little patience,
There are so often attempts made against his person,
That sometimes they may speed, for they are palnts
That spring the more for cutting, and at last
Will cast their wished shadow; mark ere long,
Enter Nemours Soisson. See who comes here my Lord, as now no more,
Now must we turn out stream another way;
My Lord, I humbly thank his majesty,
That he would grace my idle time spent here
With entertainment of your princely person;
Which, worthily, he keeps for his own bosom.
My Lord, the duke Nemours? and Count Soisson?
Your honors have been bountifully done me
In often visitation: let me pray you,
To see some jewels now, and help my choice:
In making up a present for the King.

Nem. Your highness shall much grace us.

Sau. I am doubtful
That I have much incenst the duke Byron,
With praising the Kings worthiness in arms
So much past all men.

Sois. He deserves it, highly. Exit. manet Byr: Laffin.

Byr. What wrongs are these, laid on me by the King,
To equal others worths in war, with mine;
Endure this, and be turned into his Moile
To bear his sumptures: honored friend be true,
And we will turn these torrents, hence. The King. Exit Laffi.

Enter Henry, Espe: Vitry, Ianin. Hen. Why suffer you that ill aboding vermin,
To breed so near your bosom? be assurde,
His hants are omenous, not the throtes of Ravens,
Spent on infected house^; houles of dogs,
When no sound stirs, at midnight; apparitions,
And strokes of spirits, clad in blackmens shapes:
Or ougly women's: the adverse decrees
Of constellations, no^ security,
In vicious peace, are surer fatal vshers
Of femall mischiefs, and mortallities,
Then this prodigious feend is, where he fawnes:
La fiend, and not Laffin, he should be called.

Byr. Be what he will, men in themselves entire,
March safe with naked feet on coals of fire:
I build not outward, nor depend on proppes,
Nor choose my consort by the common ear:
Nor by the Moone-shine, in the grace of Kings:
So rare are true deseruers, loved or known,
That men loved vulgarely, are ever none:
Nor men graced seruilely, for being spots
In Princes trains, though borne even with their crowns;
The Stalion power, has such a beesome tail,
That it sweepes all from justice, and such filth
He bears out in it, that men mere exempt,
Are merely cleerest men will shortly buie
Friends from the prison, or the pillorie,
Rather then honors markets. I fear none,
But foul Ingratitude, and Detraction,
In all the brood of villainy.

Hen. No? not treason?
Be circumspect, for to a credulous eye,
He comes invisible, veiled with flattery,
And flatereis look like friends, as Woolues, like Dogs.
And as a glorious Poem fronted well
With many a goodly Herrald of his praise,
So far from hate of praises to his face,
That he prays men to praise him, and they ride
Before, with trumpets in their mouths, proclayming
Life to the holy fury of his lines:
All drawn, as if with one eye he had leerd,
On his loved hand, and led it by a rule;
That his plumes only Imp the Muses wings,
He sleeps with them, his head is napt with baies,
His lips break out with Nectar, his tunde feet
Are of the great last, the perpetual motion,
And he puffed with their empty breath believes
Full merit, eased those passions of wind,
Which yet serve, but to praise, and cannot merit,
And so his fury in their air expires:
So de Laffin, and such corrupted Herralds,
Hirde to encorage, and to glorify
May force what breath they will into their cheeks
Fitter to blow up bladders, then full men:
Yet may puff men to, with persuasions
That they a^e Gods in worth; and may rise Kings
With treading on their noises; yet the worthiest,
From only his own worth receives his spirit
And right is worthy bound to any merit;
Which right, shall you have ever; leave him then,
He follows none but marked* and wretched men;
And now for England you shall go my lord,
Our Lord Ambassador to that matchless Queen;
You never had a voyage of such pleasure
Honor, and worthy objects: There Is a Queen
Where nature keeps her state, and state her Court,
Wisdom her study, Conntinence her fort,
Where Magnanimity, Humanity:
Firmness in counsel and integrity:
Grace to her porest subjects: Majesty
To awe the greatest, have respects divine,
And in her each part, all the virtues shine. Exit Hen. and Sau. manet Byron.

Byr. Enjoy your will a while, I may have mine.
Wherefore (before I part to this embassage)
I Will be resolved by a Magician
That dwells hereby, to whom i will go disguisde,
And show him my births figure, set before:
By one of his profession, of the which
I Will crave his judgment, fayning I am sent
From some great personage, whose nativity,
He wishes should be censurd by his skill.
But on go my plots, be it good or ill. Exit.
Enter La Brosse. This hour by all rules of Astrology,
Is dangerous to my person, if not deadly.
How haples is our knowledge to fore-tel
And not be able to prevent a mischief,
O the strange difference twixt us and the stars:
They work with inclynations strong and fatal
And nothing know; and we know all there working
And naught can do, or nothing can prevent?
Rude ignorance is beastly, knowledge wretched:
The heavenly powers envy what they Enjoin:
We are commanded t'imitate there natures,
In making all our ends eternity:
And in that imitation we are plagued,
And worsse then they esteemd, that have no souls,
But in their nostrils, and like beasts expire;
As they do that are ignorant of arts,
By drowning there eternal parts in sense,
And sensual affectations: while we live
Our good parts take away, the more they give.

Byron solus disguizd like a Carrier of letters. Byr. The forts that favorites
hold in Princes hearts,
In common subjects loves; and their own strengths
Are not so sure, and vnexpugnable,
But that the more they are presumed upon,
The more they fail; daily and hourly proof,
Tells us prosperity is at highest degree
The founte and handle of calamity:
Like dust before a whirle-winde those men fly,
That prostrate on the grounds of fortune lie:
And being great (like trees that broadest sproyte)
Their own top-heauy state grubs up their root.
These apprehensions startle all my powers,
And arm them with suspicion against themselves,
In my late proiects; I have cast my self
Into the arms of others; and will see
It they will let me fall; or toss me up
Into th'affected compass of a throne,
God save you sir.

Labross. You Are welcome friend: what would you?

Byr. I would entreat you, for some crowns I bring,
To give your judgment of this figure cast.
To know by his nativity there seen;
What sort of end the person shall endure,
Who sent me to you, and whose birth it is.

Labross. I Will herein do my best, in your desire;
The man is raisd out of a good descent,
And nothing oulder then your self I think;
Is it not you?

Byr. I will not tell you that:
But tell me on what end he shall arrive.

Labross. My son, I see, that he whose end is cast
In this set figure, is of Noble parts,
And by his military valor raisde,
To princely honors; and may be a king,
But that I see a Caput Algol here,
That hinders it I fear.

Byr. A Caput Algol?
What Is that I pray?

Labross. Forbear to ask me, son,
You bid me speak, what fear bids me conceal.

Byr. You have no cause to fear, and therefore speak.

Labross. You Will rather wish you had been ignorant,
Then be instructed in a thing so ill.

Byr. Ignorance is an idle salve for ill,
And therefore do not urge me to enforce,
What I would freely know: for by the skill
Shown in thy aged haytes, i will lay thy brain
Here scattered at my feet, and seek in that,
What safely thou must utter with thy tongue,
If thou deny it.

Labross. Will you not allow me
To hold my peace? what less can I desire?
If not, be pleased with my constrained speech.

Byr. Was ever man yet punished for expressing
What he was chargde? be free, and speak the wurst.

Labross. Then briefly this; the man has lately done
An action that will make him loose his head.

Byr. Cursed be thy throat and soul, Raven, Shriech-owle, hag.

Labross. O hold, for heavens sake hold.

Byr. Hold on, I will,
Vault, and contractor of all horrid sounds,
Trumpet of all the miseries in hell,
Of my confusions; of the shameful end
Of all my services; witch, fiend, accursed
For ever be the poison on thy tongue,
And let the black sum of thy venomd breath,
Infect the air, shrink heaven, put out the stars,
And rain so fell and blew a plague on earth,
That all the world may falter with my fall.

Labross. Pity my age, my Lord.

Byr. Out prodigy,
Remedy of pity, mine of flint,
Whence with my nails and feet, i will dig enough,
Horror, and sauadge cruelty, to build
Temples to Massacre: dam of devils take thee,
Had thou no better end to crown my parts.
The Bulls of Colchos, nor his triple neck,
That howles out Earthquakes; the most mortal vapors,
That ever stifled and struck dead the fowls,
That flew at never such a sightly pitch,
Could not have burnt my blood so.

Labross. I told truth,
And could have flatterd you.

Byr. O that thou had;
Would I had given thee twenty thousand crowns
That thou had flatterd me: there is no joy on earth,
Never so rational, so pure, and holy,
But is a Iester, Parasite, a Whore,
In the most worthy parts, with which they please,
A drunkenness of foul, and a disease.

Labross. I knew you not.

Byr. Peace dog of Pluto, peace,
Thou knewst my end to come, not me here present:
Pox of your halting humane knowledges;
O death! how far off have thou killed? how soon
A man may know too much though never nothing?
Spite of the Stars, and all Astrology,
I will not loose my head: or (...) I do,
A hundred thousand heads shall off before.
I am a nobler substance them the Stars,
And shall the baser overrule the better?
Or are they better, since they are the bigger?
I have a will, and faculties of choice,
To do, or not to do: and reason why,
I do, or not do this; the sta^res have none,
They know not why they shine, more then this Taper,
Nor how they work, nor what: i will change my course,
I Will peece-meale pull, the frame of all my thoughts,
And cast my will into another mould:
And where are all your Caput Algols then?
Your Plannets all, being underneath the earth,
At my nativity: what can they do?
Malignant in aspects? in bloody houses?
Wild fire consume them; one poor cup of wine,
More then I use, that my weak brain will bear,
Shall make them drunk and reele out of their spheres,
For any certain act they can enforce.
O that mine arms were wings, that I might fly,
And pluck out of their hearts, my destiny!
I Will wear those golden Spurs upon my heels,
And kick at fate; be free all worthy spirits,
And stretch your selves, for greatness and for height:
Untruss your slaueries, you have height enough,
Beneath this steep heaven to use all your reaches,
It Is too far off, to let you, or respect you.
Give me a spirit that on this life's rough sea,
Loves to have his sails filled with a lusty wind,
Even till his Sayle-yeards tremble; his Masts crack,
And his rapt ship run on her side so low
That she drinks water, and her keele plowes air;
There is no danger to a man, that knows
What life and death is: there is not any law,
Exceeds his knowledge; neither is it lawful
That he should stoop to any other law.
He goes before them, and commands them all,
That to himself is a law rational. Exit.

ACTVS 4. SCE. I.
Enter D'Aumont, with Crequi. The duke of Byron is returned from England,
And (as they say) was Princely entertainde,
Schoold by the matchless Queen there, who I hear
Spoke most divinely; and would gladly hear,
Her speech reported.
Cre. I can serve your turn,
As one that speaks from others not from her,
And thus it is reported at his parting,
THus Monsieur Du Byron you have beheld,
Our Court proportioned to our little kingdom.
In every entertainment; yet our mind,
To do you all the rites of your repair,
Is as unbounded as the ample air.
What idle pains have you bestowd to see
A poor old woman? who in nothing lives
More, then in true affections, borne your king;
And in the perfect knowledge she has learned,
Of his good knights, and servants of your sort.
We thank him that he keeps the memory
Of us and all our kindness; but must say,
That it is only kept; and not laid out
To such affectionate profit as we wish;
Being so much set on fire with his deserts,
That they consume us; not to be restorde
By your presentment of him; but his person;
And we had thought, that he whose virtues fly
So beyond wonder, and the reach of thought,
Should check at eight hours sail, and his high spirit
That stoopes to fear, less then the Poles of heaven;
Should doubt an under billow of the Sea,
And (being a Sea) be sparing of his streams;
And I must blame all you that may advise him;
That (having helped him through all martial dangers)
You let him stick, at the kind rites of peace,
Considering all the forces I have sent,
To set his martial seas up in firm walls,
On both his sides for him to pass at pleasure;
Did plainly open him a guarded way
And led in Nature to this friendly shore,
But here is nothing worth his personal sight,
Here are no walled Cities; for that Crystal
Sheds with his light, his hardness, and his height
About our thankful person, and our Realm;
Whose only aid, we ever yet desirde;
And now I see, the help we sent to him,
Which should have swum to him in our own blood,
Had it been needful; (our affections
Being more given to his good, then he himself)
Ends in the actual right it did his state,
And ours is slighted; all our worth is made,
The common-stock, and banck; from whence are served
All men's occasions; yet (thanks to heaven)
Their gratitudes are drawn dry; not our bounties.
And you shall tell your King, that he neglects
Old friends for new; and sets his soothed Ease
Above his honor; Marshals policy
In rank before his justice; and his profit
Before his royalty: his humanity gone,
To make me no repaiment of mine own.

D'Au. What answered the Duke?

Cre. In this sort.
Your highness sweet speech has no sharper end,
Then he would wish his life; if he neglected,
The least grace you have named; but to his wish,
Much power is wanting: the green roots of war,
Not yet so close cut up, but he may dash
Against their relickes to his utter ruin,
Without more near eyes, fixed upon his feet,
Then those that look out of his countries soil,
And this may well excuse his personal presence,
Which yet he often has longed to set by yours:
That he might immitate the Majesty,
Which so long peace has practisde, and made full,
In your admired appearance; to illustrate
And rectify his habit in rude war.
And his will to be here, must needs be great,
Since heaven has thron'de so true a royalty here,
That he thinks no king absolutely crownde,
Whose temples have not stood beneath this sky,
And whose height is not hardened with these stars,
Whose influences for this altitude,
Distild, and wrought in with this temperate air,
And this division of the Element
Have with your reign, brought: forth more worthy spirits,
For counsel, valor, height of wit, and art,
Then any other region of the earth:
Or were brought forth to all your ancestors,
And as a cunning Orator, reserues
His fairest similies, best-adorning figures,
Chief matter, and most moving arguments
For his conclusion; and does then supply
His ground-streames laid before, glides over them,
Makes his full depth seen through; and so takes up,
His audience in Aplawses past the clouds.
So in your government, conclusiue nature,
(Willing to end her Excellence in earth
When your foot shall be set upon the stars)
Shows all her Sovereign Beauties, Ornaments,
Virtues, and Raptures; ouertakes her works
In former Empires, makes them but your foyles,
Swells to her full Sea, and again does drown
The world, in admiration of your crown.

D'Au. He did her (at all parts) confessed right.

Cre. She took it yet, but as a part of Court-ship,
And said, he was the subtle Orator,
To whom he did too gloriously resemble,
Nature in her, and in her government,
He said, he was no Orator, but a Soldier,
More then this air, in which you breath has made me,
My studious love, of your rare government,
And simple truth, which is most eloquent,
Your Empire is so amply absolute,
That even your Theaters show more comely rule,
True noblesse, royalty, and happiness
Then others courts: you make all state before
Utterly obsolete; all to come, twice sod.
And therefore does my royal Sovereign wish
Your years may prove, as vital, as your virtues,
That (standing on his Turrets this way turned,
Ordring and fixing his affairs by yours)
He may at last, on firm grounds, pass your Seas,
And see that Maiden-sea of Majesty,
In whose chaste arms, so many kingdoms lie.

D' Au. When came she to her touch of his ambition?

Cre. In this speech following, which I thus remember.
If I hold any merit worth his presence,
Or any part of that, your Courtship gives me,
My subjects have bestowd it; some in counsel,
In action some, and in obedience all;
For none knows, with such proof as you my Lord,
How much a subject may renown his Prince,
And how much Princes of their subjects hold;
In all the services that ever subject
Did for his Sovereign; he that best deserved
Must (in comparison) except, Byron;
And to win this prise clear; without the maimes
Commonly given men by ambition,
When all their parts lie open to his view,
Shows continence, past their other excellence,
But for a subject to affect a kingdom,
Is like the Cammell, that of Jove begd horns,
And such mad-hungrie men, as well may eat,
Hot coals of fire, to feed their natural heat;
For, to aspire to competence with your king
What subject is so gross, and Gyantly?
He having now a Daulphine borne to him,
Whose birth, ten days before, was dreadfully
Vsherd with Earthquakes, in most parts of Europe,
And that gives all men, cause enough to fear
All thought of competition with him.
Commend us good my Lord, and tell our Brother
How much we joy, in that his royal issue,
And in what prayers, we raise our heart to heaven,
That in more terror to his foes, and wonder
He may drink Earthquakes, and devour the thunder,
So we admire your valor, and your virtues,
And ever will contend, to win their honor.
Then spoke she to Crequie, and Prince D' Auergne,
And gave all gracious farewels; when Byron
Was thus encountered by a Councellor*
Of great and eminent name, and matchless merit:
I think (my Lord) your princely Daulphin bears
Arion in his Cradle, through your kingdom,
In the sweet Music joy strikes from his birth.
He answered; and good right; the cause commands it.
But (said the other) had we a fifth Henry,
To claim his old right: and one man to friend,
Whom you well know my Lord, that for his friendship
Were promised the Vice-royaltie of France,
We would not doubt of conquest, in despite
Of all those windy Earthquakes. He replied;
Treason was never guide to English conquests,
And therefore that doubt shall not fright our Daulphine;
Nor would I be the friend to such a foe,
For all the royalties in Christendom.
Fix there your foot (said he) I only give
False fire, and would be loathe to shoot you of:
He that winnes Empire with the loss of faith,
Out-buies it; and will banck-route; you have laid
A brave foundation, by the hand of victory:
Put not the roof to fortune, foolish statuaries,
That under little Saints suppose, great bases
Make less, to sense, the Saints; and so where fortune,
Aduanceth vile minds, to states great and noble,
She much more exposes them to shame,
Not able to make good, and fill their bases,
With a conformed structure; I have found,
(Thanks to the blesser of my search) that counsels,
Held to the line of Justice; still produce,
The surest states, and greatest, being sure,
Without which fit assurance, in the greatest,
As you may see a mighty promontorie
More digd and vnder-eaten, then may warrant,
A safe supportance, to his hanging brows,
All passengers avoid him, shun all ground
That lies within his shadow, and bear still
A flying eye upon him, so great men
Corrupted in their ground, and building out.
Too swelling fronts, for their foundations;
When most they should be propt, are most forsaken,
And men will rather thrust into the storms
Of better grounded States, then take a shelter
Beneath their ruinous, and fearful weight;
Yet they, so ouersee, their faulty bases,
That they remain securer in conceit:
And that security, does worse presage
Their nere distructions, then their eaten grounds;
And therefore heaven it self is made to us
A perfect Hierogliphick to express,
The Idleness of such security,
And the grave labor, of a wise distrust,
In both sorts of the all-enclying stars;
Where all men note this difference in their shyning,
As plain as they distinguish either hand;
The ^ixt stars mauer, and the erring, stand.

D' Aum. How took he this so worthy admonition?

Cre. Gravely applied (said he) and like the man,
Whom all the world says, ouerrules the stars;
Which are divine books to us; and are read
By understanders only, the true objects,
And chief companions of the truest men;
And (though I need it not) I thank your counsel,
That never yet was idle, But spherelike,
Still mooues about, and is the continent
To this blessed I Will.

ACT. 5. SCEN. 1.
Enter Byron, D' Auergne, Laffin. Byr. The Circkle of this ambassie is closde,
For which I long have longed, for mine own ends;
To see my faithful, and leave courtly friends,
To whom I came (me thought) with such a spirit,
As you have seen, a lusty courser show,
That has been long time at his manger tied;
High fead, alone, and when (his headstall broken)^
He runs his prison, like a trumpet neighs,
Cuts air, in high curuets, and shakes his head:
(With wanton stopings, twixt his forelegs) mocking
The heavy center; spreds his flying crest,
Like to an Ensign, hedge, and ditches leaping,
Till in the fresh meat, at his natural food
He sees free fellows, and has met them free:
And now (good friend) I would be feign informed,
What our right Princely Lord, the duke of Sauoy
Has thought on, to employ my coming home.

Laf. To try the Kings trust in you, and withal,
How hot he trailes on our conspiracy:
He first would have you, beg the government,
Of the important Citadell of Bourg:
Or to place in it, any you shall name:
Which will be wondrous fit, to march before,
His other purposes; and is a fort
He rates, in love, above his patrimony;
To make which fortress worthy of your suite:
He vows (if you obtain it) to bestow
His third fair daughter, on your excellence,
And hopes the King will not deny it you.

Byr. Deny it me? deny me such a suite?
Who will he grant, if he deny it me.

Laf. He Will find some politic shift to do it, I fear.

Bir. What shift? or what evasion can he find,
What one patch is there in all policies shop,
(That botcher up of Kingdoms) that can mend
The brack betwixt us, any way denying.

D' Au. That's at your peril:

Byr. Come, he dares not do it.

D' Au. Dares not? presume not so; you know (good duke)
That all things he thinks fit to do, he dares.

Byr. By heaven I wonder at you, I will ask it,
As sternely, and secure of all repulse
As the ancient Persians did when they implorde,
Their idol fire to grant them any boon;
With which they would descend into a flood,
And threaten there to quench it, if they faild,
Of that they ask't it:

Laffi. Said like your Kings King;
Cold has no act in depth, nor are suites wrought
(Of any high price) that are coldly sought:
I Will have, and with your courage, comfort Sauoy. Exit Laffin.

D' Au. I am your friend (my Lord) and will deserve
That name, with following any course you take;
Yet (for your own sake) I could wish your spirit
Would let you spare all broad terms of the King,
Or, on my life you will at last repent it:

Byr. What can he do?

D' Au. All that you can not fear.

Byr. You fear too much, be by, when next I see him,
And see how I will urge him in this suite,
He comes, mark you, that think
He will not grant it.
Enter Henry, Esp. Soiss. Ia. I am become a suitor to your highness.

Hen. For what, my Lord, it is like you shall obtain.

Byr. I do not much doubt that; my services,
I hope have more strength in your good conceit
Then to receive repulse, in such requests.

Hen. What is it?

Byr. That you would bestow on one whom I shall name,
The keeping of the Citadell of Bourg,

Hen. Excuse me sir, I must not grant you that.

Byr. Not grant me this suit?

Hen. It is not fit I should;
You are my governor in Burgundy,
And Province governors, that command in chief,
Ought not to have the charge of fortresses;
Besides, it is the chief key of my kingdom,
That opens toward Italy, and must therefore,
Be given to one that has imediatly
Dependence on us.

Byr: These are wondrous reasons,
Is not a man depending on his merits
As fit to have the charge of such a key
As one that merely hangs upon your humors?

Hen: Do not enforce your merits so your self;
It takes away their luster, and reward.

Byr: But you will grant my suite?

Hen: I swear I cannot
Keeping the credit of my brain and place.

Byr: Will you deny me then?

Hen: I am infor^st;
I have no power, more then your self in things
That are beyond my reason.

Byr: Then my self?
That Is a strange slight in your comparison;
Am I become the example of such men
As have lest power? Such a diminitiue?
I was comparatiue in the better sort;
And such a King as you, would say I cannot,
Do such; or such a thing; were I as great
In power as he; even that indefinite he,
Expressed me full: This Moon is strangely changed;

Hen: How can I help it? would you have a King
That has a white beard; have so green a brain?

Byr: A plague of brain; what does this touch your brain?
You must give me more reason or I swear

Hen: Swear; what do you swear?

Byr: I Swear you wrong me,
And deal not like a King to jest, and slight,
A man that you should curiously reward;
Tell me of your gray beard? it is not gray
With care to recompense me, who eased your care.

Hen: You have been recompenc't, from head to foot.

Byr: With a distrusted dukedom: Take your dukedom
Bestowed on me again; It was not given
For any love, but fear, and force of shame;

Hen: Yet it was your honor; which if you respect not,
Why seek you this Adition?

Bry^n: Since this honor,
Would show you loved me to, in trusting me,
Without which love, and trust; honor is shame;
A very Pageant, and a property:
Honor, with all his Adiu^cts, I deserve,
And you quit my deserts, with your gray beard.

Hen: Since you expostulate the matter so;
I tell you plain; Another reason is
Why I am moved to make you this denial
That I suspect you to have had in^elligence
With my vowed enemies.

Byr: Misery of virtue,
Ill is made good, with worse? This reason poures
Poison, for Balm, into the wound you made;
You make me mad, and rob me of my soul,
To take away my tried love, and my Truth;
Which of my labors, which of all my wounds,
Which overthrow, which Battle won for you,
Breeds this suspicion? Can the blood of faith,
(Lost in all these to find it proof, and strength)
Beget disloya^ty? all my rain is fallen,
Into the horse-fayre; springing pooles and mire;
And not in thankful grounds, or fields of fruit;
Fall then before us, O thou flaming Crystal,
That art the uncorrupted Register
Of all men's merits: And remonstrate here,
The fights, the dangers, the affrights and horrors,
Whence I have r^^cu'd this unthankful King:
And show (commixt with them) the joys, the glories
Of his state then: Then his kind thoughts of me:
Then my deseruings: Now my infamy:
But I will be mine own King: I will see,
That all your Chronicles be filled with me,
That none but I, and my renowned Sire
Be said to win the memorable fields
Of Arques and Deep: and none b^t we of all
Kept you from dying there, in an Hospital;
None but my self, that won the day at Dreux:
A day of holy name, and needs, no night:
Nor none but I at Fountain Francois burst,
The heart strings of the leaguers; I alone,
Took Amiens in these arms and held her fast,
In spite of all the Pitchy fires she cast,
And clouds of bullets pourd upon my breast,
Till she showd yours; and took her natural form,
Only my self (married to victory)
Did people Artois, Dou^y, Picardie,
Bethune, and Saint Paul^, Bapaume, and Courcelles,
With her triumphant issue;

Hen. Ha ha ha, Exit,

Byron drawing and is held by (...). D'Au. O hold my Lord; for my sake, mighty
Spirrit.

Exit. Enter Byron Dau following unseen. Byr. Respect, Reuendge, slaughter
repaie for laughter,
Whats' grave in Earth, what awful? what abhord*
If my rage be ridiculouse? I will make it,
The law and rule of all things serious.
So long as such as he
Are suffered, soothed and wrest all right, to safty
So long is mischief gathering massacres,
For their cursed kingdoms; which I will prevent,
Laughter? I Will fright it from him, far as he,
Has cast irreuocable shame; which ever,
Bring found is lost and lost returns never;
Should Kings cast of their bounties, with their dangers?
He that can warm at fi^es, where virtue burns,
Hunt pleasure through her torments; nothing feel,
Of all his subjects suffer; but (long hid)
In wants, and miseries, and having past
Through all the grauest shapes, of worth and honor,
(For all Heroiq^e fashions to be learned,
By those hard lessons) show an antique vizard,
Who would not wish him rather hewd to nothing,
Then left so monstrous? slight my services?
Drown the dead noises of my sword, in laughter?
My blows, as but the passages of shadows,
Over the highest and most barraine hills,
And use me, like, no man; but as he took me
Into a desert, gasht with all my wounds,
Sustaind for him, and buried me in flies;
Forth vengeance then, and open wounds in him
Shall let in Spain, and Sauoy.

Offers to draw and D'Au: again holds him. D'Au: O my Lord,
This is to large a license given your fury;
Give time to it, what reason, suddenly,
Can not extend, respite does often supply.

Byr. While respite, holds revenge, the wrong redoubles,
And so the shame of sufferance, it torments me,
To think what I endure, at his shrunk hands,
That skornes the gift, of one pore fort to me:
That have subdued for him; O injury,
Forts, Cities, Countries, I, and yet my fury. Exieunt.

Hen. Byron?

D'Au. My Lord? the King calls,

Hen. Turn I pray,
How now? from whence flow these distracted faces?
From what attempt return they? as disclayming,
Their late Heroique bearer? what, a pistall?
Why, good my Lord, can mirth make you so wrathful?

Byr. Mirth? it was mockery, a contempt; a scandal
To my renown for ever: a repulse,
As miserably cold, as Stygian water,
That from sincere earth issues, and does break
The strongest vessels, not to be containde,
But in the tough hoof of a pacient Ass.

Hen. My Lord, your judgment is not competent,
In this dissension, I may say of you;
As Fame says of the ancient Elea^s,
That, in the Olimpian contentions,
They ever were the iustest Arbitrators,
If none of them contended, nor were partie^;
Those that will moderate disputations well,
Must not themselves affect the coronet;
For as the air, containd within our ears:
If it be not in quiet; nor refrains,
Troubling our hearing, with offensive sounds;
But our affected instrument of hearing,
Repl^at with noise, and singings in it self,
It faithfully receives no other voices;
So, of all judgments, if within themselves
They suffer spleen, and are tumultuous;
They can not equal differences without them;
And this wind, that does sing so in your ears,
I know, is no disease bred in your self;
But whisperd in by others; who in swelling
Your veins with empty hope of much, yet able,
To perform nothing; are like shallow streams,
That make themselves so many heavens; to sight;
Since you may see in them, the Moon, and Stars,
The blew space of the air; as far from us,
(To our weak senses) in those shallow streams
As if they were as deep, as heaven is high;
Yet with your middle finger only, sound them,
And you shall pierce them to the very earth;
And therefore leave them, and be true to me
Or yow'le be left by all; or be like one
That in cold nights will needs have all the fire,
And there is held by others, and embraced
Only to burn him: your fire will be inward,
Which not another deluge can put out:
Byron kneeles while the King goes on. O Inocence the sacred amulet,
Against all the poisons of infirmity:
Of all misfortune, injury, and death,
That makes a man, in tune still in himself;
Free from the hell to be his own accuser,
Ever in quiet, endle, joy enjoying;
No strife, nor no sedition i^ his powers:
No motion in his will, against his reason,
No thought against thought, Nor (as twere in the confines
Of wishing, and repenting) does possess
Only a way ward, and tumultuose peace,
But (all parts in him, friendly and secure,
Fruitful of all best things in all worst Seasons)
He can with every wish, be in their plenty,
When, the infectious guilt of one foul crime,
Destroys the free content of all our time.

Byr: It Is all acknowlegd, and, (though all to late)
Here the short madness of my anger ends:
If ever I did good I locked it safe
In you, th'impregnable defense of goodness:
If ill, I press it with my penitent knees
To that unsounded depth, whence naught returns.

Hen: It Is music to mine ears: rise then for ever,
Quit of what guilt soever, till this hour,
And nothing touched in honor or in spirit,
Rise without flattery, rise by absolute merit.

Enter: Esp: to the King, Byron: etc. Enter Sauoy with three La^ies. Esp: Sir
if it please you to be taught any Courthship take you to your stand: Sauoy is
at it with three Mistresses at once he loves each of them best, yet All
differently.


Hen: For the time he has been here, he has talked a Volume greater then the
Turks A^caron; stand up close; his lips go still


Sau: Excuse me, excuse me; The King has ye all;


1. True Sir, in honorable subjection.


2. To the which we are bound by our loyallty.


Sau: Nay your excuse, your excuse, intend me for affection? you are all
bearers of his favors; and deny him not your opposition by night.


3 You say rightly in that; for therein we oppose us to his command.


1. In the which he never yet pressed us.


2. Such is the be^edictio^ of our ^eace.


Sau: You take me still in flat misc^nstruction, and conceive not by me.


1 Therein we are strong in our own purposes; for it were something scandalous
for us to conceive by you.


2, Though there might be question made of your fruitfulnes, yet dry weather
in harue^t dooes no harm.


Hen. They will talk him into Sauoy; he begins to hunt down.


Sau. As the King is, and has been, a most admired, and the most unmatchable
soldier, so has he been, and is, a sole excellent, and vnp^ralelld Courtier.


Hen. Pouvre Amy Mercy.


1. Your highness does the king but right sir.


2. And heaven shall bless you for that justice,
With plentiful store of want in Ladies affections.

Sau. You are cruel, and will not vouchsafe me audience to any conclusion.


1. Beseech your grace conclude, that we may present our curtsies to you, and
give you the adieu.


Sau. It is said, the king will bring an army into Sauoy.


2 Truly we are not of his counsel of war.


Sau. Nay but vouchsafe me.


3. Vouchsafe him* vouchsafe him, else there is no play in it.


1. Well I vouchsafe your Grace.


Sau. Let the king bring an army into Sauoy, and I Will find him sport for forty
years.


Hen. Would I were sure of that, I should then have a long gae, and a merry.


1. I think your Grace would play with his army at Balloone.


2. My faith, and that is a martial recreation.


3. It is next to impious courting.


Sau. I am not he that can set my Squadrons ouer-night, by midnight leap my
horse, curry seven miles, and by three, leap my mistress; return to mine
army again, and direct as I were infatigable, I am no such tough soldier.


1. Your disparitie is believed sir.


2. And it is a piece of virtue to tell true.


3. Gods me, the king,


Sau. Well, I have said nothing that may offend.


1. It Is hoped so,


2. If there be any mercy in laughter.


Sau. I Will take my leave.
After the tedious stay my love has made,
(Most worthy to command our earthly zeal)
I come for pardon, and to take my leave;
Affirming though I reap no other good,
By this my voyage; but to have seen a Prince
Of greatness, in all grace so past report;
I nothing should repent me, and to show,
Some token of my gratitude, I have sent,
Into your treasury, the greatest Jewels,
In all my Cabinet of Beatrice.
And of my late-deceased wife, th'Infanta.
Which are two Basigus, and their Ewrs of crystal,
Never yet vallewd for their workmanship,
Nor the exceeding riches of their matter
And to your stable, (worthy duke of Byron,
I have sent in two of my fairest horses.

Byr. Sent me your horses? upon what desert?
I entertain no presents, but for merits;
Which I am far from at you^ highness hands;
As being of all men to you the most stranger,
There is as ample bounty in refusing;
As in bestowing, and with this I quit you.

Sau. Then have I lost naught but my poor good will,

Hen. Well cosine, I with all thanks, welcome that;
And the rich arguments with which you prove it,
Wishing I could, to your wish welcome you;
Draw, for your marquisate, the articles;
Agreed on in our composition,
And it is yours, but where you have porpos'd,
(In your aduices) my design for Millane,
I will have no war with the king of Spain,
Unless his hopes prove weary of our peace;
And (Princely cosine) it is far from me,
To think your wisdom, needeful of my counsel,
Yet love, oft-times must offer things vnneedeful;
And therefore I would counsel you to hold
All good terms, with his Majesty of Spain:
If any troubles should be stirred betwixt you,
I would not stir therein, but to appease them;
I have too much care of my royal word,
To break a Peace so just and consequent,
Without force of precedent iniur^e:
Endless desires are worthles of just Princes,
And only proper to the swinge of tyrants.

Sau. At al parts spoke like the most christian king,
I take my humblest leave, and pray your Highness,
To hold me a^ your servant, and poor kinsman,
Who wishes no supreamer happiness
Than to be yours: To you (right worthy Princes)
I wish for all your favors powered on me
The love of al these Ladies mutually,
And (so they please their Lords) that they may please
Themselves by all means. And be you assurde
(Most lovely Princesses) as of your lives,
You cannot be true women, if true wives. Exit.

Hen. Is this he Espernon, that you would needs
Persuade us courted so absurdly.

Esp. This is even he sir, howsoever he has studied his Parting Courtship.


Hen. In what one point seemde he so ridiculous as you would present him?


Esp. Behold me sir, I beseech you behold me, I appear to you as the great
Duke of Sauoy with these three Ladies.


Hen. Well sir, we grant your resemblance.


Esp. He stole a carriage sir, from Count d'Auuergne here.


D'Auer. From me sir?


Esp. Excuse me sir, from you I assure you: here sir, he lies at the Lady
Antoniette, just thus, for the world, in the true posture of Count d'Auue^gne.


D'Auer. You Are exceeding delightsome.


Hen. Why is not that wel^it came in with the organ hose.


Esp. Organ hose? a pox ant; let it pipe it self into contempt; he has
stolen it most felloniously, and it graces him like a disease.


Hen. I think he stole it from D'Avuergne indeed.


Esp. Well, would he had robbed him of all his other diseases, He were then the
soundest lord in France.


D'Au. As I am sir, I shall stand all wethers with you.


Esp. But sir, he has praisd you above th'inuention of Rimers.


Hen. Wherein? or how?


Esp. He took upon him to describe your victories in war, and where he
should have said, you were the most absolute soldier in Christendom, (no Ass
could have mist it) he deliuerd you for as pretty a fellow of your hands, as
any was in France.


Hen. Marry God dild him.


Esp. A pox on him.


Hen. Well, (to be serious) you know him well
To be a gallant Courtier: his great wit
Can turn him into any form he lists,
More fit to be avoided, then deluded.
For my Lord Duke of Byron here, well knows,
That it infecteth, where it does affect:
And where it seems to counsel, it conspires.
With him go all our faults, and from us fly,
(With all his counsel) all conspiracy.

Finis Actus Quinti, and vltimi.
THE TRAGEDY OF CHARLES Duke of BYRON.

By GEORGE CHAPMAN.

THE TRAGEDY OF Charles Duke of Byron.
ACTVS, I. SCENA, I.
Henry, Vidame, D'escures, Espernon, Ianin. Hen. BYron sallue in so tratrous a
relaps,
Aleadgd for our ingratitude: what offices,
Titles of honor, and what admiration,
Could France afford him that it pourd not on?
When he was scarce arrived at forty years,
He ran through all chief dignities of France.
At fourteen years of age he was made Colonel
To all the Suisses serving then in Flanders;
Soon after he was marshall of the camp.
And shortly after, marshall General:
He was received high Admiral of France
In that our Parliament we held at Tours;
Marshall of France in that we held at Paris.
And at the Siege of Amiens he acknowledgd,
None his Superior but our self, the King;
Though I had there, the Princes of the blood
I made him my Lieutennant General,
Declard him Jointly the prime Peer of France,
And raisd his Barony into a Duchy,

Iani. And yet (my Lord) all this could not allay
The fatal thrist of his ambition.
For some have heard him say he would not die,
Till on the wings of valor he had reached
One degree heigher; and had seen his head*
Set on the royal Quarter of a crown;
Yea at so vnbeleeu'd a pitch he aymd,
That he has said his heart would still complain,
Till he aspird the style of Sovereign,
And from what ground my Lord rise all the leuyes
Now made in Italy? from whence should spring
The warlike humor of the Count Fuentes?
The restles stirrings of the Duke of Sauoye?
The discontent the Spaniard entertaind,
With such a threatening fury, when he heard
The prejudicial conditions,
Proposed him, in the treaty held at Veruins?
And many other beaueries, this way aiming,
But from some hope of inward aid from hence?
And that, all this derectly aims at you,
Your highness has by one intelligence,
Good cause to think; which is your late advice,
That the Sea army, now prepared at Naples,
Has an intended Enterprise on Prouence?
Although the cunning Spaniard gives it out,
That all is for Algier.

Hen. I must believe,
That without treason bred in our own breasts,
Spaines, affairs are not in so good estate,
To aim at any action against France:
And if Byron should be their instrument,
His altered disposition could not grow,
So far wide in an instant; Nor resign,
His valor to these lawles resolutions
Upon the sudden; nor without some charms,
Of foreign hopes and flatteries sung to him:
But far it flies my thoughts, that such a spirrit,
So active, valiant, and vigilant;
Can see it self transformed with such wild furies.
And like a dream it shows to my conceits,
That he who by himself has won such honor:
And he to whom his father left so much,
He that still daily reapes so much from me,
And knows he may increase it to more proof
From me, then any other foreign King;
Should quite against the stream of all religion,
Honor, and reason, take a course so foul,
And neither keep his Oath, nor save his Soul.
Can the poor keeping of a Citadell
Which I denied, to be at his disposure,
Make him forgo the whole strength of his honors?
It is impossible, though the violence,
Of his hot spirtit made him make attempt
Upon our person for denying him;
Yet well I found his loyal judgment served,
To keep it from effect: besides being offered,
Two hundred thousand crowns in yearly pention,
And to be General of all the forces
The Spaniards had in France; they found him still,
As an unmatched Achilles in the wars,
So a most wise Ulysses to their words,
Stopping his ears at their enchanted sounds;
And plain he told them that although his blood
(Being moved) by Nature, were a very fire
And boyld in apprehension of a wrong;
Yet should his mind hold such a scepter there,
As would contain it from all act and thought
Of treachery or ingratitude to his Prince.
Yet do I long, me thinks, to see La Fin,
Who has his heart in keeping; since his state,
(Grown to decay and he to discontent)
Comes near the ambitious plight of Duke Byron,
My Lord Vidame, when does your Lordship think,
Your uncle of La Fin will be arrived.

Vid. I think (my Lord) he now is near ariuing
For his particular iourny and devotion,
Voud to the holy Lady of Loretto,
Was long since past and he upon return.

Hen. In him, as in a crystal that is charmed,
I shall descerne by whom and what designs,
My rule is threatened^ and that sacred power
That has enabled this defensive arm,
(When I enjoyed but in an unequal Nooke,
Of that I now possess) to front a King
Far my Superior: And from twelve set battles,
March home a victor: ten of them obtaind,
Without my personal service; will not see
A traitrous subject foil me, and so end
What his hand has with such success begun.

Enter a Lady, and a Nursse bringing the Daulphine. Esp. See the young Daulphin
brought to cheer your highness.

Hen. My royal blessing, and the King of heaven,
Make thee an aged, and a happy King:
Help Nurse to put my sword into his hand;
Hold Boy, by this; and with it may thy arm
Cut from thy tree of rule, all traitrous branches,
That strive to shadow and eclips thy glories;
Have thy old fathers angel for thy guide,
Redoubled be his spirit in thy breast;
Who when this State ran like a turbulent sea,
In civil hates and bloody enmity,
Their wrathes and enuies, like so many winds,
Settled and burst: and like the Halcions birth,
Be thine to bring a calm upon the shore,
In which the eyes of war may ever sleep,
As ouermacht with former massacres,
When gultie, made Noblesse, feed on Noblesse;
All the sweet plenty of the realm exhausted;
When the nak't merchant, was pursude for spoil,
When the pore Pezants frighted neediest thieves
With their pale lea^enesse; nothing left on them
But meager carcases sustaind with air,
Wandering like Ghosts affrighted from their graves,
When with the often and incessant sounds
The very beasts knew the alarm bell,
And (hearing it) ran bellowing to their home:
From which unchristian broiles and homicides,
Let the religious sword of justice free
Thee and thy kingdoms governed after me.
O heaven! or if th'vnsettled blood of France,
With ease, and wealth, renew he ^iuill furies:
Let all my powers be emptied in my Son
To curb, and end them all, as I have done.
Let him by virtue, quite out of from fortune,
Her fetherd shoulders, and her winged shoes,
And thrust from her light feet, her turning stone*
That she may ever tarry by his throne.
And of his worth, let after ages say,
(He fighting for the land; and bringing home
Just conquests, laden with his enemies spoils)
His father past all France in martial deeds,
But he, his father twenty times exceedes.

Enter the Duke of Byron, D'Avuergne and Laffin. Byr. My dear friends
D'Avuergne* and Laffin,
We need no coniurations to conceal:
Our close intendments, to advance our states
Even with our merits; which are now neclected;
Since Britain is reduced, and breathless war
Has sheathed his sword, and wrapped his Ensigns up;
The King has now no more use of my valor,
And therefore I shall now no more enjoy
The credit that my service held with him;
My service that has driven through all extremes,
Through tempests, droughts, and through the deepest floods;
Winters of shot: and over rocks so high
That birds could scarce aspire their ridgy tops;
The world is quite inuerted: virtue thrown
At Vices feet: and sensual peace confounds,
Valor, and cowardice: Fame, and Infamy;
The rude and terrible age is turned again:
When the thick air hid heaven, and all the stars,
Were drowned in humor, tough, and hard to peirse,
When the red Sun held not his fixe^ place;
Kept not his certain course, his rise and set
Nor yet distinguished with his definite bounds;
Nor in his firm conuersions, were discernd
The fruitful distances of time and place,
In the well varyed seasons of the year;
When th'incomposd incursions of floods
Wasted and eat the earth; and all things showed
Wild and disordred: naught was worse then now;
We must reform and have a new creation
Of State and government; and on our Chaos
Will I sit brooding up another world.
I who through all the dangers that can siege
The life of man, have forcst my glorious way
To the repayring of my countries ruins,
Will ruin it again, to re-aduance it;
Roman Camyllus, safte the State of Rome
With far less merit, then Byron has France;
And how short of this is my recompense.
The king shall know, I will have better price
Set on my services; in spite of whom
I will proclaim and ring my discontents
Into the farthest ear of all the world.

Laff: How great a spirit he breaths? how learnd? how wise?
But (worthy Prince) you must give temperate air,
To your unmatched, and more then human wind;
Else will our plots be frost-bit, in the flower.

D'Au: Betwixt our selves we may give liberal vent
To all our fiery and displeased impressions;
Which nature could not entertain with life,
Without some exhalation; A wronged thought
Will break a rib of steel.

Byr. My Princely friend,
Enough of these eruptions; our grave Councellor
Well knows that great affairs will not be forged
But upon Anuills that are linde with wool;
We must ascend to our intentions top
Like Clouds that be not seen till they be up?

Laff: O, you do too much ravish; And my soul
Offer to Music in your numerous breath;
Sententious, and so high, it wakens death;
It is for these parts, that the Spanish King
Has sworn to win them to his side
At any price or perril^; That great Sauoy,
Offers his princely daughter, and a dowry,
Amounting to five hundred thousand crowns;
With full transport of all the Sovereign rights
Belonging to the State of Burgondie;
Which marriage will be made, the only Cyment
To Effect and strengthen all our secret Treaties;
Instruct me thererfore, (my assured Prince)
Now I am going to resolve the King
Of his suspicions, how I shall behave me.

Byr: Go my most trusted friend, with happy feet:
Make me a sound man with him; Go to Court
But with a little train; and be prepared
To hear, at first, terms of contempt and choler,
Which you may easily calm, and turn to grace.
If you beseech his highness to believe
That your whole drift and course for Italy,
(Where he has heard you were) was only made
Out of your long-well-knowne devotion
To our right holy Lady of Lorretto,
As you have told some of your friends in Court:
And that in passing Mylan and Thurin,
They charged you to propound my marrriage
With the third daughter of the Duke of Sauoy;
Which you have done, and I rejected it,
Resolved to build upon his royal care
For my bestowing, which he lately vowed.

Laff. O, you direct, as if the God of light
Sat in each nooke of you; and pointed out
The path of Empire; Charming all the dangers
On both sides armed, with his harmoniouse finger.

Byr: Besides let me entreat you to dism^sse,
All that have made the voyage with your Lordship,
But specially the Curate: And to lock
Your papers in some place of doubtless safety;
Or sacrifize them to the God of fire;
Considering worthily that in your hands
I put my fortunes, honor, and my life.

Laff: Therein the bounty that your Grace has shown me,
I prize past life, and all things that are mine;
And will undoubtedly preserve, and tender
The merit of it, as my hope of heaven.

By^: I make no question; farewell worthy friend. Exit.

Henry, Chancellor, Laffin, D'Escures, Ianin, Henry having many papers in his
hand. Hen. Are these proofs of that purely Chatholike zeal
That made him wish no other glorious title,
Then to be called the scourge of Huguenots?

Chan: No question sir he was of no religion;
But (upon false grounds, by some Courtiers laid)
Has often been heard to mock and jest at all.

Hen: Are not his treasons heinous?

All: -- Most abhord;

Chan: All is confirmd that you have heard before,
And amplified with many horrors more.

Hen: Good De'Laffin; you were our golden plummet,
To sound this gulphe of all ingratitude;
In which you have with excellent desert
Of loyalty and policy, expressed
Your name in action; and with such appearance
Have proved the parts of his ungrateful creasons,
That I must credit, more then I desired,

Laff: I must confess my Lord, my voyages
Made to the Duke of Sauoy and to Mylan;
Were with endeavor, that the wars returned,
Might breed some trouble to your Majesty;
And profit those by whom they were procured;
But since, in their disseignes, your sacred person
Was not excepted (which I since have seen)
It so abhord me, that I was resolved
To give you full intelligence thereof;
And rather chus'd to fail in promises,
Made to the servant; then infringe my fealty
Sworn to my royal Sovereign and Master;

Hen: I am extremely discontent to see,
This most vnaturall conspiracy;
And would not have the Marshall of Byron,
The first example or my forced Justice;
Nor that his death should be the worthy cause,
That my calm reign, (which hitherto has held
A clea^e and cheerful sky above the heads
Of my dear subjects) should so suddenly
Be ouercast with clouds of fire, and thunder;
Yet on submission, I vow still his pardon.

Ian: And still our humble counsayles, (for his service)
Would so resolve you, if he will employ
His honored valor as effectually,
To fortify the State, against your foes;
As he has practiced bad intendments with them.

Hen: That vow shall stand; and we will now address,
Some messengers to call him home to Court;
Without the slendrest intimation,
Of any ill we know; we will restrain
(VVithal forgiveness, if he will confess)
His headlong course to ruin; and his taste,
From the sweet poison of h^s friendlike foes:
Treason has blisterd h^eles, dishonest Things
Have bitter Riue^s, though delicious Springs;
Descures haste you unto him, and inform,
That having heard by sure intelligence,
Of the great leuies made in Italy,
Of Arms and soldiers; I am resolute,
Upon my frontiers to maintain an Army;
The charge whereof I will impose on him;
And to that end, expressly have commanded,
De Vic, our Lord Ambassador in Suisse,
To demand levy of six thousand men:
Appointing them to march where Duke Byron
Shall have directions; wherein I have followed.
The counsel of my Constable his Gossip;
Whose liked advice, I made him him know by letters,
Wishing to hear his own; from his own mouth,
And by all means conjure, his speediest presence;
Do this with utmost have.

Desc. I will my Lord. Exit Desc.

Hen. My good Lord Chancellor, of many Pieces,
More then is here, of his conspiracies
Presented to us, by our friend, Laffin;
You, only, shall reserve these seven and twenty,
Which are not those that must conclude against him;
But mention only him: since I am loath,
To have the rest of the conspirators, known.

Chan. My Lord, my purpose is to guard all these,
So safely from the sight of any other:
That in my doublet I will have them sowed;
Without discovering them to mine own eyes,
Till need, or opportunity requires.

Hen. You shall do well my Lord, they are of weight;
But I am doubtful; that his conscience
Will make him so suspicious of the worst,
That he will hardly be induc't to come.

Ian. I much should doubt that to, but that I hope
The strength of his conspiracy, as yet
Is not so ready, that he dare presume,
By his refusal to make known so much
Of his disloialtie.

Hen. I yet conceive;
His practices are turned to no bad end,
And good Laffin, I pray you wright to him,
To hasten his repair: and make him sure,
That you have satisfied me to the full.
For all his actions, and have vtterd naught,
But what might serve to banish bad impressions.

Laf. I will not fail my Lord.

Hen. Conua^e your letters;
By some choice friend of his: or by his brother:
And for a third excitement to his presence;
Ianin, your self shall go, and with the power
That both the rest employ to make him come,
Use you the strength of your persuasions.

Ian. I will my Lord, and hope I shall present him. Exit Ian.

Enter Esper. Soisson, Vitry, Pralin, etc. Espa. Wilt please your Majesty to
take your place,
The Mask is coming.

Hen. Room my Lords, stand close.

Music and a Song, above, and Cupid enters with a Table written, hung about
his neck; after him two Torch-bearers; after them Mary, D'Entragues, and 4.
Ladies more with their Torch-bearers, etc. Cupid speaks. Cup. My Lord, these
Nimphs, part of the scatterd train,
Of friendlesse virtue (living in the woods
Of shady Arden: and of late not hearing
The dreadful sounds of War; but that sweet Peace,
Was by your valor lifted from her grave,
Set on your royal right hand: and all virtues
Summond with honor, and with rich rewards,
To be her hand-maides): These I say, the virtues,
Have put their heads out of their Caves and Couerts,
To be her true attendants in your Court:
In which desire, I must relate a tale,
Of kind and worthy emulation,
Twixt these two Virtues, leaders of the train.
This on the right hand is Sophrosyne,
Or Chastity: this other Dapsyle
Or Liberality: their Emulation
Begat a jar, which thus was reconciled.
I, (having left my Goddess mothers lap,
To hawlke, and shoot at Birds in Arden groves,)
Beheld this Princely Nymph* with much affection,
Left killing Birds, and turned into a Bird,
Like which I flew betwixt her Iuory breasts,
As if I had been driven by some Hawlke,
To sue to her for saftety of my life;
She smilde at first, and sweetly shadowd me,
With soft protection of her silver hand;
Sometimes she tied my legs in her rich hair,
And made me (past my nature, liberty)
Proud of my fetters: As I pertly sat,
On the white pillowes of her naked breasts,
I sung for joy; she answered note for note,
Relish for relish, with such ease and Art,
In her divine division, that my tunes,
Showd like the God of Shepherds to the Suns,
Comparde with hers: ashamd of which disgrace,
I took my true shape, Bow, and all my shafts,
And lighted all my torches at her eyes,
Which (set about her, in a golden ring)
I followd Birds again, from Tree to Tree,
Killed, and presented, and she kindly took.
But when she handled my triumphant Bow,
And saw the beauty of my golden shafts,
She begd them of me; I, poor boy replied,
I had no other Riches; yet was pleased
To hazard all, and stake them against a kiss,
At an old game I used, called Penny-prick.
She p^iuie to her own skill in the play,
Answered my challenge, so, I lost my arms:
And now my Shafts are headed with her looks,
One of which Shafts she put into my Bow*
And shot at this fair Nymph, with whom before
I told your Majesty, she had some jar.
The Nymph did instantly repent all parts
She played in urging that effeminate war,
Loved and submitted; which submission
This took so well, that now they both are one:
And as for your dear love, their discords grew,
So for your love, they did their loves renew.
And now to prove them capable of your court*
In skill of such conceits, and quallities
As here are practisde; they will first submit
Their grace in dancing to your highness doom,
And pray the prease to give their meisures room,
Music, Dance, etc. which done Cupid speaks. If this suffice, for one Court
complement,
To make them gracious, and entertainde;
Behold another parcel of their Court-ship,
Which is a rare dexterity in riddles,
Shown in one instance, which is here inscribed.
Here is a Riddle, which if any Knight
At first fight can resolve; he shall enjoy
This Jewel here annexed; which though it show
To vulgar eyes, no richer then a Peble;
And that no Lapydarie, nor great man
Will give a Soulz for it; it is worth a kingdom:
For it is an artificial stone composde,
By their great Mistress, Virtue: and will make
Him that shall wear it, live with any little,
Suffizde, and more content then any king.
If he that undertakes cannot resolve it;
And that these Nimphs can have no harbor here;
(It being considered, that so many virtues
Can never live in Court) he shall resolve
To leave the Court, and live with them in Arden,

Esp. Pronounce the riddle: I will undertake it.

Cup. It Is this sir.
What Is that a fair Lady, most of all likes,
Yet ever makes show she least of all seeks?
That Is ever embraced and affected by her,
Yet never is seen to please or come nigh her:
Most served in her night-weeds: does her good in a corner,
But a poor man's thing* yet does richly adorn her:
Most cheap, and most dear, above all worldly pelf,
That is hard to get in, but comes out of it self.

Esp. Let me peruse it, Cupid.

Cup. Here it is.

Esp. Your Riddle is good Fame.

Cup. Good fame? how make you that good?

Esp. Good fame is that a good Lady most likes I am sure;

Cup. That's granted;

Esp. Yet ever makes show she least of all seeks: for she likes it only for
the virtue, which is not glorious.

Hen. That holds well

Esp. It Is ever embraced and affected by her: for she must, persevere in virtue
or fame vanishes.
Yet never is seen to please or come nigh her for fame is Invisible,

Cup. Exceeding right.

Esp. Most served in her night weeds: for Ladies that most wear their
Nightweeds come left abroad, and they that come least abroad serve fame most;
according to this; Non forma sed fama in publicum exire de bet.


Hen. It Is very substantial,


Esp. Does her good in a corner: that is in her most retreat from the world,
comforts her; but a poor man's thing: for every poor man may purchase it, yet
does richly adorn a Lady.


Cup. That all must grant.


Esp. Most cheap for it costs nothing, and most dear, for gould can not buy
it; above all worldly pelffe; for that's transitory, and fame eternal. It is
hard to get in; that is hard to get: But comes out of it self; for when it is
vertuosely deserud with the most inward retreat from the world, it comes out
in spite of it, and so Cupid your jewel is mine.


Cup. It is: and be the virtue of it, yours.
We Will now turn to our dance, and then attend,
Your heighnes will, as touching our resort,
If virtue may be entertaind in Court,

Hen. This show has pleased me well, for that it figures.
The reconcilement of my Queen and Mistress:
Come Let us in and thank them and prepare,
To entertain our trusty friend Byron. Exeunt.

Finis Actus Secundi.
ACTVS 3. SCENA I.
Enter Byron. D'Auer. Byr. Dear friend, we must not be more true to kings,
Then Kings are to their subjects, there are schools,
Now broken open in all parts of the world,
First founded in ingenious Italy,
Where some conclusions of estate are held,
That for a day preserve a Prince, and ever,
Destroy him after: from thence men are taught,
To glyde into degrees of height by craft,
And then lock in themselves by villainy:
But God, who knows kings are not made by art,
But right of Nature, nor by treachery propt,
But simple virtue, once let fall from heaven,
A branch of that green tree, whose root is yet*
Fast fixed above the stars: which sacred branch,
We well may liken to that Laurel spray,
That from the heavenly Eagles golden seres,
Fell in the lap of great Augustus wife:
Which spray once set, grew up into a tree,
Whereof were Girlonds made, and Emperors,
Had their estates and foreheads crowned with them:
And as the arms of that tree did decay,
The race of great Augustus wore away,
Nero being last of that imperial line,
The tree and Emperor together died.
Religion is a branch, first set and blessed
By heavens high finger in the hearts of kings,
Which whilelome grew into a goodly tree,
Bright Angels sat and sung upon the twigs,
And royal branches for the heads of Kings,
Were twisted of them but since s^uint-ey'd ^nuye:
And pale suspicion, dashed the heads of kingdoms,
One against another: two abhorred twins,
With two foul tails: stern War and Liberty,
Entered the world. The tree that grew from heaven.
Is ouerrunne with moss; the cheerful music,
That heretofore has sounded out of it,
Begins to cease; and as she casts her leaves,
(By small degrees) the kingdoms of the earth
Decline and wither: and look whenever
That the pure sap in her, is dried up quite;
The lamp of all authority goes out,
And all the blaze of Princes is extinkt;
Thus as the Poet sends a messenger
Out to the stage, to show the sum of all,
That follows after: so are Kings reuolts,
And playing both ways with religion,
Forerunners of afflictions imminent,
Which (like a Chorus) subjects must lament.

D' Au. My Lord I stand not on these deep discourses,
To settle my course to your fortunes; mine
Are freely and inseperablie linckt:
And to your love my life.

Byr. Thanks Princely friend,
And whatsoever good shall come of me,
Pursued by all the Catholic Princes aids
With whom I join, and whose whole states proposde,
To win my valor, promise me a throne:
All shall be equal with my self; thine own.

La Brun. My Lord here is D'escuris sent from the King,
Desires access to you.

Enter D'escuris. Byr. Attend him in.

Desc. Health to my Lord the Duke:

Byr. Welcome D'escuris,
In what health rests our royal Sovereign.

Desc. In good health of his body, but his mind,
Is something troubled with the gathering storms,
Of foreign powers; that as he is informed
Address themselves into his frontier towns;
And therefore his intent, is to maintain:
The body of an army on those parts;
And yield their worthy conduct to your valor.

Byr. From whence hears he that any storms are rising?

D'esc. From Italy; and his intelligence,
No doubt is certain, that in all those parts
Leuies are hotly made; for which respect,
He sent to his Ambassador De Vic,
To make demand in Switzerland, for the raising
With utmost diligence of six thousand men;
All which shall be commanded to attend,
On your direction; as the Constable
Your honored Gossip gave him in advice;
And he sent you by wrighting: of which letters,
He would have answer, and advice from you
By your most speedy presence.

Byr. This is strange,
That when the enemy is t'attempt his frontiers,
He calls me from the frontiers; does he think,
It is an action worthy of my valor
To turn my back, to an approaching foe?

Desc. The foe is not so nere, but you may come,
And take more strickt directions from his highness,
Then he thinks fit his letters should contain,
Without the least attainture of your valor;
And therefore good my Lord, forbear excuse
And bear your self on his direction;
Who well you know has never made design
For your most worthy service, where he saw
That any thing but honor could succeed.

Byr. I will not come I swear:

Des. I know your grace,
Will send no such unsavory reply.

Byr. Tell him that I besecch his Majesty,
To pardon my repair till the end be known
Of all these leuies now in Italy.

Des. My Lord I know that tale will never please him;
And wish you as you love his love and pleasure*
To satisfy his summons speedily:
And speedily I know he will return you;

Byr. By heaven it is not fit: if all my service
Makes me know any thing: beseech him therefore,
To trust my judgment in these doubtful charges,
Since in assured assaults it has not faild him.

Des. I would your Lordship now, would trust his judgment.

Byr. Gods precious, you are importunate past measure,
And (I know) further, then your charge extends,
I Will satisfy his highness, let that serve;
For by this flesh and blood, you shall not bear,
Any reply to him, but this from me.

Des. It Is naught to me my Lord, I wish your good,
And for that cause have been importunate. Ex^t Desc:

Brunel. By no means go my Lord; but with distrust,
Of all that has been said or can be sent;
Collect your friends, and stand upon your guard,
The Kings fair letters, and his messages
Are only Golden Pills, and comprehend
Horrible purgatiues.

Byr. I will not go,
For now I see th'instructions lately sent me,
That something is discouerd, are too true,
And my head rules none of those neighbor Nobles,
That every Purs^uant brings beneath the axe:
If they bring me out, they shall see i will hatch
Like to the Black-thorne, that puts forth his leaf,
Not with the golden fawnings of the Sun,
But sharpest showers of hail, and blackest frosts:
Blows, batteries, breaches, showers of steel and blood,
Must be his doun-right messengers for me,
And not the misling breath of policy:
He, he himself, made passage to his Crown
Through no more armies, battles, massacres,
Then I will ask him to arrive at me;
He takes on him, my executions,
And on the demolitions, that this arm,
Has shaken out of forts and Citadells,
Has he advanced the Tropheys of his valor;
Where I, in those assumptions may skorne,
And speak contemptuously of all the world,
For any equal yet, I ever found;
And in my rising, not the Syrian Star
That in the Lions mouth, undaunted shines,
And makes his brave ascension with the Sun,
Was of the Egiptians, with more zeal beheld,
And made a rule to know the circuit*
And compass of the year; then I was held
When I appeard from battle; the whole sphere,
And full sustainer of the state we bear;
I have Alcides-like gone under the earth
And on these showlders borne the weight of France:
And (for the fortunes of the thankles King)
My father (all know) set him in his throne,
And if he urge me, I may pluck him out. Enter Mess:

Mes. Here is the president Ianin, my Lord;
Sent from the King, and urges quick access.

Byr. Another Pursiuant? and one so quick?
He takes next course with me, to make him stay:
But, let him in, let us here what he importunes. Enter Ianin.

Ianin. Honor, and loyal hopes to Duke Byron.

Byr. No other tooch me: say how fares the King?

Ian. Farely my Lord; the cloud is yet far off
That aims at his obscuring, and his will,
Would gladly give the motion to your powers
That should di^perse it; but the means, himself,
Would personally relate in your direction*

Byr. Still on that hante?

Ian. Upon my life, my Lord,
He much desires to see you, and your sight
Is now grown necessary to suppress
(As with the glorious splendour of the Sun)
The rude winds that report breaths in his ears,
Endeavoring to blast your loialtie.

Byr. Sir, if my loyalty, stick in him no faster
But that the light breath of report may loose it,
(So I rest still vnmoou'd) let him be shaken.

Ian. But these aloof abodes, my Lord bewray,
That there is rather firmness in your breath.
Then in your heart; Truth is not made of glass,
That with a small touch, it should fear to break,
And therefore should not shun it; believe me
His arm is long, and strong; and it can fetch
Any within his will, that will not come:
Not he that surfets in his mines of gold,
And for the pride thereof, compares with God,
Calling (with almost nothing different)
His powers invincible, for omnipotent,
Can back your boldest Fort against his assaults;
It is his pride, and vain ambition,
That has but two stairs in his high designs;
(The lowest envy, and the highest blood)
That does abuse you; and gives minds too high,
Rather a will by guiddinesse to fall,
Then to descend by judgment.

Byr. I rely
On no man's back nor belly; but the King
Must think that merit, by ingratitude cracked,
Requires a firmer sementing then words.
And he shall find it a much harder work
To soder broken hearts* then shiuerd glasses.

Ian. My Lord, it is better hold a Sovereigns love
By bearing injuries; then by laying out
Stir his displeasure; Princes discontents
(Being once incenst) are like the flames of Aetna,
Not to be quenched, nor lessend: and be sure,
A subjects confidence in any merit,
Against his Sovereign, that makes him presume
To fly too high; approoues him like a clowd,
That makes a show as it did hawlke at kingdoms,
And could command, all raisd beneath his vapor:
When suddenly, the Foul that hawlkt so fair,
Stoopes in a puddle, or consumes in air.

Byr. I fly with no such aim, nor am opposde,
Against my Sovereign; but the worthy height
I have wrought by my service, I will hold,
Which if I come away, I cannot do;
For if the enemy should invade the Frontier,
Whose charge to guard, is mine, with any spoil,
(Although the King in placing of another
Might well excuse me) Yet all foreign Kings
That can take note of no such secret quittance,
Will lay the weakness here, upon my wants;
And therefore my abode is resolute.

Ian: I sorrow for your resolution,
And fear your dissolution, will succeed.

Byr: I must endure it;

Ian: Fare you well my Lord;

Byr: Farewell to you; Enter Brun.
Captain what other news?

Bru: La Fin salutes you;

Byr: Welcome good friend; I hope your wished arrival*
Will give some certain end to our disseignes;

Bru: I know not that, my Lord; reports are raised so doubtful and so
different, that the truth of any one can hardly be assured.

Byr: Good news, D'Avuergne; our trusty friend La Fin,
Has cleared all scruple with his Majesty,
And vtterd nothing but what served to clear
All bad Suggestions.

Bru: So he says, my Lord
But others say, La Fins assurances
Are mere deceipts; and wish you to believe;
That when the Vidame, nephew to La Fin,
Met you at Autune, to assure your doubts,
His uncle had said nothing to the King
That might offend you; all the iournies charge,
The King defraid; besides, your truest friends
Willd me to make you certain that your place
Of government is otherwise disposed;
And all advise you, for your latest hope,
To make retreat into the Fr^nch County.

Byr: I thank them all, but they touch not the depth,
Of the affairs, betwixt La Fin and me.
Who is returned contented to his house,
Quite freed, of all displeasure or distrust;
And therefore, worthy friends well now to Court.

D' Au My Lord, I like your other friends aduices,
Much better then Laffins; and on my life
You can not come to Court with any saftie.

Byr. Who shall infringe it? I know, all the Court,
Have better apprehension of my valor;
Then that they dare lay violent hands on me;
If I have only means to draw this sword,
I shall have power enough to set me free,
From seasure, by my proudest enemy. Exit.

Esper: Vyt: Pra^^: Esp. He will not come I dare engage my hand.

Vyt. He will be fetched then, i will engage my head.

Pra. Come, or be fetched, he quite has lost his honor,
In giving these suspicions of revolt
From his allegiance: that which he has wunne,
With sundry wounds, and perrill of his life;
With wonder of his wisdom, and his valor,
He loses with a most enchanted glory:
And admiration of his pride, and folly.

Vit. Why did you never see a fortunate man,
Suddenly raised to heaps of wealth and honor?
Nor any rarely great in gifts of nature,
As valor, wit, and smooth use of the tongue,
Set strangely to the pitch of populare likings?
But with as sudden falls the rich and honored,
Were ouerwhelmd by poverty* and shame
Or had no use of both above the wretched.

Esp. Men never are satisfied with that they have;
But as a man, matched with a lovely wife,
When his most heavenly Theorye of her beauties,
Is duld and quite exhausted with his practice:
He bring^ her forth to feasts, where he ahlas,
Falls to his viends with no thought like others,
That ^hinke him blessed in her, and they (poor men)
Court, and make faces, offer service, sweat,
With their desires contention, break their brains
For jests, and tales: sit mute, and loose their looks,
(Far out of wit, and out of countenance)
So all men else, do what they have transplant,
And place their wealth in thirst of that they want.

Enter Henry, Chanc: Vyd: Desc: Ianin. Hen. He will not come; I must both
grieve and wonder,
That all my care to win my subjects love
And in one cup of friendship to comix,
Our lives and fortunes: should leave out so many
As give a man (comtemptuous of my love,
And of his own good, in the Kingdoms Peace)
Hope, in a continuance so ungrateful,
To bear out his designs in spite of me;
How should I better please all, then I do?
When they supposed, I would have given some,
Insolent garrisons; others Citadells,
And to all sorts, increase of miseries;
Province by Province, I did visit all
Whom those injurious rumors had diswaide;
And showed them how, I never sought to build,
More forts for me, then were within their hearts;
Nor use more stern constraints then their good wills,
To succor the necessities of my crown,
That I desird to ad to their contents
By all occasions, rather then subtract;
Nor wished I, that my treasury should flow,
With gold that swum in, in my subjects tears;
And then I found no man, that did not bless,
My few years reign, and their triumphant peace,
And do they now so soon, complain of ease?

Hen. He will not come? Enter Byron, D' Av^ergne; brother, with others*

Esp. O madness? he is come.

Chan. The duke is come my Lord:

Hen. Oh Sir, y^are welcome,
And fitly, to conduct me to my house;

Byr. I must beseech your Majesty's excuse,
That (Jealous of mine honor) I have vsd,
Some of mine own commandment in my stay,
And came not with your heighnesse soonest summons.

Hen: The faithfu'l servant right in holy wri^;
That said he would not come and yet he came:
But come you hither; I must tell you now,
Not the contempt you stood to in your stay,
But the bad ground that bore up your contempt,
Makes you arrive at no port, but repentance,
Despair, and ruin;

Byr. Be what port it will,
At which your will, will make me be arrived,
I am not come to justify my self,
To ask you pardon nor accuse my friends,

Hen. I^ you conceal my enemies you are one,
And then my pardon shall be worth your asking,
Or else your head be worth my cutting of.

Byr. Being friend and worthy fautor of my self,
I am no foe of yours, nor no empayrer,
Since he can no way worthily maintain
His Princes honor that neglects his own:
And if your will have been to my true reason,
(Maintaining still the truth of loyalty)
A check to my free nature and mine honor,
And that on your free justice I presum,d
To cross your will a little, I conceine,
You will not think this forfaite worth my head;

Hen. Have you maintaind your truth of loyalty?
When since I pardoned foul ententions,
Resolving to forget eternally, What they apperd in,
And had welcomd you as the kind father does his riotous son.
I can approve facts fowler then the intents,
Of deep disloyalty and highest treason;

Byr. May this right hand be thunder to my breast,
If I stand guilty of the slendrest fact,
Wherein the left of those two can be proved,
For could my tender conscience but have touched,
At any such unnatural relaps;
I would not with this confidence have run,
Thus headlong in the furnace of a wrath,
Blown, and thrice kindled: having way enough,
In my election both to shun and slight it.

Hen. You Are grosely and vain gloriously abused,
There is no way in Sauoy nor in Spain,
To give a fool that hope of your escape,
And had you not (even when you did) arrived.
(With horror to the proudest hope you had)
I would have fetched you.

Byr. You must then have used.
A power beyond my knowledge, and a will,
Beyond your justice. For a little stay
More then I vsd would hardly have been worthy,
Of such an open expedition;
In which to all the censures of the world,
My faith and Innocence had been foully foyld;
Which (I protest) by heavens bright witnesses
That shine far, far, from mixture with our fears.
Retain as perfect roundnes as their spheres;

Hen It Is well my Lord, I thought I could have frighted
Your firmest confidence: some other time,
We will (as now in private) sift your actions.
And pour more then you think into the si^e,
Always reserving clemency and pardon
Upon confession, be you nere so foul,
Come lets clear up our brows shall we to tennis.

Byr. I my Lord if I may make the match.
The Duke Espernon and my self will play,
With you and Count Soissons;

Esp. I know my Lord.
You play well but you make your matches ill.

Hen. Come it is a match. Exit.

Byr. How like you my ariuall?

Esp. I Will tell you as your friend in your ear.
You have given more preferment to your courage,
Then to the provident counsels of your friends.

D Au. I told him so my Lord, and much was grieved
To see his bold approach, so full of will.

Byr. Well I must bear it now, though but with the head,
The shoulders bearing nothing.

Esp. By Saint John,
It Is a good headless resolution. Exeunt.

ACTVS. 4. SCEN. 1.
Byron, D'Avuergne. Byr. O the most base fruits of a settled peace!
In men, I mean; worse then their durty fields,
Which they manure much better themselves:
For them they plant, and sow, and ere they grow,
Weedie, and choakt with thorns, they grub and proyne,
And make them better, then when cruel war,
Frighted from thence the sweaty labourer:
But men themselves, in steed of bearing fruits,
Grow rude, and foggie, ouer-growne with weeds,
Their spirits, and freedoms smootherd in their ease;
And as their tyrants and their ministers,
Grow wild in prosecution of their lusts,
So they grow prostitute, and lie (like whores)
Down and take up, to their abhord dishonors:
The friendlesse may be injured and oppressed;
The guiltless lead to slaughter, the deseruer
Given to the beggar; right be wholly wronged,
And wrong be only honored; till the strings
Of every man's heart, crack; and who will stir,
To tell authority, that it does err.
All men cling to it, though they see their bloods
In their most dear associates and Allies,
Poured into kennels by it: and who dares
But look well in the breast, whom that impayres?
How all the Court now looks askew on me?
Go by without saluting, shun my sight,
Which (like a march sun) agues breeds in them,
From whence of late, 'twas health to have a beam.

D'Au. Now none will speak to us, we thrust our selves
Into men's companies, and offer speech,
As if not made, for their diuerted ears*
Their backs turned to us, and their words to others,
And we must like obsequious Parasites,
Follow their faces, wind about their persons,
For looks and answers: or be cast behind,
No more viewd then the wallet of their faults.

Enter Soisson. Byr. Yet here is one views me, and I think will speak*

Soiss. My Lord, if you respect your name and race,
The preservation of your former honors,
Merits and virtues; humbly cast them all,
At the kings mercy; for beyond all doubt,
Your acts have thither driven them: he has proofs
So pregnant, and so horride, that to hear them,
Would make your valor in your very looks,
Give up your forces, miserably guilty:
But he is most loath (for his ancient love
To your rare virtues:) and in their empaire,
The full discouragement of all that live,
To trust or favor any gifts in Nature)
T'expose them to the light; when darkness may
Cover her own brood, and keep still in day,
Nothing of you but that may brook her brightness:
You know what horrors these high strokes do bring,
Raisd in the arm of an incensed King.

Byr. My Lord, be sure the King cannot complain
Of any thing in me, but my true service,
Which in so many dangers of my death,
May so approve my spotless loyalty;
That those quite opposite horrors you assure,
Must look out of his own ingratitude;
Or the malignant enuies of my foes,
Who power me out in such a Styg^an flood,
To drown me in my self, since their desert^
Are far from such a deluge; and in me
Hid like so many rivers in the Sea.

Soiss: You think I come to ^ound you; fare you well, Exit.

Enter Chancellor, Espernon, Ianin, Vidame, V^try, Pralin, whisperinge by
couples, etc. D' Au: See see, not one of them will cast a glaunce
At our eclipsed faces;

Byr: They keep all to cast in admiration on the King:
For from his face are all their faces molded.

D' Au: But when a change comes; we shall see them all
Changed into water, that will instantly
Give look for look, as if it watched to greet us;
Or else for one, they will give us twenty faces,
Like to the little specks on sides of glasses;

Byr: Is It not an easy loss to lose their looks,
Whose hearts so soon are melted?

D'Au: But me thinks,
(Being Courtiers) they should cast best looks on men,
When they thought worst of them.

Byr: O no my Lord,
They n'ere dissemble but for some advantage;
They sell their looks, and shadows; which they rate
After their markets, kept beneath the State;
Lord what foul weather their aspects do threaten?
See in how grave a Brake he sets his vizard:
Passion of nothing; See, an excellent Iesture:
Now Courtship goes a ditching in their foreheads;
And we are fallen into those dismal ditches;
Why even thus dreadfully would they be rapt,
If the Kings butterd eggs, were only spilt.

Enter Henry. Hen: Lord Chancellor;

Cha* I my Lord;

Hen: And lord Vidame: Exit.

Byr: And not Byron? here is a prodigious change;

D'Au: He cast no Beam on you;

Byr: Why now you see
From whence their countenances were copyed.

Enter the captain of Byrons guard with a letter. D'Au. See, here comes some
news, I believe my Lord.

Byr. What says the honest captain of my guard?

Cap. I bring a letter from a friend of yours.

Byr. It Is welcome then:

D'Au. Have we yet any friends?

Cap. More then ye would I think: I never saw,
Men in their right minds so unrighteous
In their own causes.

Byr. See what thou have brought,
He wills us to retire our selves my Lord,
And makes as if it were almost too late,
What says my captain; shall we go or no?

Cap. I would your daggers point had kissed my heart,
When you resolved to come.

Byr. I pray the why?

Cap. Yet, does that senseless Apopelxy dull you?
The devil or your wicked angel blinds you,
Bereauing all your reason of a man
And leaves you but the spirit of a horse,
In your brute nostrills: only power to dare.

Byr. Why, do thou think, my coming here has brought me
To such an unrecoverable danger?

Cap. Judge by the strange O^tents that have succeeded,
Since your arrival: the kind foul, the wild duck,
That came into your cabinet, so beyond
The sight of all your servants, or your self:
That flew about, and on your shoulder sat
And which you had so fed, and so attended;
For that dum love she showed you; just as soon,
As you were parted, on the sudden died.
And to make this no less then an Oftent;
Another that has fortuned since, confirms it:
Your goodly horse Pastrana, which the Archduke,
Gave you at Bruxells; in the very hour,
You left your strength, fel-mad, and killed himself;
^^e like chanced to the horse the great duke sent you:
and, with both these, the horse the duke of Lorraine,
Sent you at, Vinsie made a third presage,
Of some Inevitable fate that touched you,
Who like the other pined away and died,

Byr. All these together are indeed o^tentfull,
Which by another like, I can confirm:
The matchless Earl of Essex who some make,
(In their most sure diuinings of my death)
A parallel with me in life and fortune,
Had one horse like-wise that the very hour,
He sufferd death, (being well the night before)
Died in his pasture. Noble happy beasts,
That die, not having to their wills to live:
They use no deprecations, nor complaints.
Nor suit for mercy: amongst them the Lion,
Serves not the Lion; nor the horse the horse,
As man serves man: when men show most their spirrits,
In valor and their utmost dares to do;
They are compard to Lions, Woolues, and Bores,
But by conversion; None will say a Lion,
Fights as he had the Spirrit of a man.
Let me then in my danger now give cause,
For all men to begin that Simile.
For all my huge engagement, I provide me,
This short sword only; which if I have time,
To show my apprehendor, he shall use,
Power of ten Lions if I get not loose.

Enter Henry, Chancellor, Vidame, Ianin, Vitry, Pralin. Hen. What shall we do
with this unthankful man?
Would he (of one thing) but reveal the truth,
Which I have proof of, underneath his hand,
He should not taste my Justice. I would give,
Two hundred thousand crowns, that he would yield,
But such means for my pardon, as he should;
I never loved man like him: would have trusted,
My Son in his protection, and my Realm:
He has deserved my love with worthy service,
Yet can he not deny, but I have thrice,
Saved him from death: I drew him of the foe.
At Fountain Francoise where he was engaged,
So wounded and so much amazd with blows,
That (as I played the soldier in his rescue,)
I was enforced to play the Marshall,
To order the retreat: because he said,
He was not fit to do it nor to serve me,

Cha. Your majesty has vsd your utmost means,
Both by your own persuasions, and his friends
To bring him to submission, and confess
(With some sign of repentance) his foul fault:
Yet still he stands prefract and insolent.
You have in love and care of his recovery
Been half in labor to produce a course,
And resolution, what were fit for him.
And since so amply it concerns your crown^,
You must by law cut of, what by your grace,
You cannot bring into the state of safety,

Ian. Begin at the end my Lord and execute,
Like Alexander with Parmeni^.
Princes (you know) are Masters of their laws,
And may resolve them to what forms they please,
So all conclude in justice; in whose stroke,
There is one sort of manadge for the Great;
Another for inferior: The great Mother,
Of all productions (grave Necessity)
Commands the variation: And the profit,
So certainly foreseen, commends the example.

Hen. I like not executions so informall,
For which my predecessors have been blamed:
My Subjects and the world shall know; my power,
And my authority by laws usual course
Dares punish; not the deuilish heads of treason,
But there confederates be they nere so dreadful*
The decent ceremonies of my laws,
And their solemnities shall be observed,
With all their St^menes and Severity.

Vit: Where will your highness have him apprehended?

Hen: Not in the Castle (as some have advised)
But in his chamber;

Pral: Rather in your own,
Or coming out of it; for it is assured
That any other place of apprehension,
Will make the hard performance, end in blood.

Vit: To shun this likelihood, my Lord it is best
To make the apprehension near your chamber;
For all respect and reverence given the place,
More then is needful, to chastise the person,
And save the opening of to many veins;
Is vain and dangerous.

Hen: Gather you your guard,
And I will find fit time to give the word,
When you shall seize on him and on D'Avuergne;

Vit: We will be ready to the death; (my Lord) Exeunt.

Hen: O thou that gouernst the keen swords of Kings,
Direct my arm in this important stroke,
Or hold it being advanced; the weight of blood,
Even in the basest subject, does exact
Deep consultation, in the highest King;
For in one subject, deaths unjust affrights,
Passions, and pains, (though he be n'ere so poor)
Ask more remorse, then the voluptuous spleenes
Of all Kings in the world, deserve respect;
He should be borne grey-headed that will bear
The sword of Empire; Judgment of the life,
Free state, and reputation of a man,
(If it be just and worthy) dwells so dark
That it denies access to Sun and Moon;
The souls eye sharpened with that sacred light,
Of whom the Sun it self is but a beam,
Must only give that judgment; O how much
Err those Kings then, that play with life and death,
And nothing put into their serious States,
But humor and their lusts! For which alone
Men long for kingdoms; whose huge counterpoise
In cares and dangers, could a fool comprise,
He would not be a King but would be wise;

Enter Byron talking with the Queen: Esp: D' Entragues, D' Av: with another
Lady, others attending. Hen: Here comes the man, with whose ambitious head
(Cast in the way of Treason) we must stay
His full chase of our ruin and our Realm;
This hour shall take upon her shady wings
His latest liberty and life to Hell.

D'Av: We are undone?

Queen: What Is that?

Byr: I heard him not;

Hen: Madam you are honored much, that Duke Byron
Is so obseruant; Some, to cards with him,
You four, as now you come, sit to Primero;
And I will fight a battle at the Chesse;

Byr. A good safe fight believe me; Other war
Thirsts blood, and wounds, and his thirst quenched, is thankles;

Esp: Lift, and then cut;

Byr: It Is right the end of lifting,
When men are lifted to their highest pitch,
They cut of those that lifted them so high.

Qu: Apply you all these sports so seriously?

Byr: They first were from our serious acts devised,
The best of which, are to the best but sports;
(I mean by best, the greatest) for their ends,
In men that serve them best, are their own pleasures.

Qu: So, in those best men's services, their ends
Are their own pleasures; pass.

Byr: I vy't;

Hen: I see it;
And wonder at his frontles impudence; Exit Hen:

Chan: How speedes your Majesty?

Qu: Well; the Duke instructs me
With such grave lessons of mortallitie
Forced out of our light sport; that if I loose,
I cannot but speed well.

Byr. Some idle talk.
For Courtship sake, you know does not amiss.

Chan. Would we might hear some of it.

Byr. That you shall,
I cast away a card now, makes me think,
Of the deceased worthy King of Spain.

Chan. What card was that?

Byr. The King of hearts (my Lord)
Whose name yields well the memory of that King,
Who was indeed the worthy King of hearts,
And had, both of his subjects hearts, and strangers,
Much more then all the Kings of Christendom.

Chan. He wun them with his gold.

Byr. He wun them chiefly,
With his so general Piety and Justice:
And as the little, yet great Macedon,
Was said with his humane philosophy,
To teach the rapefull Hyrcans, marriage;
And bring the barbarous Sogdians, to nourish,
Not kill their aged Parents; as before,
The incestuous Persians to reverence
Their mothers, not to use them as their wives;
The Indians to adore the Grecian Gods,
The Scythians to inter, not eat their Parents;
So he, with his divine Philosophy,
(Which I may call his, since he chiefly vsd it)
In Turkey, India, and through all the world,
Expelled profane idolatry; and from earth,
Raisd temples to the highest: whom with the word,
He could not win, he justly put to sword,

Chan. He sought for gold, and Empire.

Byr. It Was Religion,
And her full propagation that he sought;
If gold had been his end, it had been hoorded,
When he had fetched it in so many fleetes:
Which he spent not on Median Luxury,
Banquets, and women; Calidonian wine,
Nor dear Hyrcanian fishes* but emploid it,
To propagate his Empire; and his Empire
Desird t'extend so, that he might withal,
Extend Religion through it, and all nations,
Reduce to one firm constitution,
Of Piety, Justice, and one public weal;
To which end he made all his matchles subjects
Make tents their castles, and their garrisons;
True Catholics contrimen; and their allies,
Heretics, strangers, and their enemies.
There was in him the magnanimity.

Montig. To temper your extreme applause (my Lord)
Shorten, and answer all things in a word,
The greatest commendation we can give
To the remembrance of that King deceast;
Is, that he spared not his own eldest son,
But put him justly to a violent death,
Because, he sought to trouble his estates.

Byr. Is It so?

Chan. That bit (my Lord) upon my life,
It Was bitterly replied, and does amaze him.

The King suddenly enters having determined what to do. Hen. It is resolud,
A work shall now be done,
Which, (while learnd Atlas shall with stars be crowned,
While the Ocean walks in storms his wauy round,
While Moons at full, repair their broken rings:
While Lucifer fore-shewes Auroras springs,
And Ar^tos sticks above the Earth unmoved,
Shall make my realm be blessed, and me beloved;
Call in the count D' Auuergne. Enter D'Au.
A word my Lord.
Will you become as wilful as your friend?
And draw a mortal justice on your heads,
That hangs so black and is so loath to strike?
If you would utter what I know you know,
Of his inhumaine treason; on Strong Bar,
Betwixt his will, and duty were dissolud.
For then I know he would submit himself;
Think you it not as strong a point of faith,
To rectify your loyalties to me,
As to be trusty in each others wrong?
Trust that deceiues our selves in treachery,
And Truth that truth conceales an open lie;

D'Au. My Lord if I could utter any thought,
Instructed with disloyalty to you,
And might light any safty to my friend;
Though mine own heart came after it should out;

Hen. I know you may, and that your faith's affected
To one another, are so vain and faulce,
That your own Strengths will ruin you: ye contend,
To cast up rampires to you in the sea,
And strive to stop the waves that run before you,

D'Au. All this my Lord to me is misery.

Hen. It is; I Will make it plain enouge. Believe me.
Come my Lord Chancellor let us end our mate.

Enter Varennes, whispering to Byron. Var. You are undone my Lord; Exit.

Byr: Is it possible?

Que. Play good my Lord: whom look you for?

Esp. Your mind,
Is not upon your Game,

Byr. Play, pray you play,

Hen. Enough, it is late, and time to leave our play,
On all hands; all forbear the room, my Lord?
Stay you with me; yet is your will resolved,
To dewty, and the maine bond of your life?
I swear (of all the Intrusions I have made,
Upon your own good, and continew'd fortunes)
This is the last; inform me yet the truth,
And here I vow to you, (by all my love;
By all means shown you, even to this extreme,
When all men else forsake you) you are safe.
What passages have slipped twixt count Fuentes,
You, and the Duke of Sauoye?

Byr. Good my Lord.
This nail is driven already past the head,
You much have ouerchargd, an honest man:
And I beseech you yield my Inocence justice,
(But with my single valor) against them all,
That thus have poisoned your opinion of me,
And let me take my vengeance by my sword:
For I protest, I never thought an Action,
More then my tongue has vtterd.

Hen. Would twere true.
And that your thoughts and deeds, had fell no fouler.
But you disdain submission, not remembering,
That (in intentes vrdgd for the common good)
He that shall hold his peace being chardgd to speak:
Does all the peace and nerves of Empire break
Which on your conscience lie, adieu, good night. Exit.

Byr. Kings hate to hear what they command men speak,
Ask life, and to desert of death ye yield.
Where Medicines loath, it yrcks men to be heald,

Enter Vitry, with two or three of the Guard, Esper, Vidame, following. Vytry
lays hand on Byrons sword. Vyt. Resign your sword (my Lord) the King commands
it*

Byr. Me to resign my sword? what king is he,
Has vsd it better for the realm then I?
My sword, that all the wars within the length,
Breadth and the whole dimensions of great France,
Has sheathd betwixt his hilt and horrid point?
And fixed ye all in such a flourishing Peace?
My sword that never enemy could enforce,
Bereft me by my friends? Now, good my Lord,
Beseech the King, I may resign my sword,
To his hand only.

Enter Ianin. Ianin: You must do your office,
The King commands you;

Vit: It Is in vain to strive,
For I must force it;

Byron: Have I n^ere a friend,
That bears another for me? All the Guard?
What will you kill me? will you smother here
His life that can command, and save in field,
A hundred thousand lives? For manhood sake;
Lend something to this poor forsaken hand;
For all my service, let me have the honor
To dye defending of my innocent self,
And have some little space to pray to God.

Enter Henry. Hen: Come, you are an Atheist Byron, and a Traitor,
Both foul and damnable; Thy innocent self?
No Leper is so buried quick in ulcers
As thy corrupted soul: Thou end the war?
And settle peace in France? what war has raged,
Into whose fury I have not expos^d,
My person* which is as free a spirit as thine?
Thy worthy Father, and thy self, combinde,
And arm^d in all the merits of your valors;
(Your bodies thrust amidst the thickest fight*)
Never were bristeld with so many battayles*
Nor on the foe have broke such woods of Lances
As grew upon my thigh; and I have Marshald;
I am asham^d to brag thus; where envy
And arrogance, their opposite Bulwark raise;
Men are allowd to use their proper praise;
Away with him; Exit Henry*

Byr: Away with him? live I?
And here my life thus slighted? cursed man,
That ever the intelligensing lights
Betrayed me to men's whorish fellowships;
To Princes Moorish slaueries; To be made
The Anuille, on which only blows, and wounds
Were made the seed, and wombs of others honors;
A property for a Tyrant, to set up,
And puff down, with the vapor of his breath;
Will you not kill me?

Vit: No; we will not hurt you,
We are commanded only to conduct you
Into your lodging;

Byr: To my lodging? where?

Vit: Within the Cabynet of Arms my Lord:

Byr: What to a prison? Death; I will not go;

Vit: We Will force you then;

Byr: And take away my sword;
A proper point of force; ye had as good,
Have robbed me of my soul; Slaves of my Stars,
Partial and bloody; O that in mine eyes
Were all the Sorcerous poison of my woes,
That I might witch ye headlong from your height,
And trample ou't, your excrable light.

Vit: Come will you go my Lord? this rage is vain;

Byr: And so is all your grave authority;
And that all France shall feel before I Die;
Ye see all how they use good Catholics;

Esp. Farewell for ever; so have I desern'd
An exhalation that would be a Star
Fall when the Sun forsook it, in a sincke.
Shoes ever overthrow that are too large,
And hugest canons, burst with ouercharge.

D'Avuergne, Pralin, following with a Guard. Pra: My Lord I have commandment
from the King,
To charge you go with me, and ask your sword;

D' Au: My sword, who fears it? it was n'ere the death
Of any but wild Bores; I prithee take it;
Had thou aduertis'd this when last we met,
I had been in my bed, and fast asleep
Two hours a go; lead; i will go where thou will: Exit.

Vid: See how he bears his cross, with his small strength,
On easier shoulders then the other Atlas.

Esp: Strength to aspire, is still accompanied
With weakness to endure; All popular gifts,
Are coullors, it will bear no vinegar;
And rather to adverse affai^es, betray;
Thine arm against them; his State still his best
That has most inward worth; and that is best tried,
That neither glories, nor is glorified.

Actus. 5. Scaena. 1.
Henry, Soissons, Ianin, Descures, cum aliis. Hen: What shall we think (my
Lords) of these new forces
That (from the King of Spain) has past the Alps?
For which (I think) his Lord Ambassador,
Is come to Court, to get their pass for Flanders?

Ian: I think (my Lord) they have no end for Flanders;
Cont Maurice being already entered Brabant
To pass to Flanders, to relieve Ostend,
And th'Arch-duke full prepared to hinder him;
And sure it is that they must measure forces,
Which (ere this new force could have past the Alps)
Of force must be incountred.

Soiss: It Is unlikely,
That their march has so large an aim as Flanders;

Desc: As these times sort, they may have shorter reaches;
That would pierce further;

Hen: I have been aduertis'd,
That Cont Fuentes (by whose means this army
Was lately levied; And whose hand was strong,
In thrusting on Byrons conspiracy)
Has caused these cunning forces to advance,
With coullor only to set down in Flanders;
But has intentionall respect to favor
And countnance his false Partisans in Bresse,
And friends in Burgondie; to give them heart
For the full taking of their hearts from me;
Be as it will; we shall prevent their worst,
And therefore call in Spaines Ambassador,
Enter Ambassador with others. What would the Lord Ambassador of Spain?

Amba: First (in my masters name) I would beseech
Your highness hearty thought; That his true hand,
(Held in your vowed amities) has not touched,
At any least point in Byrons offense;
Nor once had notice of a crime so foul;
Whereof, since he doubts not, you stand resolved,
He prays your Leagues continuance in this favor;
That the army he has raised to march for Flanders,
May have safe passage by your frontier towns,
And find the River free, that runs by Rhosne.

Hen: My Lord my frontiers shall not be disarmed,
Till, by araignment of the Duke of Byron,
My scruples are resolved; and I may know
In what account to hold your Masters faith,
For his observance of the League betwixt us;
You wish me to believe that he is clear
From all the proiects caused by Cont Fuentes,
His special Agent; But where, deeds, pull down,
Words, may repair, no faith; I scarce can think
That his gold was so bounteously employed,
Without his special counsel, and command:
These faint proceedings in our Royal faiths,
Make subjects prove so faithless: If because,
We sit above the danger of the laws,
We likewise lift our Arms above their justice;
And that our heavenly Sovereign, bounds not us
In those religious confines; out of which
Our justice and our true laws are informed;
In vain have we expectance that our subjects,
Should not as well presume to offend their Earthly,
As we our Heavenly Sovereign? And this breach
Made in the Forts of all Society;
Of all celestial, and humane respects,
Makes no strengths of our bounties, counsels arms,
Hold out against their treasons; and the rapes
Made of humanity, and religion,
In all men's more then Pagan liberties,
Atheismes, and sla^eries, will derive their springs
From their base Presidents, copied out of kings.
But all this, shall not make me break the commerce,
Authorisde by our treaties; let your Army
Take the directest pass, it shall go safe.

Amb. So rest your highness ever; and assurde
That my true Sovereign, lothes all opposite thoughts.

Hen. Are our dispatches made to all the kings,
Princes, and Potentates, of Christendom?
Ambassadors and Province governors,
T'enforme the truth of this conspiracy?

Ian. They all are made my Lord, and some give out,
That it is a blow given to religion,
To weaken it, in ruining of him,
That said, he never wished more glorious title,
Then to be called the scourge of Hugenots.

Soiss. Others that are like favorers of the fault,
Said it is a politic advise from England,
To break the feared Iauelins, both together*

Hen. Such shut their eyes to truth, we can but set
His lights before them, and his trumpet sound
Close to their ears; their partial wilfulness,
In resting blind, and deaf, or in perverting,
What the^r most certain senses apprehend,
Shall naught discomfort our impartial Justice.
Nor clear the desperate fault that does enforce it. Enter Vyt.

Vyt. The Peers of France (my Lord) refuse t'appeare,
At the arraignement of the Duke Byron.

Hen. The Court may yet proceed; and so command it,
It Is not their slacknesse to appear shall serve,
To let my will t'appeare in any fact.
Wherein the bouldest of them tempts my justice.
I am resolved, and will no more endure,
To have my subjects make what I command,
The subject of their oppositions,
Who euer-more slack their allegiance,
As kings forbear their penance; how sustain
Your prisoners their strange durance?

Vit. One of them,
(Which is the Count D'Avuergne) has merry spirits,
Eats well, and sleeps: and never can imagine,
That any place where he is, is a prison;
Where on the other part, the Duke Byron,
Enterd his prison, as into his grave,
Reiects all food, sleeps not, nor once lies down:
Fury has armed his thoughts so thick with thorns,
That rest can have no entry: he disdaines
To grace the prison with the slendrest show,
Of any patience, least men should conceive,
He thought his sufferance in the best sort fit;
And holds his bands so worthless of his worth,
That he empaires it, to vouchsafe to them,
The best part of the peace, that freedom owes it:
That patience therein, is a willing slavery.
And (like the Cammell) stoopes to take the load:
So still he walks: or rather as a Bird,
Enterd a Closet, which unawares is made,
His desperate prison (being pursude) amazd,
And wrathful beats his bre^t from wall to wall,
Assaults the light strikes down himself, not our,
And being taken, struggles, gaspes, and bites,
Takes all his takers strokings, to be strokes,
Abhors food, and with a sauadge will,
Frets, pines, and dies, for former liberty.
So fares the wrathful Duke; and when the strength
Of these dumb rages, break out unto sounds,
He breaths defiance* to the world, and bids us,
Make our selves drunk, with the remaining blood
Of five and thirty wounds receiud in fight,
For v^ and ours; for we shall never brag,
That we have made his spirits check at death:
This rage in walks and words; but in his looks
He cements all: and prints a world of books,

Hen. Let others learn by him to curb their spleenes,
Before they be curbd; and to cease their grudges:
Now I am settled in my Sun of height,
The circula^e splendour, and full Sphere of State.
Take all place up from envy: as the sun,
At height, and passive ore the crowns of men,
His beams diffusd, and downright pourd on them,
Cast but a little or no shade at all,
So he that is advanced above the heads,
Of all his Emulators, with high light,
Preuents their enuies, and depriues them quite, Exeunt.

Enter the Chancellor, Harlay, Potiers, Fleury, in scarlet gowns, Laffin,
Descures, with other officers of state. Cha. I wonder at the prisoners so long
stay,

Har: I think it may be made a question,
If his impacience will let him come.

Pot. Yes, he is now well stayed: Time and his Judgment,
Have cast his passion and his fever of.

Fleu. His fever may be past, but for his passions,
I fear me we shall find it spic'd to hotly,
With his old poulder.

Des. He is sure come forth;
The Carosse of the Marquis of Rhosny
Conducted him along to the Arcenall,
Close to the Riuer-side: and there I saw him,
Enter a barge covered with Tapistry,
In which the kings gards waited and received him.
Stand by there clear the place,

Cha. The prisoner comes.
My Lord Laffin forbear your sight a while,
It may incense the prisoner: who will know,
By your attendance nere us, that your hand,
Was chief in his discovery; which as yet,
I think he does not doubt,

Laf. I will forbear,
Till your good pleasures call me, Exit Laf.

Hen. When he knows
And sees Laffin, accuse him to his face,
The Court I think will shake with his distemper.

Enter Vitry, Byron, with others and a guarde. Vit. You see my Lord, it is in
the golden chamber.

Byr. The golden chamber? where the greatest Kings
Have thought them honored to receive a place:
And I have had it; am I come to stand
In rank and habit here of men arraignd,
Where I have sat assistant, and been honored,
With glorious title of the chiefest virtuous,
Where the Kings chief Solicitor has said,
There was in France, no man that ever lived,
Whose parts were worth my imitation;
That, but mine own worth; I could imitate none:
And that I made my self inimitable,
To all that could come after; whom this Court
Has seen to sit upon the Flower de Lice
In recompense of my renowned service.
Must I be sat on now, by petty Judges?
These Scarlet robes, that come to sit and fight
Against my life; dsmay my valor more,
Then all the bloody Cassocks Spain has brought
To field against it.

Vit. To the bar my Lord. He salutes, and stands to the bar.

Har. Read the indictment.

Chan. Stay, I will inuert
(For shortness sake) the form of our proceedings,
And out of all the points, the process holds,
Collect five principal, with which we charge you.

1. First you conferd with one, called Picote,
At Orleance borne, and into Flanders fled,
To hold intelligence by him with the Archduke,
And for two voyages to that effect,
Bestowd on him, five hundred, fifty crowns.

2. Next you held treaty with the Duke of Sauoy,
Without the Kings permission; offering him
All service and assistance against all men,
In hope to have in marriage, his third daughter.

3. Thirdly you held intelligence with the Duke,
At taking in of Bourge, and other Forts;
Aduising him, with all your prejudice,
Against the Kings army, and his royal person.

4. The fourth is; that you would have brought the King,
Before Saint Katherines Fort, to be there slain:
And to that end writ to the Governor,
In which you gave him notes to know his highness.

5. Fifthly, you sent Laffin to treat with Sauoy,
And with the Count Fuentes, of more plots,
Touching the ruin of the King and realm.

Byr. All this (my Lord) I answer, and deny:
And first for Picote; he was my prisoner,
And therefore I might well confer with him:
But that our conference tended to the Archduke,
Is nothing so; I only did employ him
To Captain La Fortune, for the reduction
Of Seurre, to the service of the King.
Who vsd such speedy diligence therein,
That shortly 'twas assut'd his Majesty,

2. Next, for my treaties with the Duke of Sauoy,
Roncas his Secretary, having made
A motion to me, for the Dukes third daughter,
I told it to the King; who having since,
Given me the understanding by La Force
Of his dislike; I never dreamd of it.

3. Thirdly, for my intelligence with the Duke,
Aduising him against his Highness army:
Had this been true, I had not undertaken
The Assault of Bourg, against the Kings opinion,
Having assistance but by them about me:
And (having wunne it for him) had not been
Put out of such a government so easily.

4. Fourthly, for my advise to kill the King;
I would beseech his Highness memory,
Not to let slip, that I alone diswaded
His viewing of that Fort; informing him,
It had go^d marke-men; and he could not go,
But in exceeding danger, which advise
Diuerted him; the rather, since I said,
That if he had desire to see the place
He should receive from me a Plot of it;
Offering to take it with five hundred men,
And I my self would go to the assault.

5. And lastly, for intelligences held,
With Sauoy and Fuentes: I confess,
That being denied to keep the Cytadell,
Which with incredible peril I had got,
And seeing another, honored with my spoils,
I (...) so desperate that I found my spirit,
Enraged to any act, and wished my self,
Covered with blood.

Chan. With whose blood?

Byr. With mine own;
Wishing to live no longer, being denied,
With such suspicion of me, and set will,
To rack my furious humor into blood.
And for two months space, I did speak, and wright,
More then I ought; but have done ever well,
And therefore your enformers have been false.
And (with intent to tyrani^e) subornd.

Flen. What if our witnesses come face to face,
And justify much more then we allege?

Byr. They must be ^^^^lings then, and men corrupted.

Pot. What think you of La Fin?

Byr. I hold La Fin,
An honored Gentleman, my friend and kinsman.

Har. If he then aggrauate, what we affirm,
With greater accusations to your face,
What will you say?

Byr. I know it cannot be.

Chan. Call in my Lord La Fin.

Byr. Is he so near?
And kept so close from me? can all the world,
Make him a treacher. Enter La Fin.

Chan. I suppose my Lord,
You have not stood within; without the ear
Of what has here been vrgd against the Duke;
If you have heard it, and upon your knowledge
Can witness all is true, upon your soul;
Utter your knowledge.

Laf^^. I have heard my Lord,
All that has past here; and upon my soul,
(Being chargd so vrgently in such a Court)
Upon my knowledge I affirm all true;
And so much more: as had the prisoner lives
As many as his years, would make all forfaite.

Byr. O all ye virtuous powers, in earth and heaven,
That have not put on hellish flesh and blood,
From whence these monstrous issues are produced,
That cannot bear in execrable concord,
And one prodigious subject; contraries;
Nor (as the I Will that of the world admirde)
Is seuerd from the world) can cut your selves
From the consent and sacred hermonie
Of life, yet live; of honor, yet be honored;
As this extrauagant, and errant roge,
From all your fair Decorums, and just laws,
Finds power to do: and like a lothesome wen,
Sticks to the face of nature, and this Court;
Thicken this air, and turn your plaguie rage,
Into a shape as dismal as his sin.
And with some equal horror tear him of
From sight and memory: let not such a court,
To whose fame all the Kings of Christendom,
Now laid their ears; so crack her royal Trumpe,
As to sound through it, that here vanted justice
Was got in such an incest: is it justice
To tempt, and witch a man, to break the law,
And by that witch condemn him? let me draw
Poison into me with this cursed air,
If he bewitched me, and transformd me not;
He bit me by the ear, and made me drink
Enchanted waters; let me see an Image
That vtterd these distinct words; Thou shall dye,
O wicked King; and if the diuill gave him
Such power upon an Image; upon me
How might he tyrannize? that by his vows
And oaths so Stygian, had my Nerves and will,
In more awe then his own: what man is he
That is so high, but he would higher be?
So roundly sighted, but he may be found,
To have a blind side, which by craft, persude,
Confederacy, and simply trusted treason,
May wrest him past his Angel, and his reason?

Chan. Witchcraft can never taint an honest mind.

Harl. True gold, will any trial stand, untouched.

Pot. For colors that will stain when they are tried,
The cloth it self is ever cast aside.

Byr. Sometimes, the very Gloss in any thing,
Will seem a stain; the fault not in the light,
Nor in the guilty object, but our sight.
My gloss, raisd from the richness of my stuff,
Had too much splendour for the Owly eye,
Of politic and thanklesse royalty:
I did deserve too much; a plurisie
Of that blood in me is the cause I dye.
Virtue in great men must be small and slight:
For poor stars rule, where she is exquisite,
It Is tyrannous, and impious policy,
To put to death by fraud and treachery;
Slight is then roy^ll, when it makes men live,
And if it urge faults, urges to forgive.
He must be guiltless, that condemns the guilty,
Like things, do nourish like, and not destroy them:
Minds must be sound, that judge affairs of weight,
And seeing hands, cut corosiues from your sight.
A Lord intelligencer? hangman-like,
Thrust him from human fellowship, to the deserts
Blow him with curses; shall your justice call
Treachery her Father? would you wish her weigh
My valor with the hiss of such a viper?
What I have done to shun the mortal shame,
Of so unjust an opposition;
My envious stars cannot deny me this,
That I may make my Judges witnesses;
And that my wretched fortunes have reserved
For my last comfort; ye all know (my Lords)
This body gasht with five and thirty wounds,
Whose life and death you have in your award,
Holds not a vein that has not opened been,
And which I would not open yet again,
For you and yours; this hand that writ the lines
Alledgd against me; has enacted still,
More good then there it only talked of ill.
I must confess my choler has transferd
My tender spleen to all intemperate speech:
But reason ever did my deeds attend.
In worth of praise, and imitation,
Had I borne any will to let them loose,
I could have flesht them with bad services,
In England lately, and in Swizerland:
There are a hundred Gentlemen by name,
Can witness my demeanure in the first;
And in the last Embassage I adjure
No other testimonies then the Seigneurs
De Vio, and Sillerie; who amply know,
In what sort, and with what fidelity
I bore my self; to reconcile and knit,
In one desire so many wills disioynde,
And from the Kings allegiance quite with-drawne.
My acts ask^ many men, though done by one.
And I were but one, I stood for thousands,
And still I hold my worth, though not my place:
Nor slight me, Judges, though I be but one,
One man, in one sole expedition,
Reduced into the imperial power of Rome,
Armenia, Pontus, and Arabia, Syria, Albania, and Iberia,
Conquered the Hyreanians; and to Caucasus,
His arm extended; the Numidians
And Afric to the shores Meridionall,
His power subjected; and that part of Spain
Which stood from those parts that Sertorius ruled,
Even to the Atlantique Sea he conquered.
The Albanian kings, he from the kingdoms chased,
And at the Caspian Sea, their dwellings placed:
Of all the Earths globe, by power and his advice,
The round-eyd Ocean saw him victor thrice:
And what shall let me (but your cruel doom,)
To add as much to France, as he to Rome,
And to leave Justice neither Sword nor word,
To use against my life; this Senate knows,
That what with one victorious hand I took,
I gave to all your uses, with another:
With this I took, and propt the falling kingdom,
And gave it to the King: I have kept
Your laws of state from fire; and you your selves,
Fixed in this high Tribunal; from whose height
The vengefull Saturnals of the League
Had hurld ye headlong; do ye then return
This retribution? can the cruel King,
The kingdom, laws, and you, (all saved by me)
Destroy their sauer? what (aye me) I did
Adverse to this; this damnd Enchanter did,
That took into his will, my motion;
And being banck-route both of wealth and worth,
Pursued with quarrels, and with suites in law;
Feared by the kingdom; threatened by the king;
Would raise the loathed dunghill of his ruins,
Upon the monumentall heap of mine:
Torn with possessed whirle-winds may he dye,
And dogs bark at his murthorous memory,

Chan My Lord, our liberal sufferance of your speech,
Has made it late; and for this Session,
We will dismiss you; take him back my Lord. Exit Vit. and Byron.

Har You likewise may depart. Exit Laffin.

Chan. What rests now
To be decreed against this great prisoner?
A mighty merit, and a monstrous cri^^,
Are here concurrent; what by witnesses;
His letters and instructions, we have proved
Himself confesses, and excuses all
With witchcraft, and the only act of thought.
For witchcraft I esteem it a mere strength
Of rage in him conceived against his accuser;
Who being examinde has denied it all;
Suppose it true, it made him false; But wills
And worthy minds, witchcraft can never force.
And for his thoughts that brake not into deeds;
Time was the cause, not will; the minds free act
In treason still is Iudgd as the outward fact.
If his deserts have had a wealthy share,
In saving of our land from civil furies:
Manlius had so that fast the Capitol;
Yet for his after traitorous factions,
They threw him headlong from the place he saved.
My definite sentence then, does this import:
That we must quench the wilde-fire with his blood,
In which it was so traitorously inflamed;
Unless with it, we seek to incence the land,
The King can have no refuge for his life,
If his be quitted: this was it that made
Lewis th'eleuenth renounce his countrymen,
And call the valiant Scots out of their kingdom,
To use their greater virtues, and their faiths,
Then his own subjects, in his royal guarde:
What then conclude your censures?

Omnes. He must dye.

Chan Draw then his sentence, formally, and send him;
And so all treasons in his death attend him. Exeunt.

Enter Byron, Espernon, Soisson Ianin, Vidame, Descures. Vit. I joy you had so
good a day my Lord.

Byr. I wone it from them all: the Chancellor
I answered to his uttermost improuements:
I moved my other Judges to lament
My insolent misfortunes; and to loathe
The pockie soul, and state-bawde, my accuser,
I made reply to all that could be said,
So eloquently, and with such a charm,
Of grave enforcements, that me thought I sat,
Like Orpheus casting reigns on savage beasts;
At the arms end (as twere) I took my bar
And set it far above the high tribunal,
Where like a Cedar on Mount Lebanon,
I Grew, and made my judges show like Box-trees*
And Boxtrees right, their wishes would have made them,
Whence boxes should have grown, till they had struck
My head into the budget: but ahlas,
I held their bloody arms, with such strong reasons;
And (by your leave) with such a ^yrck of wit:
That I fetched blood upon the Chancelors cheeks,
Me thinks I see his countinance as he sat;
And the most lawierly delivery
Of his set speeches: shall I play his part? Enter Soiss: Esp^

Esp: For heavens sake, good my Lord.

Byr. I will in faith,
Behold a wicked man: A man debaucht,
A man, contesting with his King; A man,
On whom (my Lords) we are not to conniue,
Though we may condole: A man:
That Laesa Maiestate sought a lease,
Of Plus quam satis. A man that vi et armis
Assaild the King; and would per fas et nefas,
Aspire the kingdom: here was lawiers learning.

Esp: He said not this my Lord, that I have heard.

Byr. This or the like, I swear* I pen no speeches.

Soiss. Then there is good hope of your wished acquitall.

Byr. Acquitall? they have reason; were I dead
I know they can not all supply my place;
Is It possible the King should be so vain,
To think he can shake me with fear of death?
Or make me apprehend that he intends it?
Thinks he to make his firmest men, his clouds?
The clouds (observing their Aeriall natures)
Are borne aloft, and then to moisture hanged,
Fall to the earth; where being made thick, and cold,
They loose both al their heat, and leuitie;
Yet then again recovering heat and lightness,
Again they are advanced: and by the Sun
Made fresh and glorious; and since clouds are rapt
With these uncertainties: now up, now down,
Am I to flit so with his smile, or froune?

Esp. I wish your comforts, and incoradgments,
May spring out of your saftie; but I hear
The King has reasond so against your life,
And made your most friends yield so to his reasons,
That your estate is fearful.

Byr. Yield to his reasons?
O how friends reasons, and their freedoms stretch,
When power sets his wide tenters to their sides!
How, like a cure, by mere opinion,
It works upon our blood? like the ancient Gods
Are Modern Kings, that lived past bounds themselves,
Yet set a measure down, to wretched men*
By many Sophismes, they made good, deceit;
And, since they past in power, surpast, in right:
When Kings wills pass; the stars winck, and the Sun,
Suffers eclips: rude thunder yields to them
His horrid wings: sits smoothe as glass engazd,
And lightning sticks twixt heaven and earth amazd:
Men's faiths are shaken: and the pit of truth
O'reflowes with darkness, in which Justice sits,
And keeps her vengeance tied to make it fierce;
And when it comes, the increased horrors show,
Heavens plague is sure, though full of state, and slow.

Sist. O my dear Lord and brother,
O the Duke?

Byr. What sounds are these my Lord? hark, hark, me thinks
I hear the cries of people.

Esp. It Is for one,
Wounded in fight here at Saint Anthonies Gate:

Byr. Sfoote, one cried the Duke. I pray harken,
Again, or burst your selves with silence, no:
What contriman's the common headsman here?

Soiss. He Is a Bourgonian.

Byr. The great devil he is,
The bitter wizerd told me, a Burgonian,
Should be my headsman; strange concurrences:
God's Death whose here? Enter 4. Vshers bare, Chanc: Har: Pol: Fle^r: Vit: Pralin,
with others.
O then I am but dead,
Now, now ye come all to pronounce my sentence.
I am condemned unjustly: tell my kinsfolks,
I die an innocent:
If any friend pity the ruin of the States sustainer
Proclaim my innocence; ah Lord Chancellor,
Is there no pardon? will there come no mercy?
I, put your hat on, and let me stand bare,
Show your self right a Lawier.

Chan. I am bare,
What would you have me do?

Byr. You have not done,
Like a good justice; and one that knew
He sat upon the precious blood of virtue;
You Have pleased the cruel King, and have not borne,
As great regard to save as to condemn;
You have condemned me, my Lord Chancellor,
But God acquites me; he will open lay
All your close treasons against him, to color
Treasons laid to his truest images;
And you my Lord shall answer this injustice,
Before his judgment seat: to which I summon
In one year and a day your hot apparanse;
I go before, by men's corrupted domes;
But they that caused my death, shall after come
By the imaculate justice of the highest.

Chan. Well, good my Lord* commend your soul to him,
And to his mercy, think of that, I pray.

Byr. Sir, I have thought of it, and every hour,
Since my affliction, asked on naked knees
Patience to bear your vnbeleeu^d Injustice:
But you, nor none of you have thought of him,
In my euiction: you are come to your benches,
With plotted judgments; your linckt ears so loud,
Sing with preiudicate winds, that naught is heard,
Of all, pore prisoners urge against your award;

Har. Passion, my Lord, transports your bitterness,
Beyond all color; and your propper judgment:
No man has known your merits more then I;
And would to God your great misdedes had been,
As much undone, as they have been concealde;
The cries of them for justice (in desert)
Have been so loud and piersing; that they deafned
The ears of mercy; and have labord more,
Your Judges to compresse then to enforce them.

Pot. We bring you here your sentence, will you read it.

Byr. For heavens sake, shame to use me with such rigor;
I know what it imports, and will not have,
Mine ear blown into flames with hearing it;
Have you been one of them that have condemned me?

Flen. My Lord I am your Orator: God comfort you.

Byr. Good Sir, my father loved you so entirely,
That if you have been one, my soul forgiues you;
It is the King (most childish that he is
That takes what he has given) that iniures me:
He gave grace in the first draught of my fault,
And now restaines it: grace again I ask;
Let him again vouchsafe it: send to him,
A post will soon return: the Queen of England,
Told me that if the wilful Earl of Essex,
Had vsd submission, and but asked her mercy,
She would have given it, past resumption;
She (like a gracious Princess) did desire
To pardon him: even as she praid to God,
He would let down a pardon unto her;
He yet was guilty, I am innocent:
He still refusd grace, I importune it.

Chan. This asked in time (my Lord) while he besought it,
And ere he had made his severity known,
Had (with much joy to him) I know been granted;

Byr. No, no, his bounty, then was misery,
To offer when he knew twould be refusde;
He treads the vulgar pathe of all advantage,
And loves men, for his vices, nor for their virtues;
My service would have quickn'd gratitude,
In his own death, had he been truly royal;
It would have stirred the image of a King,
Into perpetual motion; to have stood
Near the conspiracy restraind at Mantes;
And in a danger, that had then the Woulfe,
To fly upon his bosom, had I only held
Intelligence with the conspirators;
Who stuck at no check but my loyalty,
Nor kept life in their hopes, but in my death;
The seege of Amiens, would have softened rocks,
Where covered all in showers of shot and fire,
I seemed to all men's eyes a fighting flame
With bullets cut, in fashion of a man;
A sacrifize to valor (impious King)
Which he will needs extinguish, with my blood;
Let him beware, justice will fall from heaven,
In the same form I served in that seege,
And by the light of that, he shall decerne,
What good, my ill has brought him; it will nothing,
Assure his State: the same quench he has cast
Upon my life, shall quite put out his fame;
This day he loses, what he shall not find,
By all days he suruiues; so good a servant,
Nor Spain so great a foe; with whom, ahlas,
Because I treated am I put to death?
It Is put a politic gloss: my courage raised me,
For the dear price of five and thirty skarres,
And that has ruined me, I thank my Stars*
Come i will go where ye will, ye shall not lead me.

Chan. I fear his frenzy,
Never saw I man of such a spirit so amazed at death.

Har. He alters every minute: what a vapor?
The strongest mind is to a storm of crosses. Exeunt.

Manent Esper: Soisson: Ianin: Vidame, D'escures. Esp: O of what contraries
consists a man!
Of what impossible mixtures? vice and virtue,
Corruption, and eternnesse, at one time,
And in one subject, let together, loosse?
We have not any strength but weakens us,
No greatness but does crush us into air.
Our knowledges, do light us but to err,
Our Ornaments are Burdens: Our delightss
Are our tormentors; fiendes that (raisd in fears)
At parting shake our Roofes about our ears.

Soi. O virtue, thou art now far worse then Fortune*
Her gifts stuck by the Duke, when thine are vanished,
Thou brau'st thy friend in Need: Necessity,
That vsd to keep thy wealth, contempt, thy love,
Have both abandond thee in his extremes,
Thy powers are shadows, and thy comfort, dreams,

Vid. O real goodness if thou be a power!
And not a word alone, in human uses,
Appear out of this angry conflagration,
Where this great Captain (thy late Temple) burns,
And turn his vicious fury to thy flame,
From all earths hopes mere gilded with thy fame:
Let piety enter with her willing cross,
And take him on it; open his breast and arms,
To all the Storms, Necessity can breath,
And burst them all with his embraced death,

Ian, Yet are the ciuille tumults of his spirits,
Hot and outragiouse: not resolved, Ahlas,
(Being but one man) render the kingdoms dome;
He doubts storms, threatens, rues, complains, imp^ores,
Grief has brought all his forces to his looks,
And naught is left to strengthen him within,
Nor la^ts one habit of those grieved aspects:
Blood expells palenesse, palenes Blood does chase,
And sorrow errs through all forms in his face,

Des. So furiouse is he, that the Politic law,
Is much to seek, how to enact her sentence:
Authority backed with arms, (though he unarmed)
Abhorrs his fury, and with doubtful eyes,
Views on what ground it should sustain his ruins,
And as a Sauadge Bore that (hunted long,
Assayld and set up) with his only eyes,
Swimming in fire keeps of the baying hounds,
Though suncke himself, yet houlds his anger up,
And snowes it fo^th in foame; houlds firm his stand,
Of Batta^ouse Bristles: feeds his hate to die,
And whets his tuskes with wrathful majesty.
So fares the furious Duke, and with his looks,
Does teach death horrors; makes the hangman learn
New habites for his bloody impudence;
Which now habitual horror from him drives,
Who for his life shunns death, by which he lives,

Enter Chauncellor, Harlay, Potier, Fleury, Vitry. Vit. Will not your
Lordshippe have the Duke distinguished
From other prisoners? where the order is,
To give up men condemd into the hands
Of the executioner; he would be the death,
Of him that he should die by, ere he sufferd,
Such an abiection,

Cha. But to bind his hands*
I hold it passing needful,

Har. It Is my Lord,
And very dangerous to bring him loose.

Pra: You will in all despair and fury plunge him,
If you but offer it.

Pot. My Lord by this,
The prisoners Spirit is something pacified,
And it is a fear that th'offer of those bands,
Wou^d breed fresh furies in him, and disturb,
The entry of his soul into her peace,

Cha. I would not that, for any possible danger,
That can be wrought, by his unarmed hands,
And therefore in his own form bring him in,

Enter Byron, a Bishop or two; with all the guards, soldiers with muskets.
Byr. Where shall this weight fall? on what rhegion,
Must this declining prominent pour his lode?
I Will break my bloods high billows against my stars,
Before this ^ill be shook into a flat,
All France shall feel an earthquake; with what murmur,
This world shrinkes into Chaos?

Arch. Good my Lord,
Forgo it willingly; and now resign,
Your sensual powers entirely to your soul.

Byr. Horror of death, let me alone in peace,
And leave my soul to me, whom it concerns;
You have no charge of it; I feel her free,
How she does rowze, and like a Faulcon stretch
Her silver wings; as threatening death, with death;
At whom I joyfully will cast her off:
I know this body but a sinck of folly,
The groundwork, and raised frame of woe and frailty*
The bond, and bundle of corruption;
A quick corse, only sensible of grief,
A walking sepulcher, or household thief:
A glass of air, broken with less then breath,
A slave bound face to face, to death, til death:
And what said all you more? I know, besides
That life is but a dark and stormy night,
Of senseless dreams, terrors, and broken sleeps;
A Tyranie, devising pains to plague
And make man long in dying, racks his death;
And death is nothing, what can you say more?
I bring a long Globe, and a little earth,
Am seated like earth betwixt both the heavens:
That if I rise; to heaven I rise; if fall
I likewise fall to heaven; what stronger faith,
Has any of your souls? what say you more?
Why lose I time in these things? talk of knowledge,
It serves for inward use. I will not die
Like to a Clergy man; but like the Captain,
That prayed on horseback and with sword in hand,
Threatend the Sun, commanding it to stand;
These are but ropes of sand.

Chan. Desire you then,
To speak with any man?

Byr. I would speak with La Force, and Saint Blancart.

Byr. Do they fly me?
Where is Pr^u^st, controwler of my house?

Pra. Gone to his house ith country three days since.

Byr. He should have stayed here, he keeps all my blancks*
O all the world forsakes me! wretched world,
Consisting most of parts, that fly each other:
A firmness, breeding all inconstancy,
A bond of all disjunction; like a man
Long buried, is a man that long has lived;
Touch him, he falls to ashes; for one fault,
I forfeite all the fashion of a man;
Why should I keep my soul in this dark light?
Whose black beams lighted me to loose my self.
When I have lost my arms, my fame, my wind,
Friends, brother, hopes, fortunes, and even my fury?
O happy were the man, could live alone,
To know no man, nor be of any known!

Har. My Lord, it is the manner once again
To read the sentence?

Byr. Yet more sentences?
How often will ye make me suffer death?
As ye were proud to hear your powreful domes?
I know and feel you were the men that gave it,
And die most cruelly to hear so often
My crimes and bitter condemnation vrdg'd:
Suffize it, I am brought here; and obey,
And that all here are privy to the crimes.

Chan. It must be read my Lord, no remedy.

Byr. Read, if it must be, then, and I must talk.

Harl. The process being extraordinarily made and examined by the Court, and
chambers assembled --

Byr. Condemned for depositions of a witch?
The common deposition, and her whore
To all whorish periuries and treacheries.
Sure he called up the diuill in my spirits,
And made him to usurp my faculties:
Shall I be cast away now he is cast out?
What Justice is in this? dear contrymen,
Take this true evidence, betwixt heaven and you*
And quit me in your hearts.

Ch^. Go on.

Har. Against Charles G^ntalt of Byron: knight of both the orders; Duke of
Byron, peer and marshall of France; Governor o^ Burgondy, accused of treason
in a sentence was given the 22. of this month, condemning the said Duke of
Byron of heigh treason, for his direct conspiracies against the kings person;
enterprises against his state. --


Byr. That is most false; let me for ever be,
Deprived of heaven, as I shall be of earth,
If it be true: know worthy countrymen.
These two and twenty months I have been clear,
Of all atempts against the king and state.

Har. Treaties and trecheries with his Enemies, being marshall of the Kings
army, for reparation of which crimes they deprived him of all his estates,
honors and dignities, and condemned him to lose his head upon a Scaffold at the
Greaue


Byr. The Greaue? had that place stood for my dispatch
I had not yielded; all your forces should not,
Stire me one foot; wild horses should have drawn,
My body peece-meale, ear you all had brought me.

Har. Declaring all his goods moveable and inmoueable whatsoever to be
confiscate to the King: the Signeury of Byron to loose the title of Duchy and
Peer for ever.


Byr. Now is your form contented,


Cha. I my Lord
And I must now entreat you to deliver,
Your order up, the king demands it of you.

Byr. And I restore it, with my vow of safty,
In that world, where both he and I are one,
I never brake the oath I took to take it,

Cha. We Will now my Lord we will take our latest leaves,
Beseeching heaven to take as clear from you,
All sense of torment in your willing death:
All love and thought of what you must leave here,
As when you shall aspi^e-heauens highest sphere,

Byr. Thanks to your Lordship and let me pray to,
That you will hold good censure of my life,
By the clear witness of my soul in death,
That I have never past act against the King,
Which if my faith had let me undertake,
They had been three years since, amongst the dead;

Harl: Your soul shall find his safety in her own,
Call the executioner*

Byr: Good sir I pray,
Go after and beseech the Chancellor
That he will let my body be interrd,
Amongst my predecessors at Byron:

Desc: I go my Lord: Exit.

Byr: Go, go? can all go thus?
And no man come with comfort? farewell world:
He is at no end of his actions blessed,
Whose ends will make him greatest, and not best;
They tread no ground, but ride in air on storms,
That follow State, and hunt their empty forms;
Who see not that the Valleys of the world,
Make even right with the Mountains? that they grow
Green, and lie warmer; and ever peaceful are,
When Clouds spit fire as Hills, and burn them bare?
Not Valleys part, but we should imitate Streams,
That run below the Valleys, and do yield
To every Molehill; every Bank embrace
That checks their Currants; and when Torrents come,
That swell and raise them past their natural height,
How mad they are, and trubl'd? like low strains
With Torrents crowned, are men with Diademes;

Vit: My Lord it is late; wilt please you to go up?

Byr. Up? it is a fair preferment, ha ha ha,
There should go showtes to vp-shots; not a breath
Of any mercy, yet? come, since we must;
Whose this?

Pral: The executioner, my Lord;

Byr: Death slave, down, or by the blood that moves me
I Will pluck thy throat out; go, I Will call you straight,
Hold boy; and this,

Hang: Soft boy i will bar you that

Byr: Take this then, yet I pray thee, that again
I do not joy in sight of such a Pageant
As presents death; Though this life have a curse;
It Is better then another, that is worse;

Arch: My Lord, now you are blind to this worlds sight,
Look upward to a world of endless light;

Byr: I, I, you talk of upward still to others,
And downwards look, with headlong eyes your selves.
Now come you up sir; But not touch me yet;
Where shall I be now?

Hang: Here my Lord;

Byr: Where Is that?

Hang: There, there, my Lord;

Byr: And where, slave, is that there?
Thou see I see not? yet I speak as I saw;
Well, now is it fit?

Hang: Kneel, I beseech your Grace,
That I may do mine office with most order;

Byr: Do it, and if at one blow thou art short,
Give one and thirty, I Will endure them all.
Hold; stay a little; comes there yet no mercy?
High Heaven curse these exemplarie proceedings,
When Justice fails, they sacrifize our example;

Hang: Let me beseech you, I may cut your hair;

Byr: Out ugly Image of my cruel Justice;
Yet will thou be before me, stay my will,
Or by the will of Heaven I Will strangle thee;

Vit: My Lord you make to much of this your body,
Which is no more your own;

Byr: Nor is it yours;
I Will take my death, with all the horride rites
And representments, of the dread it merits;
Let tame Nobility, and nummed fools
That apprehend not what they undergo,
Be such exemplarie, and formal sheep;
I will not have him touch me, till I will;
If you will needs rack me beyond my reason,
Hell take me, but I Will strangle half that's here,
And force the rest to kill me* I Will leap down
If but once more they tempt me to despair;
You wish my quiet, yet give cause of fury:
Think you to set rude winds upon the Sea,
Yet keep it calm? or cast me in a sleep,
With shaking of my chains about mine ears?
O honest Soldiers, you have seen me free,
From any care, of many thousand deaths!
Yet, of this one, the manner does amaze me.
View, view, this wounded bosom, how much bound
Should that man make me, that would shoot it through;
Is it not pity I should lose my life,
By such a bloody and infamous stroke?

Soldi: Now by thy spirit, and thy better Angel,
If thou were clear, the Continent of France,
Would shrink beneath the burden of thy death,
Ere it would b^ are it;

Vit: Whose that?

Soldi: I say well:
And clear your Justice, here is no ground shrinks,
If he were clear it would: And I say more,
Clear, or not clear, If he with all his foulness,
Stood here in one Skale, and the Kings chief Mynion,
Stood in another, here: Put here a pardon,
Here lay a royal gift, this, this, in merit,
Should hoyse the other Mynion into air:

Vit: Hence with that frantic:

Byr: This is some poor witness
That my desert, might have out-weighed my forfeyt:
But danger, hauntes desert, when he is Greatest;
His hearty ills, are proved out of his glaunces,
And Kings suspicions, needs no Balances;
So here is a most decreetall end of me:
Which I desire, in me, may end my wrongs;
Commend my love, I charge you, to my brothers,
And by my love, and misery command them,
To keep their faiths that bind them to the King,
And prove no stomakers of my misfortunes;
Nor come to Court, till time has eaten out,
The blots, and skarres of my opprobrious death;
And tell the Earl, my dear friend of D'Auergne,
That my death utterly were free from grief,
But for the sad loss of his worthy friendship;
And if I had been made for longer life,
I would have more deserved him in my service,
Beseeching him to know I have not used
One word in my arraignement; that might touch him,
Had I no other want then so ill meaning:
And so farewell for ever: never more
Shall any hope of my reuiuall see me;
Such is the endless exile of dead men.
Summer succeeds the spring; Autumn the Summer,
The Frosts of Winter, the fallen leaves of Autumn:
All these, and all fruits in them yearly fade,
And every year return: but cursed man,
Shall never more renew, his vanished face;
Fall on your knees, then Statists ere ye fall,
That you may rise again: knees bent too late,
Stick you in earth like statues: see in me
How you are powered down from your cleerest heavens;
Fall lower yet: mixed with the unmoved center,
That your own shadows may no longer mock ye*
Stricke, stricke, O stricke;
Fly, fly commanding soul,
And on thy wings for this thy bodies breath,
Bear the eternal victory of death.

FINIS.

