The Joyful Return, OF THE MOST Illustrious Prince, CHARLES, Prince of great
Britain, from the Court of SPAIN.

Together, With a Relation of his Magnificent Entertainment in MADRID, and on
his way to St. ANDERAS, by the King of Spain.

The Royal and Princely Gifts interchangeably given.

Translated out of the Spanish Copy.

His wonderful dangers on the Seas, after his parting from thence: Miraculous
delivery, and most happy-safe Landing at PORTSMOVTH on the 5. of October Still.
veteri, to the unspeakable Joy of both Nations.

Testified no less by Triumphall Expressions of the Spanish Ambassadors,
(here now residing) as by the loud Acclamations of our own People.

LONDON: Printed by Edward All-de for Nathaniell Butter and Henry Seile. 1623.

The return of Prince Charles from Spain.
AS no transitory glories can be greater than to see Kingdoms married to
Kingdoms in Commerce, confederacy, and honorable Union: So, next unto That,
(or rather first above That, because This second is a Root, from whence those
Cedars of Blessings more often arise,) no Chains can be made of purer gold,
than Those by which, two Princes potent and neighboring Nations are linked
together in holy and honorable Bonds of Wedlock. Our most excellent Prince
therefore (Charles) heir apparent to all the Kingdoms of our Royal
Sovereign King James (his Father,) having that care (due to all Princes) to
lengthen out his Name, by leaving a Royal Propagation behind him; did by the
consent of the King his Father, depart in private from England, in March last,
with a small train, of which the then Lord Marquess, now Duke of Buckingham,
next to his Highness was Chief.

His Princely desires serving him as wings to fly over the dangers of the
Seas, into Spain, there to behold that admirable Lady of the world, (for Birth,
Beauty, and all the richest Ornaments, both of Mind and Body) the Infanta of
Spain, (Donna Maria) Sister to Philip the fourth King of Spain, etc. And not
only to behold her, but also, that by presenting to her fair eyes, a Prince,
equal to her in all excellencies of perfection, there might from their mutual
enter-viewes one of another, a heavenly fire of Love be kindled, out of which
might shine a memorable glory to both the Nations.

England could not trust the Sea with a greater mass of Treasure, yet ventured
she to lock it up in the bosom of the deep: France in a short time had gotten
into her possession a richer Flower than her own Flower Deluce, and but for a
short time kept it: for neither Seas, nor Land had charms strong enough to
hold the unbounded spirit of our Prince, until he had arrived at that place,
to which the bravery of his resolution had vowed to carry him. The Heavens had
undertaken to waft him unto Spain, and there, after many weary iourneys, did
they safely bring him to the King of Spaines Court, at his royal City of
Madrid.

What exultations were made at his arrival, what general acclamations shouted
out his Welcomes: His Magnificent entertainements, princely Feastings, with all
the curiosities of Kingly Triumphs, that either sumptuous expenses, quickness
of invention, or the custom and quality of that Country could bring forth,
have been already so shrilly sounded out of the Trumpet of Fame, that here
again to proclaim them, were to set up a Candle, after a Firmament of lights
had shown them to the world.

Now albeit, (above these Temptations,) there was in the young King, and our
Prince (of themselves) sufficient allurements, not to have them parted asunder,
(they being as Darlings one to another;) for they were a pair of
sweet-sounding Instruments, set to one Tune, and equally strung with the same
Number of years, (or not much differing:) All their thoughts, wishes,
recreations, speeches and Actions, being Lines meeting in one Center, and their
often-infolded Arms, the circumference to that Center.

Nay more, albeit, that high-borne Princess, Donna Maria the Infanta, through
the natural Magic of her Beauty, sweetness of Voice, variety of Languages,
with all the rarest and most princely comportments, fitting to her birth was
able to fasten, such a power upon our Prince, that he well might believe no
country in the world but Spain was worth his abiding in it. Add likewise to
this boundless Ocean of Delight, other cleere-running streams falling into
their Current, as the continual and endeerde Embraces of the Infant
Cardinal, and the Infant Don Carlos (brothers to the King:) bring up besides
to these, all the Honors, complements, congratulations, attendances, and
courtly regards bestowed daily upon our Prince, by Grande's, Conde's, and Lords
of State; the least of which by it self, but all of them knit together, being
of virtue to make any man consent to be drawn away in so golden a Chariot: Yet
there was a heap of Kingdoms (one day to be his own) which beckond to have
him come and feel their embraces.

He might as far as from the Court of England, to that at Madrid in Spain,
hear his Royal Father (King James) often wish, to have his princely Charles
again by his side. Not that he feared any malicious danger could fall upon
him, (There,) but rather at his being parted from thence, when those two
invincible Pirates of the Sea, (the winds and the waves) should fall out and
fight one against another, might play the Traitor and take him from us.

He might hear the Lords of his Fathers most Honorable privy Council,
lamenting for his abscence: The Nobility discontentedly sighing, the clergy
still praying for him: the Gentry complaining, and the common people more than
mad in their longings, to have him make a quick return home.

Thus, were the warning-pieces, which continually were shot off to give him
notice, how much the kingdom ingenerall languished for him. This was his own
country-musicke, striking up of purpose to have his princely Ear listen to the
Tunes. These were a mixture of ten thousand voices, (like Echoes) dwelling in
every Hill, Peer, Promontory, and Cape at sea, between us and Spain,
hollowing to our Charles (like so many merry whistling winds) to have him come
aboard, and make for England.

But before we can make our eyes so happy, as to behold him, we must awhile
look into Spain. And there observe what care the King of Spain took, for the
preparation of his Highness journey: appointing Attendants and officers
befitting the State of such a persons* This that follows being Verbatim
translated out of a short Spanish Relation of that entertainment, Printed at
Madrid.

A Relation of the departure of the most Illustrious Prince of Wales, from
MADRID the ninth of September this present year. 1623. Stilo Nono. To Don
Alonso Neli de Reibadeneyra, Lord of Vega de Porras, near to Valladolid.
THe wonder of Cordoua (Seneca, Romes Master,) said, that the first point of
Ingratitude, was to be forgetful of a benefit. Those which I receiud from Don
Francesco de Reibadeneyra, a Knight of the Order of Santiago, Father to your
Worthiness, I cannot in gratitude pass over in silence, for acknowledging
whereof, I may well say (that the Son of Reason and recognition rose in me
early) and moreover by an hereditary bequeathment, Sons put their Fathers in
mind, what I stood endebted in to yours, whereof I now pay a part, laying at
the Feet of your censure, (for the discharge of my Office, in respect of your
wit, and more then humane parts) this last discourse, of the departure and
magnificences of the Prince, except the shallowness of my own brain abate
some grains of the due estimate.

Fare you well. Andrez de Mendoza.


The coming of the Illustrious Prince of Wales into these Kingdoms, being the
strangest occurrent that in a Royal person the world has for many ages seen,
which dashed and obscured all ancient patterns and examples, it astonished
whole Nations, and raised up assured hopes of great prosperities and opinions,
of his coming amongst men, being so diversely conceived, beyond the bounds of
ordinary discourse, as in sundry of my Relations has been reported, wherein
are discovered and revealed many points of vrbanity, greatness, and gallantrie,
I thought my self likewise obliged to write of his departure, comprehending
(as you shall see) so many circumstances of pleasure, and contentment. For
which, the ninth of September was constituted, and by the Conde de Oliuares, as
chief Master of the Horse, Councellor of Estate, and the Kings nearest
confident; order was given, that he should be accompanied by twelve Gentlemen
Wayters, to serve and attend him, Conde de Villa mor, de Meiorada, de Villa
Franqueza, and Catillana, D. John de Sabe, Ara the Gallant, D. Diego de Zarate
Landi, D. Joseph de Samano, D. Antonio Zapata, D. Garcia de Castro, D. Iuan de
Cordoua, D. Aularo de Guzman, D. Pompeio de Farsis, all persons of renowned and
great quality* they and their servants, with all honorable appearance, of
Coaches, Horselitters, Jewels, Liueries, and Gallantry, manifesting the
greatness of their persons, by undertaking it with that observance and
cheerefulnes, which usually they show, in any thing commended to their care.

The Carriages were committed to the Licentiate Don Lewis de Paredes Alcayd of
the Palace and Court, and his care and diligence herein was but requisite, for
so great provisions as belonged to the King and the Infantes, besides those of
the Prince which he had in charge, and the preparing of the ways, and opening
of passages, to the Licentiated Iuan de Queniones, Lieutenant to the Corrigidor
of Madrid, who in this, as in all other things, showed his affection and desire
to serve the King; Then to provide victual, to minister Justice to both parts,
and to govern a company so necessary to be ruled and ordered, as such a number
of Coachmen, Littermen, and Muleters, was referred to the Licenciate, Don Diego
Franco, de Garnica Alcayd, which was not one of the least services that ever
he performed.

The Cardinal Zapata, the Marquis de Aytona, and the Conde de Gondomar,
Counselors of Estate, were appointed to accompany, and to assist, in
whatsoever was necessary to be consulted or treated of, in the behalf of the
King; for as there is no Action of Princes, which is not subject to great
variety of Accident, and new reasons give occasion of present debatements,
points of State must necessarily be scand and discust; the Conde de Monterrey,
President of Italy, so rare and famous in understanding; was commanded to
attend his Highness, for the contentment he had given herein since his coming,
and the great acceptance which the Prince made of his service; and he was
commanded to join with the Counsel of Estate, to treat of any matter that
should come in question, and for Secretary there was ordained Don Andres de
Prada, and Losuda Knight of the Order of Saint John, one that also deserved
higher employments.

The Kings house, furnished with double officers, from the highest to the least,
at the disposition of the Conde de Baraias, his Mayordome, or Steward.

The Privy chamber and all belonging to it, was commended to the Duke of
Buckingham, who attended in that place, and most of the Gentlemen there
attending were of the English nation, and the Offices being inferior to ours,
it was the less inconvenient, Those of his Majesty's Chamber being all of the
chief Nobility of Spain.
they should come for the time under foreign obedience, then to oblige so
great Nobility, to new orders and customs: the Servants and Pages of Condi de
Olivaries, attended and serud the Duke, as they had done since the first day of
his arrival.

Horses, and Mules of carriage, with whatsoever to them belonged was referred
to the charge of D. Francisco Zapata, one of the Kings Ryders, who was
confident of his own experience: and amongst so many and sundry persons that
went along in this troop, there were D. Iacynto Castelin, and Don Antonio de
Farsis: D. Gieronimo de Tapia, and D. Manuel Gutienes the Kings Pages, the
chief of the Order of Calatraua, the rest were of the order of St. Iago.

The Lieuetenant to the great Postmaster, Sanctiago de Saldanna and his
Officers, and the Spanish, and Almaine guardes, were under Baraias command, and
whatsoever else belongs to so many Lords: all which strove to the uttermost, in
adorning their own persons, and enriching their servants Liueries.

His Majesty presented to the Prince: And the Marquis Flores de Auila his
principal Rider, and a Gentleman of his Chamber, in his name, deliuerd
eighteen Spanish Genets, six Barberies, six breeding Mares, and twenty
Foles, all covered with clothes of Crymson Velvet, garnisht and guarded with
gold lace, and Scutchions of his arms, and one of them had a Saddle of fine
Lambskinnes, the other furniture set and embroyderd with most rich Pearl,
beseeming well both his Majesty, and his Highness, and two Stallions, with
their Mares, and a Pistol, Sword and Dagger, set with Diamonds of great value
and estimation, fourscore small shot, the like number of Cross-bowes, with
which the Duke of Medina Sidonia had served, and a Sword, and Pistol, with
which the Duke of Ossuna once served his Majesty: and an hundred selected
swords, amongst all those of the Court, and the Prince gave the Marquess of
Flores, a rare jewel of Diamonds.

To the Duke of Buckingham were given twelve Spanish Gennets, four Moriscos or
Barberie horse, four Mares, and ten Foales covered with Mantles of crimson
Velvet, garnisht with gold, and of swords and handpeeces, about fifty: with a
Girdle of Diamonds of the value of thirty thousand crowns.

And to the Captain of the Guard, Baron of Kensington, two hundred buttons of
Diamonds, and four horses, and with them certain Slings. And to the
estimation of fifty 1000. Ducats in Jewels amongst the English Gentry: a gift
and largess correspondent to so great a Monarch.

The Queen our Lady and Mistres besides Linen, presented to the Prince,
fifty skins of Ambar vnshauen, and an hundred and fifty Cabretanes, or of
young Kids: their sent and perfume amounting to a great sum of crowns.

The Conde d'Olivares (besides diverse pictures and other rich vtensils of the
house) presented his Highness with three Chains of needle work, so rich as
proper only for a Prince.

Don Layme Manuel de Cordeues Marquess of Belmonte, gave him four Barbary
horses, and his Highness commanded a very fair Chain, to be given him that
brought them.

His Majesty and his Highness went twice, to take leave of the Lady Infanta,
and of other royal persons, to the Monastery of the Descallsas; where they
were entertained with tears of joy, and his Majesty commanded that the
Marquis of Villena, and the Prince of Esquilache, should enter, with other
Lords, that had sisters and daughters there. And her Highness gave unto the
Prince, many Boxes of sents, flowers, and other things of great curiosity and
riches.

The Ambassadors, Grandes, and Counselors of Estate, went to take leave of his
Highness; by whom they were honored, and he thanked them for the care and pains
they took, in all the meetings for his dispatches: and he sent to visit all
Religious and grave persons, Ecclesiastical and Secular of the Assembly, to
whom he gave the like thanks: for as in greatness, so is he in no manner of
vrbanitie defective. On Thursday at seven of the clock in the morning, in the
presence of the Counsel of Estate, between the hands of the Illustrious
Patriarch of the Indies, his Highness with the King of Spain, performed some
ceremonies of the Matrimonial capitulations, and those of the conuention of
the State.

The day after, in the evening, about five of the clock, his Majesty went for
the Prince in public, wearing a black suit, and Jewels, for the sorrow of the
Princes departure, and his Highness ware no Jewels at all. The concourse of
people was so great, that neither any respect of his Majesty, nor fear of the
Guards could keep them back, so dearly Spain loves her Kings. The love of
the, Prince, is grown so natural: and his confidence, and tractabilitie in
Treaties, has so augmented it; as also the Spaniards are so easily won with
affability, an infallible effect of their demerit and valor. And so likewise,
as being son to a most absolute and understanding King, his Highness knew
how to imitate with such admirable sufficiency. The Queen and the Infanta,
accompanied with all the Ladies of the Court, the wives and Ladies of
Ambassadors, Ladies, and Menima's [which are certain young Nobilitie] expected
the^; who being entered, they went and received him without the Tarrima. A place
of the Court so called.
And all turning toward her, He first took leave of the Queen of Spain,
without an Interpreter in the French tongue: and afterward by means of his
Ambassador Ordinary, who interpreted for the Infanta, with whom he continued
about half an hour. And all the English Lords and Knights kissed the Queens,
and the Infanta's hands.

Where being conducted and accompanied by the Lords Infantes, to his Coach, and
the Duke of Infantado, the Conde de Oliuares, the Duke of Buckingham, and the
Earl of Bristoll, the Spaniards on the side of his Highness, and the English
on the Kings side, they went to the Descalsa's, A Monastery of barelegd Friars.
to take their last leave of his Highness, leaving behind them this great and
famous place. They returned by night. And afterward his Highness Gifts and
Presents were made known, such as beseemed a Prince, to persons who shall be
made known; wherein he showed the greatness of his Person, and the desire and
respect they bare to his Majesty, and ought to show and manifest.

To the King our Lord he gave a sword set with Diamonds, which in the least
estimate must needs be held a great gift: and his Majesty gave him that
delivered it, a Jewel correspondent to the Majesty of a King.

To the Queen our Mistress, he sent a fair and relucent Diamond, which was
esteemed to be of twenty Caracts weight: And a Triangle, and two Ear rings of
Diamonds, as big as an indifferent bean, great in value, but greater in Art
and workmanship: and the Queens Majesty gave to the Keeper of the Wardrobe
that brought them, three thousand Crowns.

To the Lady Infanta a string of two hundred and fifty great peare-fashioned
Pearls, of rare perfection, and of five Caracts: and one with a Diamond which
cannot be valued: and two little Peare-pearles for the ears, of inestimable
value: and other two Pearls for the same parts, marvelous great.

To the two chief Ladies of the Chamber, the Duchess of Gandia, and the
Countess of Lemos. To the chief Mayor-domos or Stewards: the Duke of
Infantado, and the Conde of Benauente, Jewels of Diamonds. And the Duke gave
five hundred Ducats to him that brought them: and to seventeen Ladies and
Minima's seventeen Jewels, as estimable for value, as for Art.

To the Lord Infant Don Carlos a poynted Diamond, in a Cup, set in a Ring, as
a true present from a Prince to his Highness.

To the Lord Cardinal Infant a Pectorall of Topazes, Diamonds, and a pendent
Pearl, which might supply the absence of the Peregrina.

To the Conde de Oliuares, a great Diamond called a Portugues, Some rare Jewel
so called,
and it was sometime Don Sebastians, it is of eight Caracts, with a pendent
Pearl of great price. And the Conde gave to the Keeper of the Wardrobe, to Mr.
Endimion Porter, and Mr. Thomas Carey of his Highness Chamber, Jewels of good
value, and each of them six excellent Swords, with all their furniture.

To the Countess of Oliuares, a Cross of very great Diamonds in form of a
column. And to the Lady Maria de Guzman her Daughter, a Ring worth a great
sum of crowns.

To the Admiral of Castilia a great jewel, and his Excellency gave a 1000.
crowns to him that brought it, and to the Marquess of Carpio the like.

To the Duke of Hixan: To the Marquis of Mondexar: To the Kings Confessor, and
to the Bishop of Segouia four Jewels of Diamonds worthy of such persons, and
him that gave them.

And to all the Gentlemen of the Chamber, rings with fair Diamonds, and to the
Counselors of Estate, stones of double the greatness.

To fourteen of the Kings Pages, so many chains, and six and fifty thousand
Ryals to the inferior Officers that waited. To the guard of Archers four
thousand Crowns; and to every one was given a very good Ring. And also to Don
Melchior of Alcazar, whose observance and attendance deserved it.

To the Conde de la Puebla del Maestre, a Chain of a thousand, an hundred and
seventeen Diamonds; and a Jewel with forty seven more, with his own picture.

The Duke of Buckingham gave to Don Rodrigo de Aguiar, and Don Pedro Ares,
servants to the Conde de Oliuares, two suits of apparel, and Crosses of
Diamonds double the value. The like were given to Don Iuan de Santacruz, and
Don Pedro de Vega: And to thirteen Pages, thirteen Chains of gold: and to
the inferior Officers and servants, a great sum of money: and to all that
carried Horses, or any other thing into England, great gifts of money and
Chains, reserving still, the showing them a further favor there. The Prince
did the like to the Gentlemen-waiters to the King. To Marco Antonio Darroque,
and to Don Iuan de Fonseca Rabelo, Attendants about the Kings person, to each
of them a thousand five hundred Crowns.

On Saturday by fair daylight, they departed, the Prince, the King, and the
Infantes, and in a manner, all the Court, and every ones Family; to San
Lorenco, or the Escuriall, whither they came that day. And the day following,
there were showed to his Highness, accompanied with the Royal persons, the
Pantheon, Sepulchers, Vestrie, Quire, Libraries, Cloisters, and Gardens: who
admired it, as it well deserves: and to all those Lords it seemed not only
greater then the fame that went of it, but then any conceit or imagination they
could have thereof: and in reason, it was exalted with the title of the eighth
wonder of the world, and the Epilogue and conclusion of all the rest.

Monday following, being the eleventh, (while they that were to go the
journey; came on to the rest of the company) was spent in seeing the Fresneda,
A place of pleasure in Spain.
and the Boscages, as also in hunting there.

Tuesday morning was spent after the same manner: And his Majesty determining
with their Highnesses, to accompany them to the Grove of Balsayn: when his
Highness requested him, having respect to the Queens being great with child,
that he would no longer continue his absence; His Majesty resisted, but in the
end was overcome by his Highness: for his just demand required no less.

They departed from the Escuriall; and in a little Field not far off the
place ordained for their taking of leave; they alighted, and so sitting down
for the space almost of half an hour, conuersed.

Afterward they embraced, and the Queen, the Infanta, with the brothers, Don
Carlos, and Infant Cardinal, came to do the like: Then all the English Lords
and Gentlemen kissed the Kings hand, and the Spaniards the Princes: by both
whom they were vouchsafed great honors. And returning to embrace again, with
wonderful demonstrations of love, a Trophee was commanded to be erected, with
an Inscription of all that succeeded, in this place where they took leave.

The Prince departed to lie at Guardarama in his Coach, with the Duke of
Buckingham, Conde de Monterrey, Conde de Gondomar, and his Fathers Ambassador
Leager: And the King and their Highnesses went to Madrid. And this night the
Admiral of Castile and Leon, in his Majesty's name, with a great train and
show of followers, was sent Post to visit the Prince, and one of the English
Lords was likewise sent by his Highness to the King of Spain.

On Wednesday he went to dine at Balsayn, where he took great delight in the
house and Boscages; as also in the rare and strange situation. And about four
of the clock in the evening, he entered into Segouia, where all the Country
came flocking in to see him. He admired the building of the Church, and of the
Palace, when, upon the opening of the Coach, they gave him a welcome with all
their Artillery, which was much and good. And lighting on foot, he viewed
all the house, extolling the memory of prudent Philip the second, the
Re-edifier thereof, delighting to see his Arms quartered, with those of these
Kingdoms in the Scutcheons of the second great Hall. The work of Don
Henriques the third, who married with a Niece of the Kings his Progenitors.

The Conde de Chinchon Alcayd of that Royal House, An Officer of great Place.
and the Treasurer of the money Mint, was appointed to entertain him: Which he
performed with the greatness of his quality, and singular wit and discretion:
who attended him at the gate, accompanied with his Lieutenant, the Guard, and
the Captain of the Alcazar or Palace, and withal their servants set forth in
all bravery, and he offered him the chief and double Key, because the
principal Key of the Fuerca is only presented to the Kings Person; or else
obtaining it by Plea of Homage.

His Highness was pleased to merender, or make his Collation, Between dinner
and supper a collation of some Fruits and Iunkets.
and the Conde served him, with a number of delicates, and certain Trouts of
extraordinary greatness. Also Don Sancho Giron, a Knight of the Order of
Alcantara, Corrigidor, (the glory of Talauera, his Country) was ready with a
Present of milk confections, of that City, so celebrated, which he esteemed,
and for it sent him great thanks.

Afterward the whole City in rank and order, with Mace-bearers, came to
kiss his hand, whom he honored, discovering himself to them, and not
permitting the ceremony of a kiss, he embraced them with show of great joy
and contentment.

Then he went down to see the Minthouse: where also the Count himself offered
him the Keys; and the Alcazar, or Palace, gave him a full salve. All the
stamps were employed, and wrought of all sorts in his presence, and here, after
he had admired the form and manner thereof, The Conde de Chinchon served him in
Founts, with more then three thousand Crowns, telling him, how it was the
fruit of those gardens, in doubles, of an hundred, eight, four, two, and
plain plates, Ryals of fifty and of eight, and from them to half Ryals: He
accepted of this service; and among those Knights and Gentlemen, that delighted
in the beauty of the coin, he imparted some; the rest with much contentment,
he dispersed among the people, who beheld him, with many acclamations and
benedictions.

Being returned to the Palace, when he had supt, the place was girt round about
with lights and fires: and the Palace with a number of Torches, and some great
ones very artificial, which yielded much light: an excellent invention: and he
presented him with a gallant Mask of thirty and two Knights, which might well
have appeared in the Court, wherein there were Liueries of Cloth and Silks,
mounted on excellent Iennets. The Palace discharges al their Artillery, which
was mingled with the sound of Bells, Trumpets, and musical Instruments, which
took up a great part of the night. They had provided Bulls, and twelve Lanciers;
but the haste of the journey could not admit of this service.

His Highness gave to Chinchon a Jewel worth 3000. Crowns, and he to him
that brought it, a chain worth three hundred.

He commanded money to be given among the Officers of the house, and 200.
Crowns to the Masters of the Artillery, and as many to Don Iuan de Torres, a
pregnant and witty Poet, who dedicated unto him certain ingenious and elegant
verses: and to Andres de Mendoca, Author of this Relation, who presented him
with a congratulation of his happy Espousals in the Latin tongue, three
thousand Ryals, with many honors and manifestations of contentment. And about
five in the morning, he cheerfully departed from Agasaxo, being received into
that City: he dined at Santa Maria de Nieua, and the day following, at
Santiustie, and lay at Olmedo: on Saturday he dined at Valdestillas, and by two
came to Valladolid, where the whole Chancerie, City, and University kissed
his hand, with a great train and company, whom he honored with signs of joy
and gladness: he was entertained by those Lords with bravery and gallantrie,
wherein they showed affection to serve their King, and by celebrating the joy
of the Prince his coming, which his Majesty formerly manifested: Amongst
whom, the Marquess de los Velez, and the Conde de Aluade Aliste, exemplified
themselves, in the great train of Servants, the glorious apparel of their
own persons, and in the riches of their Liueries; al which he honored as they
deserved, and as he well knows how to perform it. His Highness went to see
the Kings Garden, he was much delighted with the Pictures of Raphael de
Vrbino, and Michael Angelo, and with the Alabaster Fountain, which the
Illustrious great Duke of Tuscan gave to my Lord Cardinal, the Duke of Lerma;
he was served with it: It is the portrature of Cain and Abel. And his Highness
took great contentment in the rich shops of the City, which honored him with
festiuities of fires, (for he would stay for no other solemnities) and leaving
among the Officers of the Palace and the Garden, testimonies of his
magnificence, he departed to Duennas, where, by order, the Duke of Cea,
Vice Admiral of Castilia, entertained and feasted him; and in Palencia he was
received and feasted by the Bishop, to whom he gave a great Jewel, and to his
best, and inferior servants, a liberality of money: from whence he departed to
Carrion. He visited the Antiquities of the City, and so went to Fromista, and
having entertainment in the Marquesses house, by his order, he was served with
a great sumptious Dinner: The like was showed him in Alguilar de Campo, by the
Marquess thereof: and in Herrera Rio de Pisuerga. The Constable of Castilia
and Leon, presented him with the like, for his own honor, and the eminency of
his Family, omitting nothing, wherein he may testify it.

And thus the Author cuts off the thread of his Narration, reserving the rest
for some more elegant Pen, till his coming to London.

With License from the Lord Gancalo Perez de Valencuela.

In Madrid by the widow of Alonso Martin, 1623.

Thus far runs the printed Spanish Relation: what ensued after, you shall now
hear, from the report of some of his Highness Train, that attended in the
Voyage. And thus it begins.

He arrived at Saint Andera on Saint Mathews day: not far off from this Port,
the Prince dined (having not yet made his entry into the town) whilst he sat
at dinner (circled about with all his noble company) a double news saluted him
at the board, and both of them good: the one was, that his sister (the
Princess Palatine) was safely brought to bed of a son; the other was, that
the whole Fleet (unshaken by any dangerous Sea-bruizes) was arrived in the
haven of Saint Andera. In the afternoon of the same day that the news was
brought, about four of the clock, he was with all honor received and welcomed
into the Town: Being entertained upon the way, not only with multitudes of
people testifyng much affection in their faces, and uttering no less in their
Spanish tongues, that it came from their hearts: but to render this joy more
substantially, he was first all the way he came along presented with vollies of
Musketeeres, and at the town with a ringing peale of Ordnance. He was no
sooner in the town, but his desire was to take a view of his Fleet, being
attended by many great Lords of Spain who had come along to Saint Andera with
him; the Conde of Monterey being a principal; with many English of good
quality.

How soon are joys turned into sorrows? safety into dangers? a shining
forenoone into a gloomy evening? His Highness after all that feasting and
triumphing in Saint Andera, being desirous to go aboard that goodly ship (the
Admiral of his Fleet) called the Prince, (a title due to it for the bravery
and Princely building of it) spent so much time, that the evening drew on
apace, and with the evening a more threatening enemy: for not only the tide
resisted his coming back (his Highness being then in his own Barge, and his
own Watermen rowing in it) but a storm began to arise, and the billows to
swel high, before the Watermen had gotten half way from the ships to the
town, the distance between the shore and the ships being at least a Spanish
league. The Watermen were strong, cunning, and courageous, but the furious
waves taught their Oars another manner of practice then ever they were put to
upon the Thames. To the town they could not possibly get, against a wind and
tide so raging, or if they had ventured, it had been dangerous, in regard a
huge Bark (to save her self) lay very near the mouth of the Harbor: to the
shore they were as fearful to put, it being full of rocks; to the ships back
again to fly for succor, night (a dark night) being spread over that
Horizon, denied that comfort, for if they should miss the ships, they were in
doubt to be carried into the maine, the channel where the Fleet anchored,
running with an impetuous and irresistible torrent. In this full-Sea of
Horrors, the Prince resolved to turn back toward the ships, and to fall in
upon the first they could fasten, rather then trust to the mercy of the rocks,
upon every one of which sat inevitable destruction.

What could Hope trust to here, where neither the watermens skill, nor
strength, could encourage them to bring safety to their Master? A hideous night.
The clouds opened, and discharged their artillery of rain, lightning, and
thunder: elements of contrary nature, warring one upon another, whilst the
waters (which were called up, to decide the controversy) quarrelling with the
winds, made the vproare more horrid and tempestuous.

And so much greater was the danger, by how much the night (by reason of the
storm) grew darker and darker: yet at last, that omnipotent Arm, which can
tear up rocks from their center, and that voice which can call in the winds;
and still them with the moving of his finger, sent a Dove with an Olive branch
in her bill, as an assurance of comfort. For by casting out a roape from a ship
called the Defiance, (which with much hazard of life, one of the Princes
watermen catched hold off) by spying a light in the same ship, his Highness
and all in the Barge with him, (praise be given to the Almighty Pilot, that
stood at Helm) were, with unspeakable joy received into that ship, and there
took up his lodging till the next morning: nothing at all daunted at these
terrors, sithence dangers to noble minds are but the triumphs of their constant
sufferings.

The next day (being Satturday) his Highness was brought to shore, and dined
in a House appointed for him and his company; where after Dinner, he took
leave of the Spanish Commissioners, and others, who had waited on him thither;
and a little before the evening, went aboard his Ship, called the Prince, with
a full resolution to make the compass of those wooden walls, the Prince of
Englands Court, and in that Sea-chamber of Presence even to dwell, without any
remove, until it should please God to send a prosperous wind, fit to carry him
into England.

The Spanish Lords feasted in the Princes ship, for a last fare-wel.
On Sunday (which was the 14 of September) his Highness invited the Spanish
Commissioners, and other Gentlemen to a Feast aboard, as a farewell to them
before they set forward to Madrid; and at their return from his Ship, where
they had such royal entertainment, as the time and place could conveniently
prepare, the whole Fleet in their passage by every particular Ship, bestowed
upon them a Sea-salutation and farewell, from the mouths of their Artillery,
whose Echoes met them upon their very landing on the shore.

Leave we those Lords of Spain, fitting their journey back again to Madrid,
and let us return to our Prince; whose progress (after the King of Spain had
taken leave of him at Campillo) ending at S. Andera (or S. Andrew) the time
until he set sail for England, was thus entertained.

On the 10 of September, his Highness came to the Town; on the 11. his whole
Fleet, (being eight ships of his Majesty's Navy Royal, and two Pinnaces)
safely arrived in sight of the Town: the 12.13.14.15.16. and 17. went away (as
before is related) in entertainments on shore and aboard, in surueying, and
making ready the Fleet; and last, in that last farewell given to the Spanish
Commissioners, which was on the 14 of September; after whose departure, his
Highness continued aboard four days, before he weighed Anchor, which was
with much joy, elevation of voices, thundering of Drums, and Trumpets, and that
excellent musical tumult of Mariners, nimbly running up and down to set
forward so royal a business.

Anchors now are weighed, all the linen bravery of swelling sails, courting
the winds to speed them in their journey: Spanish people stand upon the shore;
our Prince and English Noble men upon the deckes, taking leaves one of another
in dumb shows, with looks, hands, and hats; And now suppose that for nine
days and nights together you behold his Highness and his Noble attendants,
flying apace toward England with the wings of prosperous winds. But on the 29.
day of September (being Michaelmas day) the Seas grew churlish, the winds
angry, and to avoid their fury, the whole Fleet was forced to put into the
Island of Silley, from whence they came into Saint Mary's Sound, and then on the
third of October, being accompanied only with a side-wind, they came merrily
forward; and within two days after, that is to say, on the fifth of October,
(being Sunday) at nine of the clock in the morning, his Highness, (with
unspeakable joy of all within reach of such happy tidings) landed at Portsmouth.

Yet before he could meet this happiness of Landing, a misfortune had a mind
to cross him, but Heaven would not suffer it: for one of the ships in the
Fleet had like to ouer-set him, but the malice of this danger ended in his
preservation.

Being thus then in health and safety set upon the shore, let us with the same
speed follow him to London, which he himself makes, to glad with his presence,
the eyes of his royal Father.

But the joy (that he was come) being swifter then he could be himself, put
both the Country, (all the way that it came) and the City, (when even after
midnight it was entered into it) into such in-vtterable expressions of
affectionate gladness, such vnlimitable and violent inundations of joy, that
the people (to remember the comfort they received in their Prince) seemed to
loose their own being, and to forget that they were themselves: men, women,
and children made but one consort, and the music of that consort, sounded
nothing but The Prince is come, our Charles is come. From the Noble man to the
Artificer, if contention had arose, which of them was fullest of good wishes,
of glad welcomes, of lowd-resounding acclamations for his coming, it had been
hard to decide the difference.

So many Bells were heard ringing for a whole day together, that a stranger but
newly ^^^ring the City, might have thought here, (...) ^eene spoken no other
language, all language else being drowned.

So infinite were the Bonefires, so costly, and so high flaming, that had they
all been seen burning in the nightime, that week might have boasted, it
had gotten one day more than any other week in the year, so universal was
the light.

The day was foul and rainy, but there were artificial Sunbeams in every
street to dry up the showers.

What need I busy my self again to draw forth this English Masterpiece of
ours, when every man carries the picture of it in his bosom! It will be a
legacy for young men when they grow old, to read (by the fire side) the
Chronicle of this day to their children.

Let us leap therefore from land again and behold at Sea one remarkable
accident, with which his Highness happily encountered in his passage homewards.
And that was this.

About a day before they put in at Silley, a great thundering of Ordnance beat
round about the air, in so much that in a short time after, the fire of the
pieces was a far off easily discerned.

The Fleet approaching nearer and nearer, certain Dunkerkers and Hollanders
were at it pell mell: Hereupon two Ships of his Highness Fleet, called the
seven Stars and the Rainbow (being the foremost of the rest) gave them a Shot
and haild them; upon which first came up four Ships singled from the rest,
who being asked what they were? they answered Men of War, and of Dunkerks: Our
Men bid them go to the Lee-ward, and speak to the Prince of England; they
presently did so, and went under our Princes Stern.

Then came up 5. Ships more, they being likewise hailed, came; and being
demanded what they were? they answered, Holland Men of War; these also were
bidden to go to the Lee-ward, and speak to the Prince of England.

These coming then under the Princes Stern, as the other had done before; his
Highness commanded them to hoyse out their Boats, and the Captains of either
side to come aboard: they did so; and the cause of their fighting being
examined by the Prince, it was found that the four Dunkerkers coming out for
them, made after them, and chased them to fight. His Highness understanding by
their own relations the truth of their Quarrel, told them that since it was
their fortune to fall into his Company, he would persuade them to be at
peace, and to give over the Chase, and to bid farewell one to another. The
Hollander seemed unwilling to this, urging rather the contrary; but his
Highness (out of a noble desire to save the shedding of blood) used many
gracious mediations to draw them to peace, and prevailed so much at that time,
as that they parted friends and upon equal terms; And for prevention of
returning to their Quarrel, his Highness set them one from the other some good
distance off, and so let them go.

The names of the Ships that were in the English Fleet, their Burden, and
what noble Gentlemen under the Prince were Commanders.
Burden. Ordn. 1 THE Prince-Royall, in which came his Highness: the Earl of
Rutland being Admiral. 1200. 55. 2 The Saint Andrew, in which was the Lord
Morley Vice Admiral. 0898. 42. 3 The Swift-sure, in which the Lord Windsor was
Rere-admirall. 0700. 42. 4 The Saint George, in which Sir Francis Steward was
chief Commander. 5 The Defiance, in which Sir Sacuile Treauer commanded. 0700.
40. 6 The Bonauenture, Sir William Sentliger Commander. 0674. 34. 7 The
Rainbow, commanded by Sir Henry Palmer. 0650. 40. 8 The Antilope, commanded by
Captain Lone. 0450. 34. 9 The Charles, under the Command of Captain Harris.
0140. 14. 10 The Seven Stars commanded by 0140. 14. The numbers of Pieces of
Ordinance, carried in the whole Fleet, amount to 315.

Memorable therefore for ever amongst us, be the fifth day of October, for our
Prince his joyful Arrival here in England, after so many tempests at Sea, and
hazardous Adventures by Land, in his passage through other Kings Dominions: As
those two other fifth days stand remarkable to the end of the world; viz. the
fifth of August, and fifth of November; the first for the particular preservation
of our King; the second, for the general delivery of our Country. Let one red
Letter more be now added to our Calendar, and an Anniuersary held with
thanksgiving to God, and with Belles and Bonefires, testifying the joy of the
people in memory of so inestimable a happiness.

And now to shut up this short Discourse with a matter worthy observation: What
an unexpected comfort was mixed with the misfortunes of those 9. Prisoners. (7.
Men and 2. Women) when the very sound of a Princes Name stayed the hand of the
Law from striking them? Joy did so transport the soul of the whole Kingdom,
that death was loath to do his Office even upon those poor condemned Wretches:
Mercy set a Portcullis before the gates of Justice, so that when her sword was
upon drawing to cut off the lives of 9. miserable Creatures, the very breath of
our Princes coming put the blow by: In stead of that charitable Bell, which at
the end of every Sessions, is with a doleful sound rung out after midnight,
to put condemned persons in remembrance of their end, which is to be the next
morning, the poor souls were cheered up, with peales from a thousand Belles
long before break of day, so that in stead of being called down out of the
Iayle to go to their deaths, they came as joyfully from their Dungeon, as if
they had been to have gone to a Wedding.

Neither has this abundant grace and mercy of the Prince given glad hearts and
thankful tongues to these 9. only (their Pardons being now signd) but it
flies like a gentle gale of Wind, into all the Prisons of the Land, to fan
comfort, and freedom, to all such as lie imprisoned or condemned for petty
Crimes.

Last of all, to save the Reader a labor of turning over Leaves, to satisfy
himself, with a brief Calender how time went away with the Prince after he
came to Port Saint Andera, let him be thus informed; That his Highness came
to that Town, on the 10. of September, (this year 1623.)

The whole Fleet came and met him there on the 11. day.

In feasting the Spanish Commissioners, surueying his Fleet, taking leave, and
other correspondencies required in a design of such State, 6. days more were
spent.

On the 18. day he put to Sea; on the 29. day he put into the Sillies; and on
the 5. of October, landed at Portsmouth; so that he continued at Sea, in his
coming homewards, 18. days.

His Journey by Land from Madrid, till he came to Saint Andera.
On the eighth of September, 1623, stilo veter. the Prince coming from Madrid,
was accompanied with the King of Spain, his two brothers, etc. to Campillo,
where they took leave, that Town being but eight miles from Madrid.

From Saint Lorenzo to Guadarama, Leagues 2 From Guadarama to Segouia, 6 From
Segouia to S. Maria de nieua, 7 From Sancta Maria de nieua to Olimedo, 8 From
Olimedo to Valladolid, 8 From Valladolid to Pasencia, 8 From Pasencia to
Carrion, 7 From Carrion to Herrera, 8 From Herrera to Reynosa, 8 From Reynosa
to la Puente de Nieuas, 8 From Puente de nieuas to Port St Andera, 7 Number of
Leagues 77.
There came along with the Prince, in one of the ships of the Fleet, an
Ambassador, called Don Diego de Mendoza, a Gentleman of a noble Family, and
Kinsman to the Duke of Infantado; who comes to congratulate with his Highness
Father our King, and upon his return is to go into Allemaine, Flanders, and
France, to give account to their Majesty's and Highnesses of these happy
concordances, carrying with him Jewels and other provision for his person.

FJNJS

