Ouids Banquet of SENSE.

A Coronet for his Mistress Philosophy, and his amorous Zodiac.

With a translation of a Latin coppie, written by a Friar, Anno Dom. 1400.

Quis leget haec? Nemo Hercule Nemo, vel duo vel nemo: Persius.

AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for Richard Smith. Anno Dom* 1595.

TO THE TRVLIE Learned, and my worthy Friend, Ma. Matthew Royden.
SVch is the wilful poverty of judgments (sweet Ma:) wandering like
pasportles men, in contempt of the divine discipline of Poesy, that a man may
well fear to frequent their walks: The profane multitude I hate, and only
c^nsecrate my strange Poems to these serching spirits, who^ learning has made
noble, and nobility sacred; endeu^uring that material Oration, which y^^ call
Schema; varying in some rare fiction, from popular custom, even for the p^re
sakes of ornament and utility; This of Euripides ^xceeding sweetly relishing
with ^ee; Lentem coquens ne quicquam dentis addito.

But that Poesy should be as peruiall as Oratorie, and plainnes her special
orna^rnt, were the plain way to barbarism: and to make the Ass run proud
of his ears; to take away str^ngth from Lions, and give Cammels horns.

That, Enargia, or cleerenes of representation, requird in absolute Poems is
not the perspicuous delivery of a low invention; but high, and hearty invention
expressed in most significant, and unaffected phrase; it serves not a skillful
Painters turn, to draw the figure of a face only to make known who it
represents; but he must lymn, give luster, shadow, and heightning; which
though ignorants will esteem spic'd, and too curious, yet such as have the
judicial perspectiue, will see it has, motion, spirit and life.

There is no confection made to last, but it is admitted more cost and skill
then presen^ly to be used simples; and in my opinion, that which being with a
little endeavor serched, ads a kind of majesty to Poesy; is better t^en that
which every Cobbler may sing to his patch.

Obscurity in affection of words, and indigested concets, is pedanticall and
childish; but where it shroudeth it self in the heart of his subject, vtterd
with fitnes of figure, and expressiue Epethites; with that d^rknes will I still
labor to be shaddowed; rich Minerals are digd out of the bowels of the earth,
not found in the superficies and dust of it; charms made of unlearned characters
are not consecrate by the Muses which are divine artists, but by Euippes
daughters, that challengd them with mere nature, whose breasts I doubt not had
been well worthy commendation, if their comparison had not turned them into
Pyes.

Thus (not affecting glory for mine own slight labors, but desirous other
should be more worthily glorious, nor professing sacred Poesy in any degree,)
I thought good to submit to your apt judgment: acquainted long since with the
true habit of Po^sie, and now since your laboring wi^s endeavor heauen-high
thoughts of Nature* you have actual means to sound the philosophical conceits,
that my new pen so seriously courteth. I know, that empty, and dark spirits,
will complain of palpable night: but those that beforehand, have a radiant,
and light-bearing intellect, will s^y they can pass through Corynnas Garden
without the help of a Lantern.

Your own most worthily and sincerely affected, George Chapman.

Richard Stapleton to the Author.
PHoebus has given thee both his bow, and Muse;
With one thou slayst the A^^^zans of thunder,
And to thy loose do such a sound in^use,
That gatherd storms therewith are blown in sunder:
The other decks her with her golden wings
Spread beyond measure, in thy ample verse,
Where she (as in her bowrs of Laurel) sings
Sweet philosophic strains tha^ Feends might pierse,
The soul of brightness in thy darkness shines
Most new, and dear: vnstaind^ with forrain^ graces,
And when aspiring sprights shall reach thy lines,
They will not hear our trebble-termed bases.
With boldness then thy able Poems use
Phoebus has given thee both his bow and Muse.
Tho: Williams of the inner Temple.
ISsue of (...) that will embrace
With fleshly arms the three-wingd wife of thunder:
Let her sad ruin, such proud thoughts abase
And view aloo^e, this verse in silent wonder,
If nearer your unhallowed eyes will pie^se,
Then (with the Satyr) kiss this sacred fire,
To scorch your lips, that dearly taught thereby
Your one^y souls fit objects may aspire,
But you high spi^rits in this cloud of gold
(...) ^like Jove) this bright Satur^an Muse,
Your eyes can well the dazeling b^ames behold
(...) ^ythian lightner freshly does ^ffuse
To dant the baseness of that bastard train
Whose twice borne judgments, formeles still remain.
Another.
Ungrateful Farmers of the Muses land
That (wanting thrift and judgment to employ it)
Let it manureles and vn^enced stand,
Till barbarous Cattle enter and destroy it:
Now the true heir is happily found out
Who (^raming it t'inritch posterities)
Walls it with spright-fild darkness round about,
Grafs, plants, and sowes; and makes it Paradise.
To which without the Parca^s golden bow,
None can aspire but stick in errors hell;
A Garland to engird a Monarchs brow,
Then take some pains to joy so rich a Jewel
Most prize is graspt in labors hardest hand,
And idle sonles can nothing rich command.
I. D. of the middle Temple.
Only that eye which for true love does weep,
Only that heart which tender love does pierse,
May read and understand this sacred vierse
For other wits too mystical and deep:
Between these hallowed leaves Cupid does keep
The golden lesson of his second Artist,
For love, till now, has still a Master mist
Since Ouids eyes were closd with iron sleep;
But now his waking soul in Chapman lives,
Which shows so well the passions of his soul,
And yet this Muse more cause of wonder gives,
And does more Prophet-like loves art enroule:
For Ouids soul, now grown more old and wise,
Poures forth it self in deeper mysteries.
Another.
SInce Ovid (loves first gentle Master) dyed
he has a most notorious trueant been,
And has not once in thrice five ages seen
That same sweet Muse that was his first sweet guide;
But since Apollo who was gratified
Once with a kiss, hunting on Cynthus green,
By loves fair Mother tender Beauties Queen,
This favor unto her has not envied,
That into whom she will, she may infuse
For the instruction of her tender son,
The gentle Ouids easy supple Muse,
Which unto thee (sweet Chapman) she has done:
She makes (in thee) the spirit of Ovid move,
And calls thee second Master of her love
Futurum inuisibile.
Ouids Banquet of SENSE.
The Argument.
OVID, newly enamoured of Iulia, (daughter to Octauius Augustus Caesar, after
by him called Corynna,) secretly con^aid himself into a Garden of the Emperors
Court: in an Arbor whereof, Corynna was bathing; playing upon her Lute, and
singing: which Ovid ouer-hearing, was exceedingly pleased with the sweetness of
her voice, Auditus.
and to himself uttered the comfort he conceived in his sense of Hearing.

Then the odors she used in her bath, Olfactus.
breathing a rich savor, he expresses the joy he felt in his sense of
S^elling.

Thus growing more deeply enamoured* (...) great contentation with himself,
he venters to see her in the pride of her nakedness: which doing by stealth,
he discovered the comfort he conceived in Seeing, Visus.
and the glory of her beauty.

Not yet satisfied, he uses all his Art to make known his being there,
Gustus.
without her offense: or (being necessarily offended) to appease her: which
done, he entreats a kiss a serve for satisfaction of his Taste, which he
obtaines.

Then proce^des he to entreaty for the fifth sense and there is interrupt^d.
Tactus.


NARRATIO.
THE Earth, from heavenly light conceived heat,
Which mixed all her moist parts with her dry,
When with right beams the Sun her bosom beat,
And with fit food her Plants did nutrifie;
They (which to Earth, as to their Mother cling
In forked roots) now sprinkled plenteously
With her warm breath; did hasten to the spring,
Gather their proper forces, and extrude
All power but that, with which they stood indude.
Then did Cyrrhus is a surname of the Sun, from a town called Cyrrha, where he
was honored.
Cyrrhus fill his eyes with fire,
Whose ardor curld the foreheads of the trees,
And made his greene-loue burn in his desire,
When youth, and ease, (Collectors of loves fees)
Enticed Corynna to a ^iluer spring,
Enchasing a round Browe; which with it sees, By Prosopopaeia, he makes y^
fountain y^ eye of the round Arbor, as a Diam^nt seems to be the eye of a
Ring: and therefore says, the Arbor sees with the Fountain.

(As with a Diamant does an ameld Ring*)
Into which eye, most pitifully stood
Niobe, shedding tears, that were her blood.
Stone Niobe, whose statue to this Fountain,
In great Augustus Caesar's grace was brought
From Sypilus, the steep Mygdonian Mountain:
That st^tue (...), still weeps for former thought,
Into this spring Corynnas bathing place;
So cunningly to optic reason wrought,
That a far of, it showed a woman's face,
Heavy, and weeping; but more nearly viewed,
Nor weeping, heavy, nor a woman showed.
In Summer only wrought her exstasie;
And that her story might be still observed,
Octauius caused in curious imagrie,
Her fourteen children should at large be carved,
Their fourteen breasts, with ^ourteene arrows gored
And ^et by her, that for her seed so starued
To a stone S^pulcher herself deplored,
In Iuory were they cut, and on each breast,
In golden Elements their names impressed.
Her sons, were Sypilus, Agenor, Phaedimus,
(...), Argus, and Damasicthen,
The s^auenth calde like his Grandsire, Tantalus.
Her D^ughters, were the fair Astiochen,
(...), N^^ra, and Pelopie,
(...), pound Ph^hia, and Eugigen,
All these apposde to violent Niobe
^ad looks so deadly sad, so lively done,
As if Death liu^d in their confusion.
Behind their Mother two Pyramides
Of freckled Marble, through the Arbor viewed,
On whose sharp brows, S^l, and Tytanides
In purple and transparent glass were hewed,
Through which the Sunbeams on the statues staying,
Made their pale bosoms seem with blood imbrewed,
Those two stern Plannets rigors still bewraying
To these dead forms, came living beauties essence
Able to make them startle with her presence.
In a loose robe of Tynsell forth she came,
Nothing but it betwixt her nakedness
And envious light. The downward burning flame,
Of her rich hair did threaten new access,
Of ventrous Phaeton to scorch the fields:
And thus to bathing came our Poets Goddess,
Her handmaides bearing all things pleasure yields
To such a service; Odors most delighted,
And purest linen which her looks had whited.
Then cast she off her robe, and stood upright,
As lightning breaks out of a laboring cloud;
Or as the Morning heaven casts off the Night*
Or as that heaven cast off if self, and showde
Heavens upper light, to which the brightest day
Is but a black and melancholy shroude:
Or as when Venus strived for sovereign sway
Of charmfull beauty, in young Troyes desire,
So stood Corynna vanishing her tire.
A soft enflowred banck embraced the founte;
Of Chloris ensigns, an abstracted field;
Where grew Melanthy, great in Bees account,
Amareus, that precious Balm does yield,
Enameld Pansies, used at Nuptials still,
Dianas arrow, Cupids crimson shield,
Ope-morne, nightshade, and Venus nauill,
Solemn Violets, hanging head as shamed,
And verdant Calaminth, for odor famed.
Sacred Nepenthe, purgative of care,
And sovereign Rumex that does rancor kill,
Sya, and Hyacinth, that Furies wear,
W^ite and red Iessamines, Merry, Melliphill:
Fair Crowne-imperiall, Emperor of Flowers,
Immortal Amaranth, white Aphrodill,
And cup-like Twillpants, stroude in Bacchus Bowres,
These cling about this Natures naked Iem,
To taste her sweetes, as Bees do swarm on them.
And now she used the Founte, where Niobe,
Toomb'd in her self, pourde her lost soul in tears,
Upon the bosom of this Roman Phoebe;
Who; bathd and Odord; her bright lyms she rears,
And drying her on that disparent round;
Her Lute she takes t'enamoure heavenly ears,
And try if with her voices vital sound,
She could warm life through those cold statues spread,
And cheer the Dame that wept when she was dead.
And thus she sung, all naked as she sat,
Laying the happy Lute upon her thigh,
Not thinking and near to wonder at
The bliss of her sweet breasts divinity,
The Song of CORYNNA.
It Is better to contemn then love,
And to be fair then wise;
For souls are ruled by eyes:
And Jove's Bird, ceaz'd by Cypris Dove,
It is ^ur grace and sport to see,
Our beauties sorcerie,
That makes (like destiny)
Men follow us the more we flee;
That s^ts wise Glosses on the fool^,
And turns her checkes to books,
Where wisdom sees in looks
D^rision, laughing as his school,
Who (loving) proves, prophanenes, holy;
Nature, our fate, our wisdom, folly.
While this was singing, Ovid young in love
With her perfections, never proving yet
How merciful a Mistres she would prove,
Bodly embraced the power he could not let
And like a fiery exhalation
Followed the sun, he wished might never set;
Trusting herein his constellation
Ruled by loves beams, which Iulias eyes erected,
Whose beauty was the star his life directed.
And having drencht his anckles in those seas,
He needs would swim, and cared not if he drounde:
Loves feet are in his eyes; for if he please
The depth of beauties gulfye floodd to sound,
He goes upon his eyes, and up to them*
At the first steap he is; no shader ground
Could Ovid find; but in loves holy stream
Was past his eyes, and now did wett his ears,
For his high Sovereigns silver voice he hears.
Whereat his wit, assumed fierye wings,
Soring above the temper of his soul,
And he the purifying rapture sings
Of his ears sense, takes full the Thespian boule
And it carrouseth to his Mistres health,
Whose sprightfull verdure did dull flesh control,
And his conceit he crowns with the wealth
Of all the Muses in his pleased senses,
When with the ears delight he thus commences:
Now Muses come, repair your broken wings,
(Plucked, and p^ophan'd by rusticke Ignorance,)
With feathers of these notes my Mistres sings;
And let qui^k verse her drooping head advance
From dungeons of contempt to smite the starr^;
In Iulias tunes, led forth by fu^ious trance
A thousand Muses come to bid you wars,
Diue to your Spring* and hide you from the stroke,
All Poets furies will her tunes inuoke.
Never was any sense so set on fire
With an immo^tall ardor, as mine ears;
Her fingers to the strings does speech inspire
And numbered laughter; that the deskant bears
To her sweet voice* whose species through my sense
My spirits to their highest function reares;
To which impressed with ceaseles con^luence
It uses them, as propper to her power
Marries my soul, and makes it self her dowre;
Me thinks her tunes fly guilt, like Attick Bees
To my ears hi^es, with honey tried to air;
My brain is but the comb, the wax, the lees,
My soul the Drone, that lives by their affayre.
O so it sweets, refines, and rauish^th,
And with what sport they sting in their repair?
Rise then in swarms, and sting me thus to death
Or turn me into swounde; possess me whole,
Soul to my life, and essence to my soul.
Say gentle Air, o does it not thee good
Thus to be smit with her correcting voice?
Why dance ye not, ye daughters of the wood?
W^ther for ever, if not now rejoice.
Rise stones, and build a City with her notes,
And notes infuse with your most Cynthian noise,
To all the Trees, sweet flowers, and crystal Flotes,
That crown, and make this cheerful Garden quick, ^
Virtue, that every ^uch may make such Music.
O that as man is called a little world
The world might shrink into a little man,
To hear the notes about this Garden hurld,
That skill dispersed in tunes so Orphean
Might not be lost in smiting stocks and trees
That have no ears; but grown as it began
Spread their renownes, as far as Phoebus sees
Through earths dull veins; that she like heaven might move,
In ceaseles Music, and be filled with love.
In precious incense of her holy breath,
My love does offer Hecatombs of notes
To all the Gods; who now despise the death
Of Oxen, Heifers, Wethers, Swine, and Goats.
A Sonnet in her breathing sacrifiz'd,
Delights them more then all beasts bellowing throats,
As much with heaven, as with my hearing prized.
And as guilt Atoms in the sun appear,
So greet these sounds the grissells of mine ear.
Whose pores do open wide to their regreete,
And my implanted air, that air embraces
Which they impresse; I feel their nimble feet
Tread my ears Labyrinth; their sport amazeth
They keep such measure; play themselves and dance.
And now my soul in Cupids Furnace blazeth,
Wrought into fury with their daliance:
And as the fire the parched stuble burns,
So fades my flesh, and into spyrit turns.
Sweet tunes, brave issue, that from Iulia come;
Shook from her brain, armd like the Queen of Ire;
For first In this allusion to the birth of Pallas; he shows the conceit of
her Sonnet; both for matter and not^, and by Metaphor he exprasseth how she
delivered her words, and tunes, which was by commision of the order,
Philosophers set down in apprehension of our knoweledge, and effection of our
senses, for first they affirm, the species of every object propagates it self
by our spirits to our common sense, that delivers it to the imaginatiue part*
that to the Cogitatiue: the Cogitatiue to the Passive Intelect* the Passive
Intelect, to that which is called Diano^s, or Di^c^rsus; and that delivers it
^p to the mind, which order he observe* in her utterance.
conceived in her mental womb,
And nourisht with her souls discursiue fire,
They grew into the power of her thought;
She gave them dounye plumes from her attire,
And them to strong imagination brought:
That, to her voice; wherein most mouinglye
She (blessing them with kysses) letts them fly.
Who fly rejoicing; but (like noblest minds)
In giving others life themselves do dye,
Not able to endure earthes rude vnkindes
Bred in my soueraigns parts too tenderly;
O that as The Philosopher says, Intellectus in ipsa intellegibilia transit,
upon which is grounded this invention, tha^ in the same manner his life might
pass into his Mistres con^eite, intending his intellectual life, or soul:
which by this Analogy, should be Intellectus, and her conceit, Intel^igibilis.
Intellects themselves transite
To each intellegible quallitie,
My life might pass into my loves conceit,
Thus to be formed in words, her tunes, and breath,
And with her kysses, sing it self to death.
This life were wholly sweet, this only bliss,
Thus would I live to dye; Thus sense were feasted,
My life that in my flesh a Chaos is
Should to a Golden world be thus dygested;
Thus should I rule her faces Monarchy,
Whose looks in several Empires are invested
Crowned now with smiles, and then with modesty,
Thus in her tunes division I should reign,
For her conceit does all, in every vain.
My life then turned to that, t'each note, and word
Should I consorte her look; which sweeter sings,
Where songs of solid harmony accord,
Ruled with Loves ^ule; and pricked with all his stings;
Thus should I be her notes, before This has reference to the order of her
vtter^nce, expressed before.
they be;
While in her blood they sit with fierye wings
Not vapord in her voices stillerie,
Naught are these notes her breast so sweetly frames,
But motions, fled out of her spirits flames.
For as when steel and flint together smit,
With violent action spitt forth sparks of fire,
And make the tender tynder burn with it;
So my loves soul does lighten her desire
Upon her spyrits in her notes So is this lykew^^e ^eferd to the (...) above
said, (...) the m^re (...).
pretense;
And they conuaye them (for distinckt attire)
To use the Wardrobe of the common sense:
From whence in vailes of her rich breath they fly,
And feast the ear with this felicitye.
Me thinks they raise me from the heavy ground
And move me swimming in the yielding air:
As Zephirs flowery blas^s do toss a sound;
Upon their wings will I to Heaven repair,
And sing them so, Gods shall descend and hear
Ladies must be adored that are but fair,
But apt besides with art to tempt the ear
In notes of Nature, is a Goddess part,
Though often, men's natures notes, please more then Art.
But here are Art and Nature both confinde,
Art casting Nature in so deep a trance
That both seem dead, because they be diuinde,
Buried is Heaven in earthly ignorance,
Why break^ not men then strumpet Follies bounds,
To learn at this pure virgin utterance?
No; none but Ouids ears can sound these sounds,
Where sing the hearts of Love and Poesy,
Which make my M^se so strong she works too hye.
Now in his glowing ears her tunes did sleep,
And as a silver Bell, with violent blow
Of Steel or Iron, when his soundes most deep,
Do from his sides and airs soft bosom flow,
A great while after murmures at the stroke,
Letting the hearers ears his hardness know,
So chid the Air to be no longer broke:
And left the accents panting in his ear
Which in this Banquet his first service were.
HEerewith, Olfactus.
as Ovid something nearer drew,
Her Odors, odord with her breath and breast,
Into the sensor of his savor flew,
As if the Phoenix hasting to her rest
Had gatherd all The Arabian Spice^e
T'enbalme her body in her Tomb, her nest,
And there lay burning against Apollos eye,
Whose fiery air straight piercing Ouids brain
Enflamde his Muse with a more odorouse vain.
And thus he sung, come sovereign Odors, come
Restore my spirits now in love consuming,
Wax hotter air, make them more sauorsome,
My fainting life with fresh-breath'd soul perfuming,
The flames of my disease are violent,
And many perish on late helps presuming,
With which hard fate must I yet stand content,
As Odors put in fire most richly smell,
So men must burn in love that will excel.
And as the air is rarefied with heat
But thick and gross with Summer-killing cold,
So men in love aspire perfections seat,
When others, slaves to base desire are sold,
And if that men near Ganges lived by sent
Of Flowers, and Trees, more I a thousand fold
May live by these pure fumes that do present
My Mistres quickening, and consuming breath
Where her wish flies with power of life and death.
Me thinks, as in these liberal fumes I burn
My Mistres lips be near with kisse-entices,
And that which way soever I can turn,
She turns withal, and breaths on me her spices
As if too pure for search of human eye
She flewe in air disburthening Indian prizes,
And made each earthly fume to sacrifice.
With her choice breath fell Cupid blows his fire,
And after, burns himself in her desire.
Gentle, and noble are their tempers framde,
That can be quickened with per^umes and sounds,
And they are cripple-minded, Gowt-wit lamde,
That lie like fire-fit blocks, dead without wounds,
Stird up with naught, but hell-descending gain,
The soul of fools that all their souls con^ounds,
The art of Pessants and our Nobles stain,
The bane of virtue and the bliss of sin.
Which none but fools and Pessants glory in.
Sweet sounds and Odors, are the heavens, on earth
Where virtues live, of virtuous men deceast,
Which in such like, receive their second birth
By smell and By this all^sion drawn from the effects of sounds and Odors, he
imitates the eternity of Virtue: saying, the ^ertues of good me^ live in them,
because they stir up pure enclinations to the like, as if infusde in per^umes
and sounds: Besides, he infers, that such as are neither delighted with sounds
(inte^ding by sound^ all utterance of knowledge, as well as musical
affections,) nor with Odors, (wc properly dry the brain and delight the
instruments of the soul, making them the more capable of her faculties) such
says he, perrish without memory*
hearing endlesly encreast;
They were mere flesh were not with them delighted,
And every such is perished like a beast
As all they shall that are so foggye sprighted,
Odors feed love, (...) love clear heaven discouers,
Lovers wea^e sweets then; sweetest minds, be lovers.
Odor in heat and drynes is con^ite
Love then a fire is much thereto affected;
And as ill smells do kill his appetite
With thankful sauors it is still protected*
Love lives in spyrits, and our spyrits be
Nourisht with Odors, therefore love refected;
And air less corpulent in quallitie
Then Odors are, does nourish vital spyrits
Therefore may they be proved of equal merits;
O sovereign Odors; not of force to give
Food to a thing that lives nor let it dye,
But to ad life to that did never live;
Nor to ad life, but immortallitie.
Since they partake her heat that like the fire
Stolen from the wheels of Phoebus waggonrie
To lumps of earth, can manly life inspire;
Else be these fumes the lives of sweetest dames
That (dead) attend on her for novel frames;
Rejoice blessed Clime, thy air is so refinde
That while she lives no hungry pestilence
Can feed her poisoned stomach with thy kind;
But as the Unicorns pregredience
To venomd Pooles, does purdge them with his horn,
And after him the deserts Residence
May safely drink, so in the wholesome morn
After her walk, who there attends her eye,
Is sure that day to taste no maladye.
Thus was his course of Odors sweet and slight,
Because he longed to give his sight assaye,
And as in feruor of the summers height,
The sun is so ambitious in his sway
He will not let the Night an hour be plast,
So in this Cupids Night (often seen in day
Now spread with tender clouds these Odors cast,)
Her sight, his sun so wrought in his desires,
His savor vanished in his visuale fires.
So v^lture love on his increasing liver,
And fruitful entrails egerly did feed,
And with the goldnest Arrow in his Quiver,
Wounds him with longings, that like Torrents bleeds,
To see the Mine of knowledge that enricht
His mind with poverty, and desperate need
A sight that with the thought of sight bewitched,
A sight taught Magic his deep mystery,
Quicker in danger then Allusion to the tr^nsformatio^ of Acteon with the sight
of Diana.
Dianas eye.
Stay therefore Ovid, venture not, a sight
May prove thy rudenes, more then show thee loving,
And make thy Mistres think thou think her light:
Which thought with lightest Dames is nothing moving.
The slender hope of favor thou have yet
Should make thee fear, such gross conclusions proving:
Besides, the Thicket Floras hands has set
To hide thy theft, is thin and hollow hearted,
Not meet to have so high a charge imparted.
And should it keep thy secrets, thine own eye
Would fill thy thoughts so full of lightenings,
That thou must pass through more extremity.
Or stand content to burn beneath their wings,
Her honor against thy love, in wager laid,
Thou would be pricked with other senses stings,
To taste, and feel, and yet not there be staide:
These casts, he cast, and more, his wits more quick
Then can be cast, by wits Arithmetic.
Forward, A simile, expressing the manner of his minds contention in the desire
of her sight, and fear of her displeasure.
and back, and forward went he thus,
Like wanton Thamysis, that hastes to greet
The brackish Court of old Ocea^us;
And as by Londons besome she does fleet
Casts herself proudly through the Bridges twists,
Where (as she takes again her Crystal feet:)
She curls her silver hair like Amorists,
Smoothes her bright cheeks, adorns her brows with ships
And Empresse-like along the Coast she trips.
Till coming near the Sea, she hears him rore,
Tumbling her churlish billows in her face,
Then, more dismayed, then insolent before
Charged to rough battle, for his smooth embrace,
She crowcheth close within her winding bancks,
And creepes retreat into her peaceful Palace;
Yet strait high-flowing in her female prancks
Again she will be wanton, and again,
By no means stayde, nor able to contain.
So Ovid with his strong affections striving*
Maskt in a friendly Thicket near her Bower,
Rubbing his temples, fainting, and reviving,
Fitting his garments, praying to the hour,
Backwards, and forwards went, and durst not venture,
To tempt the tempest of his Mistres lowre,
Or let his eyes her beauties ocean enter,
At last, with prayer he pierces Iun^s ^are,
Great Goddess of audacitie and fear,
Great Goddess of audacitie, and fear,
Queen of Olympus, Saturns eldest seed,
That do the s^epter over Samos bear,
And rul^st all Nuptiale rites with power, and meede,
Since thou in nature art the mean to mix
Still sulphur humors, and can therefor speed
Such as in Cyprian sports their pleasures fix
Venus herself, and Mars by thee embracing,
Assist my hopes, me and my purpose gracing.
With this digression, we will now return
To Ouids pro^pect in his fancies storm:
He thought he saw the Arbors bosom burn,
Blazed with a fire wrought in a Ladies form:
Where silver past the least: and Natures vant
Did such a precious miracle perform,
She lay, and seemd a flood of Diamant
Bounded in flesh: as still as Vespers hair,
When not an Aspen leaf is styrrd with air.
She lay The amplification of this simile, is taken from the blisfull state of
souls in Elisi^^, as ^^rgill fa^es: and expre^^eth a regenerate beauty in all
life and perfection, not intimating any r^st of death. But in peace of that
eternal spring, he poy^teth to that life of life this beauty-clad naked Lady.
at length, like an immortal soul
At endless rest in blessed Elisium:
And then did true felicity enroule
So fair a Lady, figure of her kingdom.
Now Ouids Muse as in her tropicke shinde,
And he (struck dead) was mere heauen-borne become,
So his quick verse in equal height was shrinde:
Or else blame me as his submitted debtor,
That never Mistress had to make me better.
Now as she lay, attirde in nakedness,
His eye did carue him on that feast of feasts:
Sweet He calls her body (as it were divided with her breasts,) y^ fields of
Paradise, and her arms and legs the famous Rivers in it.
fields of life which Deaths foot dare not press,
Flowrd with th'vnbroken waves of my Loves b^ests,
Unbroke by depth of those her beauties floods:
See where with ben^ of Gold curld into Nests
In her heads Grove, the Spring-bird Lam^ate broods:
Her body does present those fields of peace
Where souls are feasted with the soul of ease.
To prove which Parradise that nurseth these,
See see the golden Rivers that renown it:
Rich Gehon, Tigris, Phis^n, E^phra^^s,
Two from her bright Pelopian shoulders crown it,
And two out of her sno^ye Hills do glide,
That with a Deluge of delights do drown it:
The highest two, their precious streams divide
To ten pure floods, that do the body duty
Bounding themselves in ^^ngth, but not in beauty.
These He intends the office her fingers in attyring her, touching this of
their c^^^ses, in their inflection following* their playing upon an Instrument.
wind their courses through the painted bowres,
And raise such sounds in their inflection,
As ceaseles start from Earth fresh sorts of flowers,
And bound that book of life with every section.
In these the Muses dare not swim for drowning,
Their sweetness poisons with such blessed infection,
And leaves the only lookers on them swouning,
These forms so decks, and color makes so shine,
That Gods for them would cease to be divine.
Thus though my love be no Elisium
That cannot move, from her prefixed place;
Yet have her feet no power from thence to come,
For where she is, is all Elisian grace:
And as those happy men are sure of bliss
That can perform so excellent a race
As that Olympiad where her favor is,
So she can meet them blessing them the rather
And give her sweetes, as well as let men gather.
Ah how should I be so most happy then
T'aspire that place, or make it come to me?
To gather, or be given, the flower of women?
Elisium must with virtue gotten be,
With labors of the soul and continence,
And these can yield no joy with such as she,
She is a sweet Elisium for the sense
And Nature does not sensual gifts infuse
But that with sense, she still intends their use.
The sense is given us to excite the mind,
And that can never be by sense exited
But first the sense must her contentment mind,
We therefore must procure the sense delighted,
That so the soul may use her faculty;
Mine Eye then to this feast has her invited*
That she might serve the souera^gne of mine Eye,
She shall bid Time, and Time so feasted never
Shall grow in strength of her renown for ever.
Betwixt mine Eye and object, certain lines,
Move in the fig^re of a Pyramid,
Whose chapter in mine eyes gray apple shines,
The base within my sacred obi^ct is:
On this will I inscribe in golden verse
The meruailes reigning in my soueraigns bliss,
The arc^s of sight, and how her arrows p^erse:
This in the Region of the air shall stand
In Fames brass Court, and all her Tr^mps command.
Rich Beauty, that each Lover labors for,
Tempting as heaps of new-co^nd-glowing Gold,
(Rackt of some miserable Treas^rer)
Draw his desires, and them in chains enfold
Urging him still to tell it, and conceal it,
But Beauties treasure never can be told
None can peculier joy, yet all must steal it,
O Beauty, this same bloody si^dge of thine
Starues me that y^eld, and f^edes me till I pine.
And as a Taper burning in the dark
(As if it threatn^d every wa^chfull eye
That viewing b^^ns it,) ma^es that eye his mark,
And hurls guilt Darts at it continually,
Or as it envied, any eye but it
Should see in darkness, ^o my Mistres beauty
From forth her secret stand my heart does hit:
And like the D^rt of Caph^lus does kill
Her perfect Lo^e^, though she mean no ill.
Thus, as the innoc^nce of one betraide
Carries an Argus with it, though unknown,
And Fat^ to wreake the ^recherie bewraide;
Such venge^^ce has my M^^^res Beauty shown
On me the (...) to her modesty,
So vnassailde, I quite am oue^^hrowne,
And in my triumph bound in slavery,
O Beauty, still thy Empire swims in blood,
And in thy peace, War stores himself with food.
O Beauty, how attractiue is thy power?
For as the lives heat clings about the heart,
So all Men's hungry eyes do haunt thy Bower,
Reigning in Greece, Troy swum to thee in A^t;
Removed to Troy, Greece followd thee in fears;
Thou drewst each Syreles sword, each childles Dar^
And pulld'st the towers of Troy about thine ears:
Shall I then muse that thus thou drawest me?
No, but admire, I stand thus far from thee.
Heerewith she rose like the Au^umnale Star
Fresh burnisht in the lofty Ocean floode,
That darts his glorious influence more far
Then any Lamp of bright Oly^pus brood;
She lifts her lightning arms above her head,
And stretches a Meridian from her blood,
That slept awake in her Elisian bed:
Then knit she up, lest loose, her glowing hair
Should scorch the Center and incense the air.
Thus when her fair hart-binding hands had tied
Those liberal Tresses, her high fro^tier part,
She shrunk in curls, and curiously plied
Into the figure of a swelling heart:
And then with Jewels of devise, it graced:
One was a Sun graven at his E^uens depart,
And under that a Man's huge shadow At the Sun going down, shadows grow
longest, whereupon this Emblem is devised.
placed,
Wherein was writ, in ^able Charectry,
Decrescente nobilit^^, cresc^nt o^^curi.
An other was an Eye in Sapphire set,
And close upon it a fresh Laurel spray.
The skillful Posie was, Medio Sight is one of the three senses that has his
medium extrinsecally, which now (supposed wanting,) lets the sight by the close
apposition of the Laurel: the application whereof has many constructions.
c^ret,
To show not eyes, but means must truth display.
The third was an Apollo The Sun has as much time to campasse a Dial as the
world, and therefore y^ world is placed in the Dyall, expressing the co^ceite of
the Emprese morally which has a far higher intention.
with his Teme
About a Dial and a world in way,
The Motto was, Te^psi^^ ^t ^rbem,
Graven in the Dial; these exceeding rare
And other like accomplem^nts she ware.
Not Tygris, Nilus, nor swift Euphrates,
Quoth Ovid now, can more subdue my flame,
I must through hell adventure to displease,
To ^ast and touch, one kiss may work the same:
If more will come, more then much more I will;
Each natural agent does his action frame,
To render that he works on like him still:
The fire on water working does induce
Like quality unto his own in use.
But Heaven in her a sparckling temper blewe
(As love in me) and so will soon be wrought,
Good wits will bite at baits most strange and new,
And words well placed, move things were never thought;
What Goddess is it Ouids wits shall dare
And he disgrace them with attempting naught?
My words shall carry spirits to ensnare
The subtelst hearts affecting ^utes importune,
"Best loves are lost for wit when men blame Fortune."
WIth this, Narratio.
as she was looking in her Glass,
She saw therein Ovid standing behind her* his face was seen in the Glass.
a man's face looking on her:
Whereat she started from the frighted Grass,
As if some monstrous Serpent had been shown her:
Rising as when (the sun in Leos sign)
Auriga with the heavenly Goat upon her,
Shows her horned forehead with her Kids divine,
Whose rise, kills Vines, Heavens face with storms disguis^^g*
No man is safe at sea, the Haedy rising.
So straight wrapped she her body in a Cloud,
And threatened tempests for her high disgrace,
Shame from a Bower of Roses did vnshrowde
And spread her crimson wings upon her face;
When run^^ng out, poor Ovid humbly kneeling
Full in the Arbors mouth, did stay her race
And said; fair N^^ph, great Goddess have some feeling
Of Ouids pains; but hear: and your dishonor
Vainly surmisde, shall vanish with my horror.
Traitor to Ladies modesties (said she)
What savage boldness hardened thee to this?
Or what base reckoning of my modesty?
What should I think thy facts proud reason is?
Love (sacred Madam) love exhaling me
(Wrapped in his Sulphur,) to this cloud of his
Made my affections his artillery,
Shot me at you his proper Cytadell,
And loosing all my forces, here I fell.
This Gloss is common, as thy rudenes strange
Not to forbear these private times, (quoth she)
Whose fixed Rites, none should presume to change
Not where there is adiudg'd inchasti^ie;
Our nakedness should be as much conceald
As our accomplishments desire the eye:
It is a secret not to be reuealde,
But as Virginity, and Nuptials clothed,
And to our honor all to be betrothed.
It is a want, where our abundance lies,
Given a sole dowre to enrich chaste* Hymen's Bed,
A perfect Image of our purities,
And glass by which our actions should be dressed.
That tells us honor is as soon defild
And should be kept as pure, and incompressed,
But sight attainteth it: for Thought Sights child
Begets sin; and Nature bides defame,
When light and lawles eyes bewray our shame.
Dear Mistress (answered Ovid,) to direct
Our actions, by the straitest rule that is,
We must in matters Morrall, quite reject
Vulgar Opinion, ever led amiss
And let autentique Reason ^e our guide,
The wife of Truth, and Wisdoms Gouernisse:
The nature of all actions must be waide,
And as they then appear, breed love or loathing,
Use makes things nothing huge, and huge things nothing.
As in your sight, how can sight simply being
A Sense receiving essence to his flame
Sent from his object, give it harm by seeing
Whose action Actio cernendi in homine vel a^^mali, ^idente collocanda est.
Ari^to^.
in the Seer has his frame?
All excellence of shape is made for fight,
Else, to be like a Beast were no defame;
Hid Beauties lose their ends, and wrong their right:
And can kind love, (where no harms kind can be)
Disgrace with seeing that is gi^en to see?
It Is I (alas) and my hart-bu^^ing Eye
Do all the harm, and f^ele the harm we do:
I am no (...), y^^ harmles I
Poison with sight, and mine own bosom^ too;
So am I to my self a So^^eresse
Bewitched with my concei^es in her I woo:
But you vnwronged* and all ^^shon^^lesse
No ill dares touch, affliction, sorc^^ie,
One kiss of yours can quickly remedy.
I could not times observe, as others might
Of cold affects, and watery ^empers framde,
Yet well assurde the wounder of your ^ight
Was so far of from seeing you defamde,
That ever in the Ph^^e of Memory
Your love shall shine by it, in me enflamde.
Then let your power be clad in l^nitie,
Do not (as others would) of custom storm*
But prove your wit as pregnant as your form.
Nor is my love so sudden, since my heart
Was long loves Vulcan, with his pants unrest
Ham'ring the shafts bred th^^ delightsome smart:
And as when Jove at once from East and W^st
Cast off two Eagles, to (...) the sight
Of this world Center, b^th his Byrds ^oynd breast
In Cynthian D^lp^o^, since Ear^hs nauill hight:
So casting off my ce^seles though^s to see
My hearts true C^^^er, all do (...) in thee.
Cupid that acts in you, suffers in me
To make himself one tryumph-place of twain,
Into your tunes and odors turned he,
And through my senses flew into my brain
In Cerebro est principium sentiend^, et inde nerui, qui instrumenta sunt motus
voluntarij oriuntur.
Where rules the Prince of sense, whose Throne he takes,
And of my Motions engines fra^d a chain
To lead me where he list; and here he makes
Nature (my Natura est vniuscuiusque Fatum, (...) Theophr.
fate) enforce me: and re^ignes
The raines of all, to you, in whom he shines.
For yielding love then, do^ not have impart,
Nor let mine Eye, your careful Harbengere
That has puruaide your Chamber in my heart,
Be blamde for seeing who it lodged there;
The freer service mer^its gre^ter meede,
Princes are served with unexpected chere,
And must have things in store before they need:
Thus should fair Dames be wise and confident,
Not blushing to be noted excellent.
Now, as when Heaven is m^ffled with the vapors
His long since just di^orced wife the E^rth,
In envy breath's, to mask his spu^^ie Tapers
From the vnrich abundance of her binth*
When straight the western issue of the Air
Beats with his flowrie wings those Brats of dearth,
And gives Oly^pus leave to show his fair,
So fled the offended shadows of her ^heere,
And showd her pleased countenance full as clear.
Which for his fourth course made our Poet court her, etc.
THis motion of my soul, Gustus.
my fantasy
Created by three senses put in act,
Let justice nourish with the ^impathie,
Putting my other senses into fact,
If now thou gr^nt not, Alteratione^ pati est sentire.
now changde that offense;
To suffer change, does perfect sense compact:
Change then, and suffer for the use of sense,
We live not for our selves, the Ear, and Eye,
And every sense, must serve society.
To furnish then* this Banquet where the taste
Is never used, and yet the cheer divine,
The nearest mean dear Mistres that thou have
To bless me with it, is a kiss of thine,
Which grace shall borrow organs of my touch
T'aduance it to that inward He intends the common sense which is centrum
sensibus et speciebus, and calls it last because it does, sapare in effectione
sensuum.
taste of mine
Which makes all sense, and shall delight as much
Then with a kiss (dear life) adorn thy feast
And let (as Benquets should) the last be best.
I see unbidden G^ests are boldest still, Corynna.

And well you show how weak in soul you are
That let rude sense, subdue your reasons skill
And feed so spoilefully on sacred fare;
In temper of such needles feasts as this
We show more bounty still the more we spare,
Chiefly where birth and state so different is:
Air too much rarefied breaks forth in fire,
And favors too far urged do end in ire.
The difference of our births (imperial Dame)
Is herein noted with too triuiall eyes
For your rare wits; Ovid.
that should your choices frame
To state of parts, that most does royalize,
Not to commend mine own; but that in yours
Beyond your birth, are perrils soueraignties
Which (vrgd) your words had struck with sharper powers;
It Is for mere looke-like Ladies, and for men
To boast of birth that still be childeren.
Running to Father straight to help their needs,
True dignities and rites of reverence,
Are sown in minds, an^ reapt in lively deeds,
And only policy makes difference
Twixt States, since virtue want^ du^ imperance
Virtue makes honor, as the soul does sense,
And merit far exceedes inheri^ance,
The Graces fill loves cup, his feasts adorning,
Who seeks your service now, the Graces scorning.
Pure love (said she) the purest grace pursues,
And there is contact, not by application
Of lips or bodies, but of bodies virtues,
As in our ele^entale Nation
Stars by their powers, which are their heat and light
Do heavenly works, and that which has probation
By vertuall contact has the noblest plight,
Both for the lasting and affinity
It has with natural diuini^ie.
Ovid replied; in this thy vertuall presence
(Most fair Corynna) thou can not effuse
The true and solid parts of thy pure essence
But do thy superficial beams produce
Of thy rich substance; which because they flow
Rather from form then from the matters use
Resemblance only of thy body show
Whereof they are thy wondrous species,
And it is thy substance must my longings ease.
Speak then sweet air, that give our speech event
And teach my Mistres tractabilitie,
That art to motion most obedient,
And though thy nature, swelling be and high
And occupiest so infinite a space,
Yet yeeldst to words, and art cond^ust thereby
Past nature pressed into a little place
Dear sovereign then, make air thy rule in this,
And me thy worthy servant with a kiss.
Ovid (said she) I am well pleased to yield:
Bounti^ by virtue cannot be abusde:
Nor will I coylie lift Mineruas shield
Against Mineru^, honor i^ not brusde
With such a tender pressure as a kiss,
Nor yielding soon to words, though seldom used,
Nicenes in civil favors, folly is:
Long su^es make never good a bad detection,
Nor yielding soon, makes bad, a good affection.
To some I know, (and know it for a faule)
Order and reverence, are repulst in skaling,
When pride and rudenes, enter with assault,
Consents to fall, are worse to get then falling*
Willing resistance, takes away the will,
And too much weakness it is to come with calling:
Force in these frayes, is better man then skyll,
Yet I like skill, and Ovid if a kis
May do thee so much pleasure, here it is.
Her moving toward him, made Ouids eye
Believe the Firmament was coming down
To take him quick to immortality,
And that the Ambrosian kiss set on the Crown:
She spoke in kissing, and her breath infusd^
Restoring syrrop to his taste, in swoune:
And he imaginde Hebes hands had brusde
A banquet of the Gods into his sense,
Which filled him with this furious influence.
The motion of the Heavens that did beget
The golden age, and by whose harmony
He^uen is preserud, in me on work is set,
All instruments of deepest melody
Set sweet in my desires to my loves liking
With this sweet kiss in me their tunes apply,
As if the best Musi^ians hands were striking*
This kiss in me^ has endless Music closed,
Like Phoebus Lute, on Nisus Towrs imposed.
And as a Pible cast into a Spring,
We see a sort of trembling cirkles rise,
One forming other in their issuing
Till over all the Fount they circulize,
So this perpetuall-motion-making kiss,
Is propagate through all my faculties,
And makes my breast and endless Fount of bliss,
Of which, if Gods could drink, their matchless fare
Would make them much more blessed then they are.
But Qua ratione fiat Echo.
as when sounds do hollow bodies beat,
Air gatherd there, comprest, and thickened,
The self same way she came does make retreat,
And so effects the sound reecchoed
Only in part, because she weaker is
Is that redition, then when first she fled:
So I alas, faint echo of this kiss,
Only reiterate a slender part
Of that high joy it works in my heart.
And thus with feasting, love is famisht more,
Without my touch are all things turned to gold,
And till I touch, I cannon joy my store:
To purchase others, I my self have sold,
Love is a wanton famine, rich in food,
But with a richer appetite controld,
An argument in figure and in Mood,
Yet hate all arguments: disputing still
For Sense, against Reason, with a senseless will.
THen sacred Madam, Tactus.
since my other senses
Have in your graces ^asted such content,
Let wealth not to be spent, fear no expenses,
But give thy bounty true eternizement:
Making my senses groundwork, which is, Feeling,
Effect the other, endless excellent,
Their substance with flint-softning softnes steeling:
Then let me feel, for know sweet beauties Queen,
Dames may be felt, as well as heard or seen.
For if we be allowd to serve the Ear
With pleasing tunes, and to delight the Eye
With gracious shows, the Taste with dainty cheer,
The Smell with Odors, is it immodestie
To serve the senses Empe^or, sweet Feeling
With those delights that fit his Emperie?
Shall Subjects free themselves, and bind their King?
Minds taint no more with bodies touch or tire,
Then bodies nourish with the minds desire.
The mind then clear, the body may be used,
Which perfectly your touch can spritualize;
As by the great elixer is trans-fusde
Copper to Gold, then grant that deed of prise:
Such as trans-forme into corrupt effects
What they receive from Natures purities,
Should not wrong them that hold her due respects:
To touch your quickening side then give me leave,
The abuse of things, must not the use bereave.
Heere-with, even glad his arguments to hear,
Worthily willing to have lawful grounds
To make the wondrous power of Heaven appear,
In nothing more then her perfections found,
Close to her nauill she her Mantle wrests,
Slacking it upwards, and the foulds vnwo^nd,
Showing Latonas Twinns, her plenteous breasts
The Sun and Cynthia in their tryumph-robes
Of Lady-skin; more rich then both their Globes
VVhereto she bad, blessed Ovid put his hand:
He, well acknowledging it much too base
For Such an action, did a little stand,
Enobling it with tytles full of grace,
and coniures it with charge of reverend verse,
To use with piety that sacred place,
And through his Feelings organ to disperse
VVorth to his spirits, amply to supply
The porenes of his fleshes faculty.
And thus he said: King of the King of Senses,
Engines of all the engines under heaven,
To health, and life, defense of all defenses,
Bounty by which our nourishment is given,
Beauties bewtifier, kind acquaintance maker,
Proportions odnes that makes all things even,
Wealth of the laborer, wrongs reuengement taker,
Pattern of concord, Lord of exercise,
And figure of that power the world did guise:
Dear Hand, most duly honored in this
And therefore worthy to be we^l employde:
Yet know, that all that honor nothing is,
Compard with that which ^^w must be enjoyed:
So think in all the pleasures these have shown
(Likened to this) tho^ were but mere anoyde,
That all hands merits in thy self alone
With this one touch, have more then recompense,
And therefore feel, with fear and reverence.
See Cupids Alps which now thou must go over,
Where snow that thawes the Sun does ever lie:
Where thou may plain and feelingly discover
The worlds fore-past, that flowed with Milk and Honny:
Where, (like an Empress seeing nothing wanting
That may her glorious childbed bewtifie)
Pleasure her self lies big with issue panting:
Ever deliuerd, yet with child still growing,
Full of all blessings, yet all bliss bestowing.
This said, he laid his hand upon her side,
Which made her start like sparckles from a fire,
Or like Saturnia from the Ambrosian pride
Of her morns slumber, frighted with admire
When Jove laid young Alcydes to her breast,
So sta^tled she, not with a coy retire,
But with the tender temper she was blessed,
Proving her sharp, vnduld with handling yet,
Which keener edge on Ouids longings set.
And feeling still, he ^igh'd out this effect;
Alas why lent not heaven the soul a tongue?
Nor language, nor peculier dialect,
To make her high conceits as highly sung,
But that a fleshly engine must unfold
A spiritual notion; birth from Princes sprung
Pessants must nurse, free virtue wait on gold
And a professed though flattering enemy,
Must plead my honor, and my liberty.
O nature how do thou defame in this
Our humane honors? yoking men with beasts
And noblest minds with slaves? thus beauties bliss,
Love and all virtues that quick spirit feasts
Surfeit on flesh; and thou that banquests minds
Most bounteous Mistress, of thy dull-tongu'd guests
Reapst not due thanks; thus rude frailetie binds
What thou give wings; thus joys I feel in thee
Hang on my lips and will not uttered be.
Sweet touch the engine that loves bow does bend,
The sense wherewith he feels him deified,
The object whereto all his actions tend,
In all his blindenes his most pleasing guide,
For thy sake will I write the Art of love,
Since thou do blow his fire and feed his pride
Since in thy sphere his health and life does move,
For thee I hate who hate society
And such as self-love makes his slavery.
In these dog-dayes how this contagion smoothers
The purest bloods with virtues diet fined
Nothing their own, unless they be some others
Spite of themselves, are in themselves confined
And live so poor they are of all despised,
Their gifts, held down with scorn should be diuined,
And they like Mummers mask, unknown, vnprised:
A thousand merua^les mourn in some such breast
Would make a kind and worthy Patron blessed.
To me (dear Sovereign) thou art Patroness,
And I, with that thy graces have infused,
Will make all fat and foggy brains confess,
Riches my from a poor verse be deduced:
And that Golds love shall leave them groueling here,
When thy perfections shall to heaven be Mused,
Decked in bright verse, where Angels shall appear
The praise of virtue, love, and beauty singi^g,
Honor to Noblesse, shame to Avarice bringing.
Here Ovid interupted with the view
Of other Dames, who then the Garden painted,
Shrouded himself, and did as death eschew
All note by which his loves fame might be tainted:
And as when mighty Macedon had wun
The Monarchy of Earth, yet when he fainted,
Grieved that no greater action could be done,
And that there were no more worlds to subdue,
So loves defects, loves Conqueror did rue.
But as when expert Painters have displaid,
To quickest life a Monarchs royal hand
Holding a Scepter, there is yet bewraide
But half his fingers; when we understand
The rest not to be seen; and never blame
The Painters Art, in nicest censures skand:
So in the compass of this curious frame,
Ovid well knew there was much more intended,
With whose omition none must be offended.
Intentio, animi actio. Explicit conuiuium.
A Coronet for his Mistress Philosophy.
Muses that sing loves sensual Emperie,
And Lovers kindling your enraged fires
At Cupids bonfires burning in the eye,
Blown with the empty breath of vain desires,
You that prefer the painted Cabinet
Before the welthy Jewels it does store ye,
That all your joys in dying figures set,
And stain the living substance of your glory,
Abjure those joys, abhor their memory.
And let my love the honored subject be
Of love, and honors complete history;
Your eyes were never yet, let in to see
The majesty and riches of the mind,
But dwell in darkness; for your God is blind.
BUT dwell in darkness, for your God is blind,
Humor poures down ^uch torrents on his eyes,
Which (as from Mountains) fall on his base kind,
And eat your entrails o^t with exstasies.
Color, (whose hands for faintnes are not felt)
Can bind your waxen thoughts in Adamant,
And with her painted fires your hearts does melt
Which beat your souls in peecs with a pant,
But my love is the cordial of ^oules
Teaching by passion what perfection is,
In whose fix^ beauties shine the sacred scroule,
And long-lost records of your humane bliss
Spirit of flesh, and soul to spirit giving,
Love flows not from my liver, but her living.
A Coronet.
Love flows not from my liver b^^ her living,
From whence all stings to perfect love are darted
All power, and thought of pridefull lust depriving,
Her life so pure and she so spo^les hearted,
In whom ^its beauty with so firm a brow
That age, nor care, nor torment can contract it;
Heavens glories shining there, do stuff allow,
And virtues constant graces do compact it.
Her mind (the beam of God) draws in the fires
Of her chaste eyes, from all earths tempting fuel;
Which upward lifts the looks of her desires
And makes each precious thought in her a Jewel,
And as huge fires comprest more pro^dly f^ame
So her close beauties further blaze her fame.
SO her close beauties further blaze her ^a^^e;
When from the world, into herself reflected
She lets her (shameless) glory in her shame
Content for heaven to be of earth rejected,
She thus deprest, knocks at Oly^pus gate,
And in (...) Temple of her har^
Does the diuorcele^ nuptials celebrate
Twixt God and her; where loves pr^phaned dart
Feeds the chaste flames of Hym^^ fi^m^ment,
Wherein she (...), for her part;
The Robes, looke^, (...)
Of female natures, (...)
Virtue is both (...)
Of her removed and soule-infusde regard.
OF her removed, and soule-infusde regard,
With whose firm species (as with golden Lances)
She points her lives field, (for all wars prepared)
And bears one chanceles mind, in all mischances;
Th'inuersed world that goes upon her head
And with her wanton heels does kyck the sky,
My love disdaynes, though she be honored
And without envy sees her emperie,
Loathes all her ^oyes, and thoughts cupidinine,
Arandging in the army of her face
All virtues forces, to dismay loose ^yne
That hold no quarter with renown, or grace,
War to all frailetie* peace of all things pure
Her look does promise and her life assure.
HEr look does promise and her life assure;
A right line, forcing a reba^eles point,
In her high deeds, through every thing obscure
To full perfection; not the weak disioint
Of female humors; nor the Protean rages
Of pied faced fashion, that does shrink and swell,
Working poor m^n like waxen images
And makes them apish strangers where they dwell
Can alter her, titles of primacy
Courtship of antic ies^ures; br^ineles jests
Blood without soul^ of false nobiliti^
Nor any folly that the world infests
Can alter her who with her constant guises
To living virtues turns the deadly vices.
TO living virtues turns the deadly vices,
For covetous she is, of all good parts,
Incontinent for still she shows entices
To consort with them sucking out their hearts,
Proud, for the scorns prostrate humility,
And gluttonous in store of abstinence,
Drunk with extractions stild in feruencie
From contemplation, and true continence,
Burning in wrath, against impatience*
And sloth it self, for she will never rise
From that all-seeing trance (the band of sense)
Wherein in view of all souls skils she lies.
No constancy to that her mind does move
Nor riches to the virtues of my love.
NOr riches, to the virtues of my love,
Nor Empire to her mighty government:
Which fair analisde in her beauties grove,
Shows Laws for care, and Canons for content:
And as a purple tincture given to Glass
By clear transmission of the Sun does taint
Opposed subjects: so my Mistress face
Does reverence in her viewers brows depaint,
And like the Pansye, with a little veil
She gives her inward work the greater grace;
Which my lines imitate, though much they fail
Her gyfts so hie, and times conceits so base:
Her virtues then above my verse must raise her,
For words want Art, and Art want^ words to praise her.
FOR words want Art, and Art wants words to praise her,
Yet shall my actiu^ and ^^dustrious pen,
Wind his sharp forheade through those parts that ^aise her,
And register ^er worth past rarest women*
Her self shall be my Muse; that well will know
Her proper inspirations: an^d aswage
(With her dear love) the wrongs my fortunes show,
Which to my yo^th, bind har^^esse grief in age,)
Her self shall be my comfort and my r^ches,
And all my tho^ghts I will on her con^ert,
Honor, and Error, which the world bewitches,
Shall still crown fools, and ^read upon desert,
And never shall my friendlesse verse envy
Muses that Fames loose fea^hers beautify.
Muses that Fames loose feathers beautify,
And such as ^corne to tread the Theater,
As ignora^^ the ^^^de of memory
Have most inspirde, and show^e their glories there
To noblest wits, and men of highest doom,
That for the kingly Laurel bent affayre,
The Theaters of Athens and of R^m^
Have been the Crowns, and not the base empayre*
Far then be this foul clowdy-browd contempt
From like-plu^de Birds: and let your sacred rymes
From honors Court their ser^ile feet exempt
That live by soothing moods, and se^^ing times:
And let my love, adorn with modest eyes,
Muses that sing loves sensual Empery^^.
Lucidius olim.
The amorous Zodiac.
1
I Never see the Sun, but s^ddainly
My soul is moved, with spite and jealousy
Of his high bliss in his sweet co^rse discerned:
And am displeasde to see so many signs
As the bright S^ye unworthily divines,
Enjoy an honor they have never earned.
2
To think heaven decks with such a beauteous show
A Harp, a Ship, a Serpent, and ^ Crow,
And such a crew of creatures of no prises,
But to excite in us th'vnshamefast flames,
With which (long since) Jove wronged so many Dames,
Reviving in his rule, their names and vices.
3
Dear Mistres, whom the Gods bred here below
To Express their wondrous power and let us know
That before thee they naught did perfect make
Why may not I (as in those signs the Sun)
Shine in thy beauties, and as roundly r^^ne,
To frame (like him) an endless Zodiac.
4
With thee I Will furnish both the year and Sky,
Running in thee my course of destiny:
And thou shall be the rest of all my moving,
But of thy numberles and perfect graces
(To give my Moons their full in twelve months spaces)
I choose but twelve in guerdon of my loving.
5
Keeping even way through every excellence,
I Will make in all, an equal residence
Of a new Zodiac: a new Phoebus guising,
When (without altering the course of nature)
I Will make the seasons good, and every creature
Shall henceforth reckon day, from my first rising.
6
To open then the Spring-times golden gate,
And flower my race with ardor temperate,
I Will e^ter by thy head, and have for house
In my first month, this heauen-Ram-curled tresse:
Of which, Love all his charme-chaines does address:
A Sign fit for a Spring so beau^io^s.
7
Lodgd in that fleece of hair, yellow, and curld,
I Will take high pleasure to enlight the world,
And fetter me in gold, thy crisps implies,
Earth (at this Spring spungie and langorsome
With envy of our joys in love become)
Shall swarm with flowers, and air with painted flie^*
8
Thy smooth embowd brow, where all grace I see,
My second month, and second house shall be:
Which brow, with her clear beauties shall delight
The Earth (yet sad) and ouerture confer
To herbs, buds, flowers, and verdure gracing Ver,
Rendering her more then Summer exquisite.
9
All this fresh April, this sweet month of Venus,
I will admire this browe so bounteous:
This brow, brave Court for love, and virtue builded,
This brow where Chastity holds garrison,
This brow that (blushlesse) none can look upon,
This brow with every grace and honor gilded.
10
Resigning that, to perfect this my year
I Will come to see thine eyes: that now I fear:
Thine eyes, that sparckling like two Twin-borne fires,
(Whose looks benign, and shining sweets do grace
Mays youthful mo^th with a more pleasing face)
Justly the Twinns sign* hold in my desires,
11
Scorcht with the beams these sister-flames eiect,
The living sparcks thereof Earth shall effect
The shock of our ioynd-fires the Summer starting:
The season by degrees shall change again
The days, their longest durance shall retain,
The stars their amplest light, and ardor dar^ing.
12
But now I fear that thronde in such a shine,
Playing with objects, pleasant and divine,
I should be moved to dwell there thirty days:
O no, I could not in so little space,
With joy admire enough their plen^eous grace,
But ever live in sunshine of their rays:
13
Yet this should be in vain, my forced will
My course designd (begun) shall follow still;
So forth I must, when forth this month is wore,
And of the neighbor Signs be borne anew,
Which Sign perhaps may stay me with the view
More to conceive, and so desire the more.
14
It is thy nose (stern to thy Bark of love)
Or which Pyne-like does crown a flowrie Grove,
Which Nature striud to fashion with her best,
That she might never turn to show more skill:
And that the envious fool, (vsd to speak ill)
Might feel pretended fault chokt in his breast.
15
The violent season in a Sign so bright,
Still more and more, become more proud of light,
Should still incense me in the following Sign:
A sign, whose sight desires a gracious kiss,
And the red confines of thy tongue it is,
Where, hotter then before, mine eyes would shine.
16
So glow those Corrals, naught but fire respiring
With smiles, or words, or sighs her thoughts attiring
Or, be it she a kiss divinely frames;
Or that her tongue, shookes forward, and retires,
Doubling like fervent Syrius, summers fires
In L^os mouth, which all the world enflameth.
17
And now to bid the Boreall signs adieu
I come to give thy virgin-cheekes the view
To temper all my fire, and tame my heat,
Which soon will feel it self extinct and dead,
In those fair courts with modesty dispred
With holy, humble, and chaste thoughts repleate.
18
The purple tinct, thy Marble cheeks retain,
The Marble tinct, thy purple cheeks does stain
The Lillies duly equald with thine eyes,
The tinct that dies the Morn with deeper red,
Shall hold my course a Month, if (as I dread)
My fires to issue want not faculties.
19
To balance now thy more obscured graces
Against them the circle of thy head encha^es
(Twice three Months vsd, to run through twice three houses
To render in this heaven my labor lasting,
I have to see the rest, and with one hasting,
The dripping time shall fill the Earth carowses.
20
Then by the neck, my Au^umne I Will commence,
Thy neck, that merrits place of excellence
Such as this is, where with a certain Sphere
In ballancing the darkness with the light,
It so might vvey, with skoles of equal weight
Thy be^uties seen with those do not ^ppeare.
21
Now past my month t'admire for built most pure
This Marble pillar and her ly^eature,
I come t'inhabit thy most gracious teates,
Teates that ^eede love upon the white riphees,
Teates where he hangs his glory and his trophes
When victor from the Gods war he retreats.
22
Hid in the vale twixt these two hills confined
This vale the nest of loves, and joys diuined
Shall I enjoy mine ease; and fair be passed
Beneath these parching Alp^; and this sweet cold
Is first, this month, heaven does to us unfold
But there shall I still grieve to be displaced.
23
To sort from this most brave and pompous sign
(Leaving a little my ecliptic line
Less superstitious then the other S^nne)
The rest of my Autumnall race I Will end
To see thy hand, (whence I the crown attend,)
Since in thy past parts I have slightly run.
24
Thy hand, a Lilly gendred of a Rose
That wakes the morning, hid in nights repose:
And from Apollos bed the veil does twine,
That each where does th'Idalian Minion guide;
That bends his bow; that ties, and leaves untied
The silver ribbands of his little Ensign.
25
In fine, (still drawing to th'Antartick Pole)
The Tropicke sign, I Will run at for my Gole,
Which I can scarce express with chastity,
I know in heaven it is called C^pricorne
And with the sudden thought, my case takes horn,
So (heauen-like,) Capricorn the name shall be.
26
This (wondrous fit) the wintry Solstice seaseth,
Where darkness greater grows and day decreseth,
Where rather I would be in night then day,
But when I see my iournies do increase
I Will straight dispatch me thence, and go in peace
To my next house, where I may safer stay.
27
This house along thy naked thighs is found,
Naked of spot; made fleshy, firm and round,
To entertayne loves friends with feeling sport*
These, Cupids secret mysteries enfold,
And pillars are that Venus Phane uphold,
Of her dear joys the glory, and support.
28
Sliding on thy smooth thighs to this months end;
To thy well fashiond Calves I will descend
That soon the last house I may apprehend,
Thy slender feet, fine slender feet that shame
Thetis sheene feet, which Poets so much fame,
And here my latest season I will end.
LENVOY.
29
Dear Mistres, if poor wishes heaven would hear,
I would not choose the empire of the water;
The empire of the air, nor of the earth,
But endlesly my course of life confining
In this fair Zodiac for ever shining,
And with thy beauties make me endless mirth.
30
But gracious Love, if ielous heaven deny
My life this truely-blest variet^e,
Yet will I thee through all the world disperse,
If not in heaven, amongst those brauing fires
Yet here thy beauties (which the World admires)
Bright as those flames shall glister in my verse.
The amorous contention of Phillis and Flora, translated out of a Latin
coppie, written by a Friar, Anno. 1400.
1
IN flowrie season of the year,
And when the Firm^^ent was clear,
When T^llus Herbals pain^ed were
With issue of disparant cheer*
2
When th'Vsher to the Morn did rise,
And drive the darkness from the skies,
Sleep gave their visuall liberties,
To Phillis and to Floras eyes.
3
To walk these Ladies liked best,
(For sleep reiects the wounded breast,)
Who jointly to a Meade addressed
Their sportance with the place to feast.
4
Thus made they amorous excess,
Both Virgins, and both Princesses:
Fair Phillis wore a liberal tresse,
But Flora, hers in curls did dress.
5
Nor in their ornamentall grace,
Nor in behavior were they base,
Their years and minds in equal place,
Did youth and his effects embrace.
6
A little yet unlike they prove,
And somewhat hostilely they strove,
A Clarke did Floras humor move,
But Phillis likt a Soldiers love.
7
For stature and fresh beauties flowrs,
There grew no difference in their dowrs:
All things were free to both their powrs
Without, and in, their courtly Bow^s.
8
One vow thy made religiously*
And were of one society:
And only was their imparie
The form of eythers fantasy.
9
Now did a gentle timely gale,
A little whisper through the Dale,
Where was a place of festival,
With verdant grass adorned all:
10
And in that Meade-proude-making grass,
A River like to liquid glass
Did with such soundfull murm^re pass,
That with the same it wanton was.
11
Hard by this Bro^ke, a Pi^e had sea^e,
With goodly furniture complete,
To make the place in state more great,
And lessen the inflaming hea^e.
12
Which was with leaves so beautified
And spread his breast so thick and wide,
That all the Suns estranged prid^
Sustaind repulse on every side.
13
Queen Phillis by the Foord^ did ^it,
But Fl^ra far removed from it,
The place in all things sweet was fi^,
Where th'erbage did their se^^^s admit.
14
Thus while they opposite were set
And could not their effects forget,
Loves arrows and their bosoms me^,
And both their hart^ did passion-^^^t.
15
Love, close and inwa^d s^^o^ds his fires,
And in faint word^, firm sighs expires,
Pale tinctures change their cheeks attires,
But modest shame entombes their ^res.
16
Phillis did Flora ^ighing take,
And Flora did requital make:
So both together part the st^ke,
Till forth the wound and sickness brake.
17
In this changed speech they long time stayed,
The process all (...) love they laid,
Love in their har^^ their looks bewraid:
At last, in la^ghter, Phillis said:
18
Brave Soldier, Paris, my hearts seizure
In fight, or in his peaceful leisure:
The Soldiers life, is life's chief treasure,
Most worth the Loue-Queenes household pleasure.
19
While she her war-friend did prefer,
Flora looked coy, and laughed at her,
And did this adverse speech aver;
Thou might have said, I love a Beggar.
20
But what does Alcibiades
My Love: past all in worths excess:
Whom Nature does with all gyfts bless?
O only Clarks lives, happiness.
21
This hard speech, Phillis hardly takes,
And thus she Flora^ patience crakes:
Thou love a Man, pure love forsakes,
That God, his godless belly makes.
22
Rise wretch from this gross exsta^ie,
A Clarke sole Epicure think I:
No elegance can beautify
A shapelesse lump of gluttony.
23
His heart, sweet Cupids Tents reiects
That only m^ate and drink affects:
O Flora, all men's intelects
Know Soldiers vowe^ shun those respects.
24
Mere helps for need his mind suffiseth,
Dull sleep and surfets he despises:
Loves Trumpe his temples exercises,
Courage and love, his life compriseth.
25
Who with like band our loves combineth?
Even natures law thereat repineth,
My Love, in conquests Palm wreaths shines,
Thine feast deforms, mine fight refineth.
26
Flora her modest face enrosed,
Whose second s^ile, more fair disclosed:
At length, with moving voice she losed
What Art in her stord breast reposed.
27
Phillis, thy fill of speech thou have*
Thy wit with pointed wings is grast*
Yet vrgest not a truth so vast
That Hemlocks, Lillies have surpast.
28
Ease-louing Clarks thou holdst for dear,
Servants to sleep and belly cheer:
So Envy, honor would enphere
But give me care, I Will give thee answer.
29
So much inioyes this love of mine,
He nere enuies, or hirs, or thine,
Household-stuffe, honny, oil, corn, wine,
Coin, Jewels, plate, serve his design.
(...) (...) 42
Sharp is the wasting bane of war,
The lot is hard, and straineth far,
The life in stooping doubts does iar
To get such things as needful are.
43
Knewst thou the guise, thou would not say
Shau'n hair shamde Clarks, or black array,
Wor^e higher honors to display,
And that all st^tes they ouer-sway.
44
All things should to my Clarke incline,
Whose croune sustaines the imperial sign,
He r^les, and pays such friends as thine,
And Lay, must stoop to men divine.
45
Thou say, that sloth a Clarke disguiseth,
Who (I confess) base works despises*
But when from cares his free mind rises,
Heavens course and Natures he compriseth.
46
Mine Purple decks, thine Maile be digh^eth,
Thine lives in war, mine peace delights,
Old acts of Princes he recites,
All of his friend, thinks, seeks, and writes.
47
What Venus can, or Loues-wingd Lord,
First knows my Clarke, and brings me word,
Music in ca^es does mine afford,
Thine lives by rapine and the sword.
48
Here speech and strife had both their ending,
Phillis asked judgment, all suspending,
Much stir they made, yet ceast contending,
And sought a Judge in homewards we^ding.
49
With countnances that equal been,
With equal majesty beseene,
With equal voice, and equal spleen
These Ladies wa^rd upon the green.
50
Phillis, a white robe beautifide,
Flora, wore one of two hews did,
Phillis upon a Mule did ride,
And Flora back^ a horse of pride.
51
The Mule was that which being create,
Neptun^ did feed and subiugate:
Which after fair Adonis fa^e,
He^ Venus sent to cheer her st^^e.
52
This, she, the Queen of Iberine,
( Phillis fair Mother did resign
Since she wa^ given to works divine,
Whence Phillis had the Mule in fine.
53
Who of the trappings asks and Bit
The Mule, (though ^iluer) champing it,
Know, all things were so richly fit,
As Nept^nes honor might admit.
56
Then Phillis, no decorum wanted,
But rich and beauteous, all eyes danted,
Nor Floras virtue less enchanted,
Who on a welthy Palfrey vanted.
57
Tamde with his raines, wun heaven for lightness,
Exceeding fair, and full of witenes:
His breast Art decked with diverse brightness
For lea^ black mixed, with Swan^ pure whitenes.
58
Young and in dainty shape digested,
His looks with pride, not rage invested:
His maine thin hayrd, his neck high-crested,
Small ear, shor^ head, and burly brested.
59
His broad back stoopt to this Cla^ks-loued,
Which with his pressure naught was moved,
Strait leggd, large thighd, and hollow houed,
All Natures skill in him was proueed.
60
An Iuorie seat on him had place,
A hoope of gold did it embrace
Graven: and the poi^trell did (...)
A stone, that starre-like gave it grace.
61
Inscription there allurde the eye
With many a wondrous mystery
Of ancient things, made nouel^ie
That never man did yet des^ry.
62
The God of Rhetoricks nuptial Bower
Adornd with every heavenly power,
The contract, and the marriage hour
And all the most vnmeasurd dowre.
63
No place was there that figurde naught,
That could through all the work be sought,
But more excess of merua^les wrought
Then might inceede a humane thought.
64
The skill of Mulciber alone
Engrau'd that admirable throne,
Who looking steadfastly thereon,
Scarce thought his hand such Art had shone.
65
The trappings wrought he not with ^ase,
But all his pain employed to please,
And left (to go in hand with these)
The Targe of great A^^acides.
66
A styrrop for her feet to press,
And bridle-bosses he did a^ress^,
And added mines, in worths excess
Of his sweet Spouses golden (...)
67
Thus on their famous Caualrie,
These Prince-^ome Damzels seemd to fly
Their soft young cheek^^balls to the eye,
Are of the fresh vermi^on D^e.
68
So Lillies out of Scarlet pere,
So Roses bloomde in Lady Vere,
So shoot two wanton stars yfere
In the eternall-burning Sphere.
69
The Chyld-gods graceful Paradise
They jointly purpose to inuise,
And lovely emulations rise
In note of one another guise.
70
Phillis to Flora laughter led*
And Flora Phillis answered:
Phillis, a Merlyn managed,
A Sparhawke, Flora carried.
71
In little time, these Ladies found
A Grove with every pleasure crowned,
At whose sweet entry did resound
A Forde, that flowrd that holy ground.
72
From thence the sweet-breathd winds convey
Odors from every Myrtle spray
And other flowers* to whose a^ay
A hundred Harps, and Timbrels play.
73
All pleasures, study can invent
The Dames ^ares instantly present,
Voices in all sorts different
The four parts, and the Di^pent.
74
To tunes that from those voices fly
With admirable harmony,
The Tymbrell, Harp, and Psalterie
Rejoice in rapting symphonie.
75
There did the Vials voice abound,
In Music Angelike profound,
There did the Phi^^ dispreden round,
His voice in many a variant sound.
76
All Birds with tunefull bosoms sing,
The Blackbird makes the woods to ring,
The Thrush, the lay, and she in Spring,
Rues the past rape of Thraces King.
77
Their sweet notes to the Music plying*
Then all the different flowrs descrying.
The Odors in abundance flying,
Proved it the Bower of Love soft-lying.
78
The Virgins somewhat entered here,
And sprinkled with a little fear,
Their hearts before that held Love dear,
In Cupids flames increased were.
79
And while each winged Forrester
Their proper rumors did prefer,
Each Virgins mind made wait on her
Applauses apt and singular.
80
Deathles were he could there repose;
Each path his spicie Odor stroes
Of Mirrh, and Synamon there groes,
And of our blessed Ladies Rose,
81
Each tree has there his several bliss,
In fruits that never season miss:
Men may conceive how sweet Love is,
By that celestial Court of his.
82
The dancing companies they see
Of young men, and of maidens free,
Whose bodies were as bright in blee,
As stars illustrate bodies be.
83
In which so marvelous a guise
Of unexpected novelties,
These Virgins bosoms through their eyes,
Are danted with a quick surprise.
84
Who stay their royal Steeds ou^-right,
And almost from their seats alight,
Forgetting their endeavors quit^
With that proud rumors sweet affright.
85
But when sad Phil^men, did strain
Her rapefull-ruing breast again*
These Damz (...) hearing her complain,
Are re^inflamd in every vain.
86
About the center of the spring
A sacred place is where they ^ing
And use their supreme worshipping,
Of loves mere^ darting fiery King
87
There many a two-shapt company
Of Faunes, N^mphs, Sa^y^es, meet and ply
The Ti^brell and the Psalterie
Before Loves sacred majesty.
88
There bear they Goblets, big with (...),
And Coronets of Flowers combi^e,
There Nimphs, and Faunes de^y-diuine,
Does Bacchus teach to foot it fin^.
89
Who keep true measure with their (...)
That to the instruments do (...),
But old Sile^^s plays not swee^e
In consort, but indents the street.
90
The spring sleep did his temple^ lod
As on a long-^ard Ass he rod,
Laughters excess to s^^ him nod
Dissolved the bosom of the God.
91
Fresh cups he ever calls upon
In sounds of ^^perfection,
With age and Bacchus o^ergon,
They stop his voices Organon.
92
Amongst this gamesome Crew is seen,
The issue of the Cyprian Queen,
Whose head and shoulders feathered been,
And as the stars his countnance sheene.
93
In his left hand his Bow he bare,
And by his side his Quiver ware:
In power he sits past all compare,
And with his flames the world does dare.
94
A Scepter in his hand he held,
With Chloris native flowrs, untilled,
And Nectars deathlesse odors stild
From his bright locks the Sun did guild.
95
The triple Graces there assist,
Sustaining with their breasts commist
And knees that Tellus bosom kissed
The Challice of this Amo^ist.
96
These Vergins now approached near,
And worshipped, exempt from fear,
Loves God, who was en^irond there
With youth, tha^ honored styles did bear.
97
Their joy is super excellent
To see a Court so conflu^^^,
Whom Cupid seeing; their intent,
He does with greeting interuent.
98
He asks the cause for which they came:
They confidently tell the same*
And he gives praise to either Dame
That durst so great a war proclaim.
99
To both he spoke to make some pause
Until their honorable cause
Profoundly weighd in every clause,
Might be expland with all applause.
100
He was a God, which well they know,
Rehersall needs it not bestow,
They lite, and rest, and plainly show
Where love strives love will master grow
101
Love, Laws, and Judges has in fee,
Nature, and Use his Judges be
To whom his whole Courts censures flee
Since past, and things to come they see.
102
These do the heart of justice try
And show the Courts severity,
In judgment, and strong custom^ eye
The Clarke is first for venerie.
103
Against which the Virgins, nothing stro^e
Since loves high voice did it approve,
So both to their abods remove,
But, as at first, rest firm in love.
Explicit Rhithmus Phillidis ^t Flor^.
Certamen inter Phillidem and Floram.
ANni part florida coelo puriore
Picta terra graminis vario color
Cum fugaret nubila nuncius aurorae
Liquit sopor oculos Phyllidis and Flora
Placuit virginibus ire spatiatum
Nam soporem reiicit pectus sauciatum
Aequis ergo passibus exeunt in pra^um
Vt et locus facia^ ludum esse gratum
Eunt ambae virgins and amb^ Regin^
Phyllis coma libera Flora compto crine
Nec sunt form^ virginum sed form^ diuin^
Et respondent facies luci matutinae
Nec stirpe, nec specie, nec ornatu viles
Et annos and animos habent iuueniles
Sed sunt parum impares et parum hostiles
Nam huic placet Clericus and huic placet Miles
Non est differentia corporis aut oris
Sunt vnius voti, sunt vnius moris
Omnia communia sunt i^tus et foris*
Sola differentia modus est a^^ris.
Susurrabit modicum ventus tempestiuus
Locus erat viridi gramine festiuus
Et in ipso gramine defluebat riuus
Viuus atque garrulo murmr lasciuus
Ad augmentum decoris et caloris min^s
Fuit iuxta riuulum speciosa pi^us
Venustata folio late pandens sin^s
Nec intrare poterat calor peregrinus
Consedere virgins, herba sedem dedit
Phyllis iuxta riuulum, Flora long sedit
Et dum sedit vtraque et ^n s^se redit
Amor corda vi^nerat et vtramque ladit
Amor est interius latens et occultus
Et breui, certissimos elicit singultus
Pallor genas in^icit, alternantur vultus
Sed in verecundia fur (...) est (...)
Phyllis (...)
Et hanc (...)
Altera sic alter^ (...)
(...)
Ille sermo mutuus (...) hab^t ^ore
Et est quadam series (...) de (...)
Amor est (...) e^t in ore
Tandem Phillis incip^t et arridi^ Florae
Miles inquit incli^^ (...) Paris,
Ubim^d^ militas et vbi mor^^is
O vita militiae vita singularis
Sola digna gaudi^ Da^^nai l^ris.
Dum ^^lla recoli^ militem amicum
Flora (ridens) oculos, i^cet in obliqum
Et in risu l^quitur verbum (...)
Amo inquit poteras dicere mendicu^
Sed quid Alcibiades facit mea cura
Res creata digni^^ o^^ni creatura
Quem beauit omnibus gratiis natura
O sola falicia Clericorum iura
Floram Phyllis arguit de sermon duro
Et sermon loquitur Floram commoturo
Nam ecce virgunculam inquit credo puro
Cuius pectus mobile seruit Epicuro
Surge surge misera de furore f^do
Solum esse Clericum Epicurum credo
Nihil elegantiae Clerico concedo
Cuius implet latera moles et pinguedo
A castris Cupidinis cor habet remotum
Qui somnum desiderat et cibum and potum
O puella nobilis omnibus est notum
Quantum distat militis ab hoc voto votum
Solis necessariis Miles est contentus
Somno, cibo, potui* non vi^it intentus
Amor illum prohibet ne sit somnolentus
Nam est vita Militis amor et i^uentus
Quis amicos copulit nostros loro pari?
Lex, Natura prohibent illos copulari
Meum semper praemium dare tuo dari
Meus nouit ludere, tuus epulari
Haurit flora sanguinem vulta verecundo
Et apparet pulchrior in risu s^cundo
Et tandem eloquio reserat facundo
Que cord conceperat artibus faecundo
Satis inqui^ libere Phylli^ es loquuta
Multum es eloquio v^lox et acuta
Sed non efficaciter verum prosequuta
Vt per te praeualeat lilio cicuta
Dixisti de Clerico qui indulgit sibi
Seruum somni nominas and potus and ^ibi
Sic sole^ ab inuido probitas describi
Ecce parem pattere respondebo tibi
Tot et tanta fat^or* etc.
FINIS.

