EASTVVARD HOE. As It was played in the Blackfriars. By The Children of her
Majesty's Revels

Made by GEO: CHAPMAN. BEN: IONSON. ION: MARSTON.

AT LONDON Printed for William Aspley. 1605.

PROLOGVS.
NOt out of Envy, for there is no effect
Where there is no cause; nor out of Imitation
For we have evermore bin Imitated;
Nor out of our contention to do better
Then that which is opposde to ours in Title,
For that was good; and better cannot be:
And for the Title if it seem affected
We might as well have calde it, God you good Even:
Only that Eastward; west-wards still exceedes,
Honor the Suns fair rising, not his setting;
Nor is our Title utterly ensorste,
As by the points we touch at, you shall see;
Bear with our willing pains, if dull or witty,
We only dedicate it to the City.
EASTWARD HOE.
Actus primi, Scena prima.
Enter Master Touchstone, and Quicksilver at Several doors, Quicksilver
with his hat, pumps, short sword and dagger, and a Racket trussed up under his
cloak. At the middle door, Enter Golding discovering a Goldsmiths shop, and
walking short turns before it. Touchstone. AND whether with you now? what
loose action are you bound for? come what comrades are you to meet withal?
whers the supper? whers the supper? whers the randeuous?


Quick. Indeed, and in very good sober truth, Sir.


Touch. Indeed, and in very good sober truth Sir? Behind my back thou will
swear faster then a french foot boy, and talk more bawdily then a common
midwife, and now indeed and in very good sober truth Sir: but if a privy
search should be made, with what furniture are you riggd now? Sirrah I tell
thee, I am thy master William Tutchstone Goldsmith: and thou my Prentise
Francis Quicksilver: and will see whether you are running. Work upon that now.


Quick. Why Sir I hope a man may use his recreation with his masters profit.


Touch. Prentises recreations are seldom with their masters profit. Work
upon that now. You shall give up your cloak tho you be no Alderman. Heyday,
Ruffins hall. Sword, pumps, heers a Racket indeed. Touch. vncloakes Quick.


Quick. Work upon that now.


Touch. Thou shamlesse Varlet do thou jest at thy lawful master contrary to
thy Indentures?


Quick. Why zbloud sir, my mother's a Gentlewoman: and my father a Justice of
Peace, and of Quorum, and tho I am a younger brother and a prentise yet I hope I
am my fathers son: and by Gods lidde, it is for your worship and for your
commodity that I keep company. I am intertaind among gallants, true: They
call me coozen Frank, right; Ilend them monnies, good; they spend it, well.
But when they are spent, must not they strive to get more? must not their land
fly? and to whom? shall not your worship ha, the refusal? well, I am a good
member of the City if I were well considered. How would Morchants thrive, if
Gentlemen would not be unthrifts? How could Gentlemen be vnthrists if their
humors were not fed? How should their humors be fed but by whit meat, and
cunning secondings? well, the City might consider us. I am going to an
Ordinary now; the gallants fall to play, I carry light gold with me: the
gallants call coozen Francke some gold for silver, I change, gain by it, the
gallants loose the gold; and then call coozen Francke lend me some silver. Why
--


Tou. Why? I cannot tell, seven score pound art thou out in the cash, but look
to it, I will not be gallanted out of my moneys. And as for my rising by other
men's fall; God shield me. Did I gain my wealth by Ordinaries? no: by
exchanging of gold? no: by keeping of gallants company? no. I hired me a little
shop, fought low, took small gain, kept no debt book, garnished my shop for
want of Plate, with good wholesome thriftie sentences; As, Touchstone, keep thy
shopp, and thy shop will keep thee. Light gains makes heavy purses. It Is
good to be merry and wise: And when I was wiu'd, having something to stick too,
I had the horn of Suretiship ever before my eyes: You all know the devise of
the Horn, where the young fellow slippes in at the Butte end, and comes squesd
out at the Buckall: and I grew up, and I praise providence, I bear my brows
now as high as the best of my neighbors: but thou-well look to the accounts,
your fathers bond lies for you: seven score pound is yet in the reere.


Quick. Why Slid sir, I have as good, as proper gallants words for it as any
are in London, Gentlemen of good phrase, perfect language, passingly behau'd,
Gallants that wear socks and clean linen, and call me kind coozen Francke,
good coozen Francke, for they know my Father; and by god; lidde shall not I
trust hem? not trust?


Enter a Page as inquiring for Touch-stones Shop. Golding. What do ye lack
Sir? What is it you will buy Sir?


Touchstone. I marry Sir, there is a youth of another piece. There Is thy
fellowe-Prentise, as good a Gentleman borne as thou art: nay, and better
mean'd. But dos he pumpe it, or Racket it? Well, if he thrive not, if he
out-last not a hundred such crackling Bauins as thou art, God and men neglect
industry.


Gold. It is his Shop, and here my M. walks. To the Page.


Touch. With me Boy?


Page. My Master, Sir Petronel Flash, recommends his love to you, and will
instantly visit you,


Touch. To make up the match with my eldest daughter, my wives Dilling, whom
she longs to call Maddam. He shall find me unwillingly ready Boy. Exit Page.

There Is another afliction too. As I have two Prentises: the one of a boundless
prodigality, the other of a most hopeful Industry. So have I only two
daughters: the eldest, of a proud ambition and nice wantonness: the other of a
modest humility and comely soberness. The one must be Ladyfied forsooth: and
be attired just to the Court-cut, and long tail. So far is she ill naturde
to the place and means of my preferment and fortune, that she throws all the
contempt and dispight, hatred it self can cast upon it. Well, a piece of Land
she has, it was her Grandmothers gift: let her, and her Sir Petronel, flash out
that. But as for my substance, she that skornes me, as I am a Citizen and
Tradesman, shall never pamper her pride with my industry: shall never use me
as men do Foxes; keep themselves warm in the skin, and throw the body
that bare it to the dunghill. I must go intertaine this Sir Petronell.
Goulding, My utmost care's for thee, and only trust in thee, look to the
shop, as for you, Master Quicksilver, think of husks, for thy course is
running directly to the prodigaills hogs trough. husks Sra. Works upon that
now.


Exit. Tuch. Quick. Mary sough goodman flat-cap: Sfoot tho I am a prentise I
can give arms, and my father's a justice a peace by descent: and zbloud --


Goul. Fie how you swear.


Qui. Sfoot man I am a Gentleman, and may swear by my pedigree, Gods my life.
Sirrah Goulding, wiit be ruled by a fool? turn good fellow, turn swaggering
gallant, and let the Welkin roar, and Erebus also: Look not Westward to the
fall of Don Phoebus, but to the East; Eastward Hoe, "Where radiant beams of
lusty Sol appear,
"And bright Eous makes the welkin clear.
We are both Gentlemen, and therefore should be no coxcombes: lets be no longer
fools to this flat-cap Touchstone. Eastward Bully: this Satin belly, and
Canuas backed Touchstone; Slife man his father was a Malt-man, and his mother
sold Ginger-bread in Christ-church.


Goul. What would ye ha me do?


Quick. Why do nothing, be like a gentleman, be idle the curse of man is
labor. Wipe thy bum with testones, and make Duckes and Drakes with shillings:
What Eastward hoe. Will thou cry, what is it ye lack? stand with a bare pate,
and a dropping nose, under a wodden pent-house, and a^t a gentleman? will thou
bear Tankards, and may bear Aims? be ruled, turn gallant, Eastward hoe,
ta lyre, lyre, to., Who calls Ieronimo? speak here I am: gods so, how like a
sheep thou lookst, a my conscience some cowheard begot thee, thou Goulding of
Goulding-hall, ha boy?


Gou. Go, ye are a prodigal coxcombe, I a cowheards son, because I turn
not a drunke^ whore-hunting rake-hell like thy self? Offers to draw, and
Goulding trips up his heels and holds him.


Quick. Rakehell? rakehell?


Goul. Pish, in soft terms ye are a cowardly bragging boy. I Will ha you whipped.


Quic. Whipped, that's good in faith, untruss me?


Goul. No, thou will undo thy self. Alas I behold thee with pity, not with
anger; thou common shot-clog, gull of all companies: me thinks I see thee
already walking in Moore fields without a Cloak, with half a Hatte, without a
band, a Doublet with three Buttons, without a girdle, a hose with one point and
no Garter, with a cudgel under thine arm borrowing and begging three pence.


Quic. Nay Slife, take this and take all: as I am a Gentleman borne, I Will be
drunk, grow valiant, and beat thee. Exit.


Goul. Go thou most madly vain, whom nothing can recover but that which
reclaimes Athiests, and makes great persons sometimes religious: Calamity. As
for my place and life thus I have read:

What ere some vainer youth may term disgrace,
The gain of honest pains is never base:
From trades from arts, from valor honor springs,
These three are founts of gentry, yea of Kings.

Enter Girtred, Mildrid, Bettrice, and Poldauy a Tailor, Poldauy with a fair
gown, Scotch Varthing all, and French fall in his arms, girted in a French
head attire, and Citizens gown; Mildred sowing, and Bettrice leading a Monkey
after her. Gir. For the passion of patience, look if sir Petronell approach;
that sweet, that fine, that delicate, that -- for loves sake tell me if he
come. O sister Mill, though my father be a low capt tradsman, yet I must be a
Lady: and I praise God my mother must call me Medam, (does he come?) off with
this gown for shames sakes, off with this gown: let not my Knight take me in
the City cut in any hand: tear't, pax ont (does he come) tear't of. Thus
whilst she sleeps I sorrow, for her sake, etc.


Mil. Lord sister, with what an immodest impaciencie and disgraceful scorn,
do you put off your City tier: I am sorry to think you imagine to right your
self, in wronging that which has made both you and us.


Gir. I tell you I cannot endure it, I must be a Lady: do you wear your
Quoiffe with a London licket; your Stammell petticoate with two guardes, the
Buffin gown with the Tuftaffitic cape, and the Velvet lace. I must be a Lady,
and I will be a Lady. I like some humors of the City Dames well, to eat
Cherries only at an Angel a pound, good; to dye rich Scarlet black, pretty:
to line a Grogaram gown clean thorough with velvet, tolerable; their pure
linen, their smocks of 3. li. a smock are to be borne withal. But your
minsing niceryes, taffata pipkins, durance petticotes, and silver bodkins: --
Gods my life, as I shall be a Lady I cannot endure it. Is he come yet? Lord
what a long knight it is! And ever she cride shoute home, and yet I knew one
longer, and ever she cryde shoute home, fa, la, ly, re, lo, la.


Mil. Well Sister, those that scorn their nest, often fly with a sick wing.


Gir. Boe-bell.


Mil. Where Titles presume to thrust before fit means to second them, Wealth
and respect often grow sullen and will not follow. For sure in this, I would
for your sake I spoke not truth. Where ambition of place goes before fitness
of birth, contempt and disgrace follow. I heard a Scholar once say, that
Ulysses when he counterfeited himself mad, yoakt cattes, and foxes, and
dogs together to draw his plowe, whilst he followed and sowed salt: But sure
I judge them truly mad, that yoke citizens and courtiers, trades men and
soldiers, a goldsmiths daughter and a knight: well sister, pray God my father
sow not salt too.


Gir. Alas, poor Mil. when I am a Lady, I Will pray for thee yet I faith: Nay,
and I Will vouchsafe to call thee sister Mil still, for though thou art not like
to be a Lady as I am, yet sure thou art a creature of Gods making; and may
paraduenture to be saved as soon as I, (dos he come?) And ever and anon she
doubled in her song.

Now (Ladies my comfort)
What a profane Ape's here!
Tailer, Poldavis, prithee fit it
fit it: is this a right Scot?
Does it clip close? and bear up round?

Pold. Fine and stiffly i faith, twill keep your thighs so cool and make your
waste so small: here was a fault in your body, but I have supplied the desect,
with the effect of my steel instrument which, though it have but one eye, can
see to rectify the imperfection of the proportion.


Gir. Most aedefying Tailer! I protest you Tailers are most sanctified members,
and make many crooked thing go upright. How must I bear my hands? light?
light?


Pold. O I, now you are in the Lady-fashion, you must do all things light.
Tread light, light. I and fall so: that is the court-Amble. She trips about the
stage.


Gir. Has the Court nere a trot?


Pold. No, but a false gallop, Lady.


Gir. And if she will not go to bed Cantat.


Bett. The knights come forsooth.


Enter Sir Petronell, M. Touchstone, and Mistress Touchstone. Gir. Is my knight
come? O the Lord. my band? Sister do my cheeks look well? give me a little
box a the ear that I may see me to blush: now, now. So, there, there, there!
here he is: O my dearest delight, Lord, Lord, and how do my Knight?


Touch: Fie, with more modesty.


Gir. Modesty! why I am no citizen now, modesty? am I not to be married?
you are best to keep me modest now I am to be a Lady.


Sir Petro. Boldness is good fashion and courtlike.


Gir. I, in a country Lady I hope it is: as I shall be. And how chance ye
came no sooner knight?


Sir Petro. Faith, I was so intertaind in the Progress with one Count Epernoum
a welsh knight: we had a match at Baloone too, with my Lord Whachum, for four
crowns.


Gir. At Baboone? Jesus! you and I will play at Baboone in the country? Knight.


Sir Pet. O sweet Lady: it is a strong play with the arm.


Gir. With arm, or leg, or any other member, if it be a court-sport. And
when shal's be married my Knight?


Sir Pet. I come now to consumate it; and your father may call a poor Knight,
Son in Law.


M. Touch. Sir, ye are come, what is not mine to keep, I must not be sorry to
forgo: A 100. li. Land her Grandmother left her, it is yours, her self (as her
mothers gift) is yours. But if you expect ought from me, know, my hand and mine
eyes open together; I do not give blindly: Work upon that now.


Sir Pet. Sir, you mistrust not my means? I am a Knight.


Touch. Sir, Sir; What I know not, you will give me leave to say, I am ignorant
of.


Mistress Touch. Yes, that he is a Knight; I know where he had money to pay the
Gentlemen Vshers, and Heralds their Fees. I, that he is a Knight: and so might
you have been too, if you had been ought else then an Ass, as well as some of
your neighbors. And I thought you would not ha been Knighted, (as I am an
honest woman) I would ha dubbed you my self, I praise God I have wherewithal.
But as for you daughter. --


Gir. I mother, I must be a Lady to morrow: and by your leave mother (I
speak it not without my duty, but only in the right of my husband) I must
take place of you, Mother.


Mistress Touch. That you shall Lady-daughter, and have a Coach as well as I too.


Cir. Yes mother. But by your leave mother, (I speak it not without my duty
but only in my husbands right) my Coach-horses must take the wall of your
Coach-horses.


Touchstone. Come, come, the day grows low: it is supper time; use my house the
wedding solemnity is at my wifes cost; thank me for nothing but my willing
blessing: for (I cannot feign) my hopes are faint. And Sir, respect my
daughter, she has refused for you wealthy and honest matches, known good men,
well monied, better traded, best reputed.


Gir. Boddy a truth, Chittizens, Chittizens. Sweet Knight, as soon as ever we
are married, take me to to thy mercy out of this miserable Chittie,
presently, carry me out of the sent of New Castle Coal, and the hearing of
Boe-bell, I beseech thee down with me for God sake.


Touch. Well daughter, I have read, that old wit sings:

The greatest rivers flow from little springs.
Though thou art full, skorne not thy means at first,
He that is most drunk may soonest be a thirst.
Work upon that now.
All but Touchstone, Mildred, and Goulding depart. No, no; yon'd stand my
hopes.


Milared, Come hither daughter. And how approve you your sisters fashion? how
do you phantsie her cho ye? what do thou think?


Mil I hope as a sister, well.


Touch. Nay but, nay but how do thou like her behavior and humor? speak
freely.


Mil. I am loath to speak ill: and yet I am sorry of this, I cannot speak
well.


Touch. Well: very good, as I would wish: A modest answer* Goulding, come
hither: hither Golding. How do thou like the Knight. Sir Flash? dos he not
look big? how likst thou the Elephant? he says he has a castle in the
Country.


Gould. Pray heaven, the Elephant carry not his Castle on his back.


Touch. Fore heaven, very well: But seriously, how do repute him?


Gould. The best I can say of him is, I know him not.


Touch. Ha G ulding? I commend thee, I approve thee, and will make it appear
my affection is strong to thee. My wise has her humor, and I will ha, mine.
Do thou see my daughter here? she is not fair, well-fauoured or so,
indifferent, which modest measure of beauty, shall not make it thy only work
to watch her, nor sufficient mis^baunce, to suspect her. Thou art towardly,
she is modest, thou art provident, she is careful. She Is now mine: give me
thy hand, she is now thine* Work upon that now.


Gould. Sir, as your son, I honor you; and as your servant obey you.


Touch. Say thou so, come hither Mildred. Do you see yon'd fellow? he is a
Gentlemen (tho my Prentise) and has somewhat to take too: a Youth of good hope;
well friended, well parted. Are you mine* You are his. Work (you) upon that now.


Mil. Sir, I am all yours: your body gave me life, your care and love
happiness of life: let your veriue still direct it, for to your wisdom I
wholly dispose my self.


Touch. Say thou so? be you two better acquainted. Lip her, Lip her knave. So
shut up shop: in* We must make holiday.

This match shall on, for I intend to prove Ex. Gol. and Mil.
Which thriues the l^st, the mean or lofty love.
Whether fit Wedlock vowed twixt like and like.
Or prouder hopes, which daringly ore strike
Their place and means: it is honest Times expense.
When seeming lightness bears a morrallsence.
Work upon that now. Exit.


Actus secundi. Scena Prima.
Touchstone, Quickesiluer, Goulding and Mildred, sitting on either side of the
stall. Touch. Quickesiluer, master Frances Quickesiluer, master Quickesiluer?
Enter Quickesiluer.


Qui. Here sir; (vmp.)


Touch. So sir; nothing but flat Master Quickesiluer (without any familiar
addition) will fetch you: will you trusse my points sir?


Quick. I forsooth: (vmp.)


Touch. How now sir? the drunken hyckop, so soon this morning?


Quick. It Is but the coldness of my stomach forsooth.


Touch. What? have you the cause natural for it? you are a very learned
drunckerd: I believe I shall miss some of my silver spoones with your
learning. The nuptial night will not moisten your throat sufficiently, but
the morning likewise must rain her dews into your gluttonous wesand.


Quick. An't please you sir, we did but drink (vmp,) to the coming off, of
the Knightly Bridegroom.


Touch. To the coming off an'him?


Quick. I forsooth: we druncke to his coming on (vmp,) when we went to bed;
and now we are up, we must drink to his coming off: for that's the chief
honor of a Soldier sir, and therefore we must drink so much the more to it,
forsooth. (vmp.)


Touch. A very capital reason. So that you go to bed late, and rise early to
commit drunkenness? you fulfill the Scripture very sufficient wickedly
forsooth.


Quick. The Knights men forsooth be still a their knees at it, (vmp) and
because it is for your credit sir, I would be loath to flinch.


Touch. I pray sir, even to 'hem again then; you are one of the separated crew,
one of my wives faction, and my young Ladies, with who^ and with their great
match, I will have nothing to do.


Quick. So sir, now I will go keep my (vmp) credit with 'hem an't please you
sir.


Touch. In any case Sir, lay one cup of Sack more alyour cold stomach, I
beseech you.


Quick. Yes forsooth. Exit. Quick.


Touch. This is for my credit Servants ever maintain drunkenness in their
masters house, for their masters credit; a good idle Seruing-mans reason: I
thank Time, the night is past; I nere wakt to such cost; I think we have
stowd more sorts of flesh in our bellies, then ever Noah's Arc received: and
for Wine, why my house turns giddie with it, and more noise in it then at a
Conduict; Aye me, even beasts condemn our gluttony. Well, it is our Cities
fault, which because we commit seldom, we commit the more sinfully, we lose
no time in our sensuality, but we make amends for it; O that we would do so in
virtue, and religious negligences; But see here are all the sober parcels my
house can show, I Will cauesdrop, hear what thoughts they utter this morning.


Enter Goulding. Goul. But is it possible, that you seeing your sister preferred
to the bed of a Knight, should contain your affections in the arms of a
Prentice?


Myl. I had rather make up the garment of my affections in some of the same
piece, then like a fool wear gowns of two colors, or mix Sackcloth with
Satin.


Goul. And do the costly garments; the title and fame of a Lady the fashion;
observation, and reverence proper to such preferment, no more inflame you, then
such conuenience as my poor means and industry can offer to your virtues?


Mil. I have observed that the bridle given to those violent flatteries of
fortune, is seldom recouer'd; they bear one headlong in desire from one
novelty to another: and where those ranging appetites reign, there is ever
more passion then reasons no stay, and so no happiness. These hasty
aduancements are not natural; Nature has given us legs, to go to our
objects; not wings to fly to them.


Goul. How dear an object you are to my desires I cannot express, whose
fruition would my masters absolute consent and yours vouchsafe me, I should be
absolutely happy. And though it were a grace so far beyond my merit, that I
should blush with unworthiness to receive it, yet thus far both my love and
my means shall assure your requital; you shall want nothing fit for your
birth and education; what increase of wealth and advancement the honest and
orderly industry and skill of our trade will affoorde in any, I doubt not will
be aspirde by me; I will ever make your contenment the end of my endeavors; I
will love you above all; and only your grief shall be my misery; and your
delight, my felicity.


Touch. Work upon that now. By my hopes, he woes honestly and orderly; he
shall be Anchor of my hopes. Look, see the ill yoakt monster his fellow.


Enter Quickesiluer vnlac'd, a towell about his neck, in his flat Cap, drunk.
Quick. Eastward Hoe; Holla ye pampered lades of Asia.


Touch. Drunk now down right, a, my fidelity.


Quic. (Vmp) pulldo, Pulldo; showse quoth the Caliuer.


Goul. Fie fellow Quickesiluer, what a pickle are you in?


Quic. Pickle? pickle in thy throat; zounes pickell? wa ha ho, good morrow
knight Petronell: morrow lady Gouldsmith* come of, Knight, with a counterbuff,
for the honor of knighthood.


Goul. Why how now sir? do ye know where you are?


Quic. Where I am? why god's blood you loulthead where I am?


Goul. Go to, go to, for shame go to bed, and sleep out this immodestie: thou
sham'st both my master and his house.


Quick. Shame? what shame? I thought, thou would show thy bringing up: and
thou were a Gentleman as I am, thou would think it no shame to be drunk.
Lend me some money, save my credit, I must dine with the Serving men and their
wives; and their wives sirrah.


Gou. E'ene who you will, I Will not lend thee three pence.


Quic. Sfoote lend me some money, have thou not Hyren here?


Touch. Why how now sirrah? what vain's this, hah?


Quic. Who cries on murder? lady was it you? how does our master? pray thee
cry Eastward ho?


Touch. Sirrah, sirrah, you are past your hickvp now, I see you are drunk.


Quic. It Is for your credit master.


Touch. And hear you keep a whore in town.


Quic. It Is for your credit Master.


Touch. And what you are out in Cashe, I know.


Quick. So do I. my fathers a Gentleman, Work upon that now; Eastward hoe.


Touch. Sir, Eastward hoe, will make you go Westward ho; I will no longer
dishonest my house, nor endanger my stock with your license; There sir,
there is your Indenture, all your apparel (that I must know) is on your back;
and from this time my door is shut to you: from me be free; but for other
freedom, and the moneys you have wasted; Eastward ho, shall not serve you.


Quic. Am I free a, my ferters? Rense; Fly with a Duck in thy mouth: and now I
tell thee Touchstone --


Touch. Good sir.


Quic. When this eternal substance of my soul,


Touch. Well said, chandge your gould ends for your play ends.


Quick. Did live imprisoned in my wanton flesh.


Touch. What then sir?


Quic. I was a Courtier in the Spanish court, and Don Andrea was my name.


Touch. Good master Don Andrea will you march?


Quic. Sweet Touchstone, will you lend me two shillings?


Touch. Not a penny.


Quic. Not a penny? I have friends, and I have acquaintance, I will piss at
thy shop posts, and throw rotten Eggs at thy sign: Work upon that now. Exit,
staggering.


Touch. Now sirrah, you? hear you? you shall serve me no more neither; not an
hour longer.


Goul. What mean you sir?


Touch. I mean to give thee thy freedom; and with thy freedom my daughter:
and with my daughter a fathers love. And with all these such a portion, as
shall make Knight Petronell himself envy thee: you are both agreed? are ye not?


Ambo. With all submission, both of thanks and duty.


Tou. Well then, the great power of heaven bless and confirm you. And,
Goulding, that my love to thee may not show less then my wives love to my
eldest daughter; thy marriage feast shall equal the Knights and hers.


Goul. Let me beseech you, no Sir, the superfluity and cold meat left at
their Nuptials, will with bounty furnish ours. The grossest prodigallitie is
superfluous cost of the Bellye: nor would I wish any invitement of States or
friends, only your reverent presence and witness shall sufficiently grace
and confirm us.


Touch. Son to mine own bosom, take her and my blessing: The nice fondling,
my Lady sir-reuerence, that I must not now presume to call daughter, is so
rauish't with desire to hansell her new Coche, and see her knights Eastward
Castle, that the next morning will sweat with her busy setting forth, away
will she and her mother, and while their preparation is making, our selves with
some two or three other friends will consumate the humble match, we have in
Gods name concluded.

It Is to my wish; for I have often read,
Fit birth, fit age, keeps long a quiet bed.
It Is to my wish; For Tradesmen (well it is known)
Get with more ease, then Gentry keeps his own. Exit.

Security solus. Secu. My privy Guest, lusty Quickesiluer, has drunk too
deep of the Bride-boule, but with a little sleep he is much recovered; And I
think is making himself ready, to be drunk in a gallanter likeness: My
house is as it were the Cave, where the young Out-lawe hoords the stolen vayles
of his occupation; And here when he will revel it in his prodigal similitude,
he retires to his Trunks, and (I may say softly) his Punks: he dares trust me
with the keeping of both: for I am Security it self, my name is Security,
the famous Usurer.


Enter Quickesiluer in his Prentises Cote and Cap his gallant Breeches and
Stockings, gartering himself. Security following. Quic. Come old Security,
thou father of destruction: th'indented Sheepeskinne is burned wherein I was
wrapped, and I am now loose, to get more children of perdition into thy vsurous
Bonds. Thou feed'st my Lechery, and I thy Covetousness: Thou art Pandar to me
for my wench, and I to thee for thy coosenages: K. me, K. thee, runs through
Court and Country.


Secu. Well said my subtle Quickesiluer, These K's open the doors to all this
worlds felicity: the dullest forehead sees it. Let not mast. Courtier think
he carries all the knavery on his shoulders: I have poor Hob in the country,
that has worn hob-nayles on's shoes, have as much villainy in's head, as he
that wears gold bottons in's cap.


Quic. Why man, it is the London highway to thrist, if virtue be used; it is but
as a scrappe to the net of villainy. They that use it simply, thrive simply
I warrant: Weight and fashion makes Goldsmiths Cockolds.


Enter Syndefie, with Quicke-siluers doublet, Cloak, Rapier, and Dagger. Synd.
Here sir, put of the other half of your Prentiship.


Quick. Well said sweet Syn: bring forth my bravery.
Now let my Truncks shoot soorth their silks concealde,
I now am free; and now will justify
My Trunkes and Punkes: Auant dull Flat-cap then,
Via, the curtain that shaddowed Borgia;
There lie thou husk of my envassail'd State.
I Sampson now, have burst the Philistines Bands,
And in thy lap my lovely Dalida,
I Will lie and snore out my enfranchisde state.
When Sampson was a tall young man
His power and strength increased than,
He sold no more, nor cup, nor can,
But did them all despise.
Old Touchstone, now wright to thy friends,
For one to sell thy base gold ends
Quickesiluer, now no more attends
Thee Touchstone.
But Dad, have thou seen my running Gelding dressed to day?


Secu. That I have Franck, the Ostler a'th Cock, dressed him for a Breakefast.


Quick. What did he eat him?


Secu. No, but he eat his breakefast for dressing him: and so dressed him for
breakfast. Quicksiluer. O witty Age, where age is young in wit,
And al youths words have gray beards full of it!



Hyn. But ah-las Francke, how will all this be maintained now?


Your place maintained it before.

Quickesiluer. Why and I maintainde my place. I Will to the Court, another manner
of place for maintenance I hope then the silly City. I heard my father say, I
heard my mother sing a nolde Song and a true: Tou art a she fool, and know
not what belongs to our male wisdom. I shallbee a Merchant for-sooth: trust
my estate in a wooden Troughe as he does? What are these Ships, but Tennis
Balls for the winds to play withal? Tossed from one wave to another; Now
vnder-line; Now over the house; Sometimes Bricke-wal'd against a Rock, so
that the guts fly out again: sometimes struck under the wide Hazard, and
farewell Mast. Merchant.


Synnedefie. Well Francke, well; the Seas you say are uncertain: But he that
sails in your Court Seas, shall find 'hem ten times fuller of hazard;
wherein to see what is to be seen, is torment more then a free Spirit can
endure; But when you come to suffer, how many Injuries swallowe you? What care
and devotion must you use, to humor an imperious Lord? proportion your looks
to his looks? smiles to his smiles? fit your sails to the wind of his breath?


Quick. Tush he is no Iourney-man in his craft, that can not do that.


Sinnedefie. But he is worse then a Prentise that does it, not only humouring
the Lord, but every Trencherbearer, every Groom that by indulgence and
intelligence crept into his favor, and by Pandatisme into his Chamber; He
rules the roste: And when my honorable Lord says it shall be thus, my
worshipful Rascal (the Groom of his close stool) says it shall not be
thus, claps the door after him, and who dares enter? A Prentise, quoth you?
it is but to learn to live, and does that disgrace a man? he that rises hardly,
stands firmly: but he that rises with ease, Alas, falls as easily.


Quickesiluer. A pox on you, who taught you this mor rallitie?


Security. It Is long of this witty Age, Master Francis. But indeed, Mistress
Synnedefie, all Trades complain of inconvenience, and therefore it is best to
have none. The Merchant he complains, and says, Traffic is subject to
much uncertainty and loss: let 'hem keep their goods on dry land with a
vengeance, and not expose other men's substances to the mercy of the winds,
under protection of a wooden wall (as Master Francis says) and all for
greedy desire, to enrich themselves with unconscionable gain, two for one, or
so: where I, and such other honest men as live by lending money, are content
with moderate profit; Thirty, or Forty i'th'hundred: so we may have it with
quietness, and out of peril of wind and weather, rather then run those
dangerous courses of trading, as they do.


Quick. I Dad thou may well be called Security, for thou take the safest
course.


Security. Faith the quieter, and the more contented; and, out of doubt, the
more godly. For Merchants in their courses are never pleased, but ever repining
against Heaven: One prays for a Westerly wind to carry his ship forth;
another for an Easterly to bring his ship home; and at every shaking of a
lease, he falls into an agony, to think what danger his Ship is in on
such a Coast, and so forth. The Farmer he is ever at odds with the Weather,
sometimes the clouds have been too barren; Sometimes the Heavens forgette
themselves, their Haruests answer not their hopes; Sometimes the Season falls
out too fruitful, Corn will bear no price, and so forth. Th'Artificer,
he is all for a stirring world, if his Trade be too full and fall short of
his expectation, then falls he out of joint. Where we that trade nothing but
money, are free from all this, we are pleased with all weathers: let it rain
or hold up, be calm or windy, let the season be whatsoever, let Trade go how
it will, we take all in good part; even what please the heavens to send us; so
the Sun stand not still; and the Moon keep her usual returns; and make up
days, months, and years.


Quick. And you have good security?


Secu. I mary Francke, that is the special point.


Quick. And yet forsooth we must have Trades to live withal; For we cannot
stand without legs, nor fly without wings; and a number of such skurvie
phrases. No, I say still; he that has wit, let him live by his wit: he that
has none, let him be a Tradesman.


Secu. Witty Master Francis!

It Is pity any Trade should dull that quick brain of yours. Do but bring
Knight Petronell into my Parchment Toils once, and you shall never need to
toil in any trade, a my credit! You know his wives Land?


Quickesiluer. Even to a foot Sir, I have been often there: a pretty fine
Seat, good Land, all entire within it self.


Secu. Well wooded?


Quick. Two hundred pounds worth of wood ready to fell. And a fine sweet
house that stands just in the midst an't, like a Prick in the midst of a
Circle; would I were your Farmer, for a hundred pound a year.


Secu. Excellent M. Francis; how I do long to do thee good: How I do hunger,
and thirst to have the honor to enrich thee? I, even to die, that thou
might inherit my living: even hunger and thirst, for a my Religion, M.
Francis. And so tell Knight Petrouell I do it to do him a pleasure.


Quickesiluer. Marry Dad, his horses are now coming up, to bear down his
Lady, will thou lend him thy stable to set 'hem in?


Secur. Faith M. Francis, I would be loathe to lend my Stable out of doors, in a
greater matter I will pleasure him, but not in this.


Quick. A pox of your hunger and thirst. Well Dad, let him have money: All he
could any way get, is bestowed on a Ship, now bound for Virginia: the frame of
which voyage is so closely conuaide, that his new Lady nor any of her friends
know it. Notwithstanding, as soon as his Ladies hand is gotten to the sale of
her inheritance, and you have furnished him with money, he will instantly hoyst
Sail, and away.


Secur. Now a Franck gale of wind go with him, Master Frank, we have too
few such knight adventurers: who would not sell away competent certainties, to
purchase (with any danger) excellent uncertainties? your true knight venturer
ever does it. Let his wife seal to day, he shall have his money to day.


Qui. To morrow she shall, Dad, before she goes into the country, to work her
to which actio, with the more engines, I purpose presently to prefer my
sweet Sin here, to the place of her Gentlewoman; whom you (for the more
credit) shall present as your friends daughter, a Gentlewoman of the country,
new come up with a will for a while to learn fashions for-sooth, and be toward
some Lady; and she shall buzz pretty devises into her Ladies ear; feeding
her humors so seruiceablie (as the manner of such as she is you know.)


Secur. True good Master Fraunces.


Enter Sindefie. Quic. That she shall keep her Port open to any thing she
commends to her.


Secur. A'my religion, a most fashionable project; as good she spoil the Lady,
as the Lady spoil her; for it is three to one of one side: sweet mistress
Sin, how are you bound to master Frances! I do not doubt to see you shortly
wedde one of the head men of our city.


Sin. But sweet Frank, when shall my father Security present me?


Quic. With all festination; I have broken the Ice to it already; and will
presently to the Knights house, whether, my good old Dad, let me pray thee with
all formallitie to man her.


Secur. Command me Master Frances; I do hunger and thirst to do thee
service. Come sweet Mistress Sin, take leave of my Wynnifride, and we will
instantly meet francke Master Frances at your Ladies.


Enter Winnifride above. Win. Where is my Cu there? Cu?


Secur. I Winnie.


Win. Will thou come in, sweet Cu?


Secur. I Wynney, presently. Exeunt.


Quic. I Wynney, quod he? that's all he can do poor man; he may well cut off
her name at Wynney. O it is an egregious Pandare! what will not an vsurous knave
be, so he may be rich? O it is a notable jews trump! I hope to live to see
dogs meat made of the old Usurers flesh; Dice of his bones; and Indentures of
his skin: and yet his skin is too thick to make Parchment, 'twould make
good Boots for a Peeter man to catch Salmon in. Your only smooth skin to
make fine Vellam is your Puritanes skin; they be the smoothest and slickest
knaves in a country.


Enter Sir Tetronell in Boots with a riding wan. Petr. I Will out of this wicked
town as fast as my horse can trot: Here Is now no good action for a man to
spend his time in. Tauerns grow dead; Ordinaries are blown up; Plays are at
a stand; Howses of Hospitallitie at a fall; not a Feather wauing, nor a Spur
gingling any where: I Will away instantly.


Qui. Y'ad best take some crowns in your purse Knight, or else your Eastward
Castle will smoke but miserably.


Petr. O Francke! my castle? Alas all the Castles I have, are built with air,
thou know.


Quic. I know it Knight, and therefore wonder whether your Lady is going.


Pet. Faith to seek her Fortune I think. I said I had a castle and land
Eastward, and Eastward she will without contradiction; her coach, and the coach
of the Sun must meet full butt: And the Sun being out shined with her
Lady-ships glory, she fears he goes Westward to hang himself.


Quic. And I fear, when her enchanted Castle becomes invisible, her Ladyship
will return and follow his example.


Petr. O that she would have the grace, for I shall never be able to pacific
her, when she sees her self deceived so.


Quic. As easily as can be. Tell her she mistook your directions, and that
shortly, your self will down with her to approve it; and then, cloth but
her croupper in a new Gown, and you may drive her any way you list: for these
women Sir, are like Essex Calves, you must wriggle 'hem on by the tail still,
or they will never drive orderly.


Petr. But alas sweet Francke, thou know my ability will not furnish her
blood with those costly humors.


Quic. Cast that cost on me Sir, I have spoken to my old Pandare Security,
for money or commodity; and commodity (if you will) I know he will procure
you.


Petr. Commodity! Alas what commodity?


Qui. Why Sir? what say you to Figs, and Raysons?


Petr. A plague of Figs and Raysons, and all such frail commodities, we
shall make nothing of 'hem.


Quic. Why then Sir, what say you to Forty pound in roasted Beef?


Petr. Out upon it, I have less stomach to that, then to the Figs and
Raysons: I Will out of Town, though I soiourne with a friend of mine, for stay
here I must not; my creditors have laid to arrest me, and I have no friend
under heaven but my Sword to bail me.


Qui. Gods me Knight, put 'hem in sufficient sureties, rather then let your
Sword bail you; Let 'hem take their choice, either the Kings Benche, or the
Fleet, or which of the two Counters they like best, for by the Lord I like
none of 'hem.


Petr. Well Francke there is no jesting with my earnest necessity; thou
know if I make not present money to further my voyage begun all is lost, and
all I have laid out about it.


Qui. Why then Sir in earnest, if you can get your wise Lady to sether hand to
the sale of her Inheritance, the blood hound Security will smell out ready
money for you instantly.


Petro. There spoke an Angel. To bring her to which conformity, I must feign
my self extremely amorous; and alleging urgent excuses for my stay, behind,
part with her as passionately, as she would from her foysting hound.


Qui. You have the Sow by the right ear Sir: I warrant there was never Child
longd more to ride a Cock horse, or wear his new coat, the^ she longs to ride
in hexr new Coache: She would long for every thing when she was a maid; and
now she will run mad for 'hem: I lay my life she will have every year four
children; and what charge and change of humor you must endure while she is
with child; and how she will tie you to your tackling till she be with child,
a Dog would not endure: Nay, there is no Turne-spit Dog bound to his wheel
more seruily, then you shall be to her wheel; For as that Dog can never
climb the top of his wheel, but when the top comes under him: so shall you
never clime the top of her contentment, but when she is under you.


Petr. Slight how thou terrifiest me?


Quic. Nay hark you sir; what Nurses, what Midwiues, what Fools, what
Physicians, what cunning women must be sought for (fearing sometimes she is
bewitched, some times in a consumption) to tell her tales, to talk bawdy to
her, to make her laughe, to give her glisters, to let her blood under the
tongue, and betwixt the toes; how she will revile and kiss you; spit in your
face, and lick it off again; how she will vaunt you are her Creature; she
made you of nothing; how she could have had thousand mark ioyntures; she
could have bin made a Lady by a Scotche Knight; and never have married him: She
could have had Poynados in her bed every morning; how she set you up, and how
she will pull you down: you will never be able to stand of your legs to endure
it.


Petr. Out of my fortune, what a death is my life bound face to face too? The
best is, a large Time-fitted conscience is bound to nothing: Marriage is but a
form in the School of Policy, to which Scholars sit fastened only with
painted chains, old Securities young wife is nere the further of with me.


Quic. Thereby lies a tale sir. The old usurer will be here instantly, with my
Puncke Syndefie, whom you know your Lady has promised me to entertain for her
Gentlewoman: and he (with a purpose to feed on you) inuites you most solemnly
by me to supper.


Petr. It falls out excellently fitly: I see desire of gain makes Jealousy
venturous: Enter Gyrt:

See Francke here comes my Lady; Lord how she viewes thee, she knows thee not
I think in this bravery.


Gyr. How now? who be you I pray?


Quic. One master Frances Quickesiluer, an't please your Ladyship.


Gyr. Gods my dignity! as I am a Lady, if he did not make me blush so that
mine eyes stood awater, would I were unmarried again: Enter Security and
Sindefie.

Where Is my woman I pray?


Qui. See Madam, she now comes to attend you.


Secur. God save my honorable Knight, and his worshipful Lady.


Gyr. You Are very welcome! you must not put on your Hat yet.


Secur. No Madam; till I know your Ladyships further pleasure, I will not
presume.


Gyr. And is this a Gentleman's daughter new come out of the country?


Secur. She is Madam; and one that her Father has a special care to bestow
in some honorable Ladies service, to put her out of her honest humors
forsooth, for she had a great desne to be a Nun, an't please you.


Gyr. A Nun? what Nun? a Nun Substantive? or a Nun Adjective?


Secur. A Nun Substantive Madam I hope, if a Nun be a Noune. But I mean, Lady,
a vowed maid of that order.


Gyr. I Will teach her to be a maid of the order I warrant you: and can you do
any work belongs to a Ladies Chamber?


Synde. What I cannot do, Madam, I would be glad to learn.


Gyr. Well said, hold up then; hold up your head I say, come hither a little.


Synd. I thank your Ladyship.


Gyr. And hark you; Good man, you may put on your Hatt now, I do not look on
you: I must have you of my faction now; not of my Knights, maid.


Synd. No forsooth Madam of yours.


Gyr. And draw all my servants in my Bow, and keep my counsel, and tell me
tales, and put me Riddles and read on a book sometimes when I am busy, and
laugh at country Gentlewomen, and command any thing in the house for my
reteiners, and care not what you spend, for it is all mine; and in any case, be
still a Maid what soever you do, or whatsoever any man can do unto you.


Secur. I warrant your Ladyship for that.


Gyr. Very well, you shall ride in my coach with me into the country to morrow
morning; Come Knight, pray thee lets make a short supper, and to bed presently.


Secur. Nay good Madam, this night I have a short Supper at home, waits on his
worships acceptance.


Gyr. By my faith but he shall not go Sir; I shall swoune and he sup from me.


Petr. Pray thee forbear; shall he lose his provision?


Gyr. I by Lady Sir, rather then I lose my longing; come in I say: as I am a
Lady you shall not go.


Quic. I told him what a Burre he had gotten.


Secur. If you will not sup from your Knight Madam, let me entreat your
Ladyship to sup at my house with him.


Gyr. No by my faith Sir, then we cannot be a bed soon enough, after supper.


Petr. What a Medcine is this? well Master Security, you are new married as
well as I; I hope you are bound as well: we must honor our young wives you
know.


Quic. In policy Dad, till to morrow she has sealed.


Secur. I hope in the morning yet your Knighthood will breake-fast with me.


Petr. As early as you will Sir.


Secur. Thank your good worship; I do hunger and thirst to do you good Sir.


Gyr. Come sweet Knight come, I do hunger and thyrst to be a bed with thee.
Exeunt.


Actus Tertii. Scaena Prima.
Enter Petronell, Quicksiluer, Security, Bramble, and Wynnifrid. Petr. Thanks
for our feastlike Breakefast good Master Security, I am sorry, (by reason of
my instant haste to so long a voyage as Virginia,) I am without means, by any
kind amends to show how affectionatly I take your kindness, and to confirm
by some worthy ceremony a perpetual league of friendship betwixt us.


Secur. Excellent Knight; let this be a token betwixt us of inviolable
friendship: I am new married to this fair Gentlewoman you know; and (by my
hope to make her fruitful though I be something in years) I vow faithfully
unto you, to make you Godfather (though in your absence) to the first child I
am blessed withal; and henceforth call me Gossip I beseech you, if you please to
accept it.


Petr. In the highest degree of gratitude, my most worthy Gossip; for
confirmation of which friendly title, let me entreat my fair Gossip your Wife
here, to accept this Diamond, and keep it as my gift to her first Child,
wheresoever my Fortune in event of my Voyage shall bestow me.


Secur. How now my coye wedlock! make you strange of so Noble a favor? take it
I charge you, with all affection, and (by way of taking your leave) present
boldly your lips to our honorable Gossip.


Quick. How ventrous he is to him, and how jealous to others!


Pet. Long may this kind touch of our lips Print in our hearts all the forms
of affection. And now my good Gossip, if the writings be ready to which my wife
should seal, let them be brought this morning, before she takes Coache into
the country, and my kindness shall work her to dispatche it.


Secur. The writings are ready Sir. My learned counsel here, Master Bramble,
the Lawyer has perusde them; and within this hour, I will bring the
Scriuenour with them to your worshipful Lady.


Petr. Good Master Bramble, I will here take my leave of you then; God send
you fortunate Pleas sir, and contentious Clients.


Bram. And you foreright winds Sir, and a fortunate voyage. Exit. Enter a
Messenger.


Mess. Sir Petronell, here are three or four Gentlemen desire to speak with
you.


Pet. What are they?


Qui. They are your followers in this voyage Knight, Captain Seagull and his
associates, I met them this morning, and told them you would be here.


Pet. Let them enter I pray you, I know they long to be gone, for their stay
is dangerous.


Enter Seagull, Scapethrift, and Spendall. Sea. God save my honorable
Collonell.


Pet. Welcome good Captain Seagull, and worthy Gentlemen, if you will meet my
friend Francke here, and me, at the blew Anchor Tavern by Billinsgate this
Evening, we will there drink to our happy voyage, be merry, and take Boat to
our Ship with all expedition.


Spoil. Defer it no longer I beseech you Sir, but as your voyage is hitherto
carried closely, and in another Knights name, so for your own safety and
ours, let it be continued, our meeting and speedy purpose of departing known
to as few as is possible, least your Ship and goods be attacht.


Qui. Well aduisd Captain our Collonell shall have money this morning to
dispatch all our departures, bring those Gentlemen at night to the place
appointed, and with our skins full of vintage, we will take occasion by the
vantage, and away.


Spoil. We will not fail but be there sir.


Pet. Good morrow good Captain, and my worthy associates. Health and all
Sovereignty to my beautiful gossip, for you sir, we shall see you presently
with the writings.


Secur. With writings and crowns to my honorable gossip: I do hunger and
thirst to do you good sir. Exeunt.


Actus tertii. Scena Secunda.
Enter a Coachman in have in's frock feeding. Coach. Here Is a stir when
Citizens ride out of Town indeed, as if all the house were a fire; Slight
they will not give a man leave, to eat's breakfast before he rises.


Enter Hamlet a footeman in haste. Ham. What Coachman? my Ladies Coach for
shame; her ladyships ready to come down;


Enter Potkinn, a Tankerd bearer. Pot. Sfoote Hamlet; are you mad? whether
run you now you should brushe up my old Mistress?


Enter Syndefye. Synd. What Potkinn? you must put off your Tankerd, and put on
your blew cote and wait upon Mistrisse Toochstone into the country. Exit.


Pot. I will forsooth presently. Exit.


Enter Mistress Fond, and Mistress Gazer. Fond. Come sweet Mistress Gazer,
lets watch here, and see my Lady Flashe take coach.


Gaz. A my word here is a most fine place to stand in, did you see the new Ship
lancht last day Mistress Fond.


Fond. O God, and we citizens should loose such a sight?


Gaz. I warrant, here will be double as many people to see her take coach, as
there were to see it take water.


Fond. O she is married to a most fine Castle 'ith' country they say?


Gaz. But there are no Giants in the Castle, are there?


Fond. O no, they say her Knight kild' hem all and therefore he was knighted.


Gaz. Would to God her Ladyship would come away.


Enter Gyr. Mistress Tooch. Synd. Ham. Por. Fond. She comes, she comes, she
comes.


Gaz. Fond. Pray heaven bless your Ladyship.


Gyr. Thank you good people; my coach for the love of Heaven, my coach? in
good truth I shall swoune else.


Ham. Coach? coach my Ladies coach. Exit.


Gir. As I am a Lady, I think I am with child already, I long for a coach so;
may one be with child before they are married Mother?


Mist. Touch. I by 'rladie Madam, a little thing does that; I have seen a
little prick no bigger then a pins head, swell bigger and bigger, til it has
come to an Ancome; and eene so it is in these cases.


Enter Ham. Ham. Your Coach is coming, Madam.


Gyr. That Is well said; Now heaven! me thinks, I am eene up to the knees in
preferment; But a little higher, but a little higher, but a little higher,
There, there, there lies Cupids fire.



Mist. Touch. But must this young man, an't please you Madam, run by your coach
all the way a foot?


Gyr. I by my faith I warrant him, he gives no other milk, as I have an other
servant does.


Mist. Touch. Ahlas! it is eene pity me thinks; for Gods sake Madam buy him but
a Hobbie horse, let the poor youth have something betwixt his legs to ease
'hem; Ahlas! we must do as we would be done too;


Gir. Go too, hold your peace dame, you talk like an old fool I tell you.


Enter Petr. and Quicksiluer. Pet. Will thou be gone, sweet Honny suckle,
before I can go with thee?


Gyr. I pray thee sweet Knight let me; I do so long to dress up thy castle
before thou come: But I marle how emy modest Sister occupies her self this
morning, that she can not wait on me to my Coach, as well as her mother!


Quick. Mary Madam, she is married by this time to Prentise Goulding; your
Father, and some one more, stole to Church with 'hem, in all the haste, that
the cold meat lest at your wedding, might serve to furnish their Nuptial table.


Gyr. There Is no base fellow, my Father, now: but he is eene fit to Father
such a Daughter: he must call me daughter no more now; but Madam; and please
you Madam: and please your worship Madam, indeed; out upon him, marry his
daughter to a base Prentise?


Mist. Touch. What should one do? is there no law for one that marries a
woman's daughter against her will? how shall we punish him Madam.


Gyr. As I am a Lady an't would snow, we would so peble 'hem with snow bals as
they come from Church; but sir, Franck Quicksiluer.


Quick. I Madam.


Gir. Do remember since thou and I clapped what d'ye' clats in the Garrat?


Quick. I know not what you mean Madam.


Gyr. His head as white as milk,
All flaxen was his hair:
But now he is dead,
And laid in his Bed,
And never will come again.
God be at your labor.


Enter Touch. Gould. Mild. with Rosemary. Pet. Was there ever such a Lady?


Quic. See Madam, the Bride and Bridegroom:


Gyr. Gods my precious! God give you joy Mistrisse What lack you. Now out upon
thee Baggage: my sister married in a Taffeta Hat? Mary hang you; Westward with
a wanio^ te'yee, Nay I have done we ye Minion the^y 'faith, never look to have
my countnance any more: nor any thing I can do for thee. Thou ride in my Coach?
or come down to my Castle? fie upon thee: I charge thee in my Ladyships name,
call me Sister no more.


Touch. An't please your worship, this is not your Sister: This is my daughter,
and she call me Father, and so does not your Ladyship an't please your worship
Madam.


Mist. Touch. No nor she must not call thee Father by Heraldrie, because thou
make thy Prentise thy Son as well as she; Ah thou misproude Prentise,
dare thou presume to marry a Ladies Sister?


Gou. It pleased my Master forsooth to embolden me with his favor: And though
I confess my self far unworthy so worthy a wife (being in part, her
servant, as I am your Prentise) yet (since I may say it without boasting) I am
borne a Gentleman, and by the Trade I have learned of my Master (which I trust
taints not my blood) able with mine own Industry and portion to maintain
your daughter, my hope is, heaven will so blesle our humble beginning, that in
the end I shall be no disgrace to the grace with which my Master has bound me
his double Prentise.


Touch. Master me no more Son if thou think me worthy to be thy father.


Gry. Sun? Now good Lord how he shines and you mark him! he is a gentleman.


Gone. I indeed Madam, a Gentleman borne.


Pet. Never stand a'your Gentrye M. Bridgegrome: if your legs be no better
then your Arms, you will be able to stand upon neither shortly.


Touch. An't please your good worship Sir, there are two sorts of Gentlemen.


Pet. What mean you Sir?


Touch. Bold to put off my hat to your worship.


Pet. Nay pray forbear Sir, and then forth with your two sorts of Gentlemen.


Touch. If your worship will have it so? I say there are two sorts of
Gentlemen. There is a Gentleman Artificial, and a gentleman Natural; Now,
though your worship be a Gentleman Natural: Work upon that now.


Quick. Well said old Touchstone, I am proud to hear thee enter a set speech
in faith, forth I beseech thee.


Touch. Cry you mercy Sir, your worship's a Gentleman, I do not know? if you
be one of my acquaintance you are very much disguisde Sir.


Quick. Go too old Quipper: forth with thy speech I say.


Touch. What Sir, my speeches were ever in vain to your gracious worship: And
therefore till I speak to you gallantry in deed, I will save my breath for my
broth anon. Come my poor son and daughter; Let us hide our selves in our
poor humility and live safe: Ambition consumes it self, with the very show.
Work upon that now.


Gyr. Let him go, let him go for Gods sake: let him make his Prentise, his
son for Gods sake: give away his daughter for Gods sake: and when they come a
begging to us for Gods sake, let us laugh at their good husbandry for Gods sake.
Farewell sweet Knight, pray thee make haste after.


Pet. What shall I say? I would not have thee go,


Quick. Now, O now, I must depart;
Parting though it absence move,
This Dittie knight, do I see in thy looks in Capital Letters.
What a grieftis to depart, and leave the slower that has my heart?
My sweet Lady, and alack for we, why should we part so?
Tell truth Knight, and shame all dissembling Lovers; does not your pain lie
on that side?


Pet. If it do, can thou tell me how I may cure it?


Quick. Excellent easily; divide your self in two halfes, just by the
girdlestead; send one half with your Lady, and keep the cother your self: or
else do as all true Lovers do, part with your heart and leave your body
behind: I have seen't done a hundred times: It Is as easy a matter for a Lover
to part without a heart from his sweet heart, and he nere the worse: as for a
Mouse to get from a Trappe and leave her tail behind him. See here comes the
Writings.


Enter Security with a Scriuener. Secu. Good morrow to my worshipful Lady. I
present your Ladishippe with this writing; to which if you please to set your
hand, with your Knights, a velvet Gown shall attend your journey a'my credit.


Gir. What Writing is it Knight?


Petrenell. The sale (sweet heart) of the poor Tenement I told thee off,
only to make a little money to send thee down furniture for my Castle, to
which my hand shall lead thee.


Gyr. Very well: Now give me your Pen I pray.


Qui. It goes down without chewing in faith.


Scriue. Your worships deliver this as your deed?


Ambo. We do.


Gyr. So now Knight farewell till I see thee.


Pet. All farewell to my sweet heart.


Mistress Touch. God-boye, son Knight.


Pet. Farewell my good Mother.


Gyr. Farewell Francke, I would feign take thee down if I could.


Quickesiluer. I thank your good Ladyship; Farewell Mistrie Syndifie. Exeunt.


Pet. O tedious Voyage, where of there is no end! What will they think of me?


Quick. Think what they list; They longed for a vagarie into the Country, and
now they are fitted: So a woman marry to ride in a Coach, she cares not if she
ride to her Ruin; It Is the great end of many of their marriages: This is not
first time a Lady has rid a false journey in her Coach I hope.


Pet. Nay, it is no Matter, I care little what they think; he that ways men's
thoughts, has his hands full of nothing: A man in the course of this world
should be like a Surgeons instrument, work in the wounds of others, and
feel nothing himself. The sharper, and subtler, the better.


Quickesiluer. As it falls out now Knight, you shall not need to devise
excuses, or endure her out cries, when she returns; we shall now be gone
before, where they can not reachevs.


Petronell. Well my kind Compere, you have now The Assurance we both can make
you; let me now entreat you, the money we agreed on may be brought to the
Blewe Ancor, nere to Billings-gate, by Six a Clock: where I and my chief
friends, bound for this voyage, will with Feasts attend you.


Secu. The money my most honorable Compere, shall without fail observe your
appointed hour.


Pet. Thanks my dear Gossip. I must now impart
To your approved love, a loving secret:
As one on whom my life does more rely
In friendly trust, then any man alive.
Nor shall you be the chosen Secretary
Of my affections, for affection only;
For I protest, (if God bless my return,)
To make you Partner, in my actions gain
As deeply, as if you had ventured with me
Half my expenses. Know then, honest Gossip,
I have inioyed with such divine contentment,
A Gentle woman's Bed, whom you well know,
That I shall nere enjoy this tedious Voyage,
Nor live the lest part of the time it asks,
Without her presence; So I thirst and hunger
To taste the dear feast of her company.
And if the hunger and the thirst you vow
(As my sworn Gossip) to my wished good
Be (as I know it is) vnfainde and firm,
Do me an easy favor in your Power.

Secur. Be sure brave Gossip, all that I can do
To my best Nerve, is wholly at your service:
Who is the woman (first) that is your friend?

Pet. The woman is your learned Counsels wife,
The Lawyer Master Bramble: whom would you,
Bring out this Even, in honest Neighborhood
To take his leave with you, of me your Gossip.
I, in the mean time, will send this my friend
Home to his house, to bring his wife disguised
Before his face, into our company:
For Love has made her look for such a wile,
To free her from his tyranous Ielosie.
And I would take this course before another:
In stealing her away to make us sport,
And gull his circumspection the more grosely.
And I am sure that no man like your self,
Has credit with him to entice his Ielosie,
To so long stay abroad, as may give time
To her enlardgment, in such safe disguise.

Secu. A pretty, pithie, and most pleasant project!
Who would not strain a point of Neigh-bourhood,
For such a point, de-vice? that as the ship
Of famous Draco, went about the world,
Will wind about the Lawyer, compassing,
The world him self, he has it in his arms:
And that is enough, for him, without his wife.
A Lawyer is Ambitious, and his head,
Can not be prais'de, nor rais'de too high,
With any Forcke, of highest knauerye.
I Will go fetch her straight. Exit Security.

Per. So, so, Now Frank go thou home to his house,
Stead of his Lawyers, and bring his wife hither:
Who just like to the Lawyers wife, is imprisoned,
With his stern vsurous Ielosie; which could never
Be over reacht-thus, but with ouer-reaching. Enter Security.

Secu. And M. Francis, watch you the instant time
To Enter with his Exit: t'wilbe rare,
Two fine horned Beasts A Cammell and a Lawyer!

Quickesiluer. How the old villain joys in villainy?
Enter Secur. And hark you Gossip, when you have her here,
Have your Bote ready, ship her to your Ship
With utmost haste, lest Master Bramble stay you,
To over reach that head that outreacheth all heads?
It Is a trick Rampant; It Is a very Quiblyn;
I hope this harvest, to pitch cart with Lawyers;
Their heads will be so forked; This sly tooche
Will get Apes to invent a number such. Exit.

Quick. Was ever Rascal, honied so with poison? He that delights in slavish
Avarice.
Is apt to joy in every sort of vice.


Well, i will go fetch his wife, whilst he the Lawyers.


Pet. But stay Franck, lets think how we may disguise her upon this sudden.


Quick. Gods me there is the mischief; but hark you, here is an excellent
device; fore God a Rare one: I will carry her a Sailors gown and cap and cover
her; and a players beard;


Pet. And what upon her head?


Quick. I tell you a Sailers Cap: slight God forgive me, what kind of
sigentmemorie have you?


Pet. Nay then, what kind of figent wit have thou?
A Sailors cap? how shall she put it off
When thou presentst her to our company?

Quick. Tush man, for that, make her a saucy sayler.


Pet. Tush tush it is no fit sauce for such sweet mutton; I know not what
t'aduise.


Enter Secur* with his wives gown. Secur. Knight, knight a rare devise.


Pet. Sownes yet again.


Quick. What stratagem have you now?


Secur. The best that ever. You talked of disguising?


Pet. Imary Gossip that's our present care.


Secur. Cast care a way then, here is the best device
For plain Security (for I am no better)
I think that ever lived: here is my wives gown
Which you may put upon the Lawyers wife,
And which I brought you sir for two great reasons;
One is, that Master Bramble may take hold
Of some suspicion that it is my wife,
And gird me so perhaps with his law wit,
The other (which is policy indeed)
Is, that my wife may now be tied at home,
Having no more but her old gown abroad,
And not show me a quirck, while I fyrke others.
Is not this rare?

Ambo. The best that ever shas.


Secur. Am I not borne to furnish Gentlemen?


Pet. O my dear Gossip!


Secur. Well hold Master Francis, watch when the Lawyer's out, and put it in;
and now -- I will go fetch him. Exit.


Quick. O my Dad! he goes as twere the Devil to fetch the Lawyer; and devil
shall he be if horns will make him.


Pet. why how now Gossip, why stay you there musing?


Secur. A toye, a toy runns in my head in faith.


Quick. A pox of that head, is there more toys yet?


Pet. What is it pray thee Gossip?


Secur. Why Sir? what if you should slip away now with my wives best gown. I
having no security for it?


Quick. For that I hope Dad you will take our words.


Secu. I by th'masse your word that's a proper staff
For wise Security to lean upon;
But it is no matter, once i will trust my Name,
On your cracked credits, let it take no shame,
Fetch the wench Franck. Exit.

Quick. I Will wait upon you sir.
And fetch you over, you were nere so fetched:
Go, to the Tavern Knight, your followers
Dare not be drunk I think, before their Captain. Exit.

Pet. Would I might lead them to no hotter seruise,
Till our Virginian gould were in our purses Exit.

Enter Seagull Spendall and Scapthrift in the Tavern with a Drawer. Sca. Come
Drawer, pierce your neatest Hogsheades, and lets have cheer, not fit for your
Billingsgate Tavern; but for our Virginian Colonel; he will be here instantly.


Draw. You shall have all things fit sir; please you have any more Wine.


Spend, More wine Slave? whether we drink it or no, spill it, and draw more.


Scap. Fill all the pottes in your house with all sorts of licour, and let 'hem
wait on us here like Soldiers in their Pewter, coats; And though we do not
employe them now, yet we will maintain 'hem, till we do.


Draw. Said like an honorable Captain; you shall have all you can command
Sir. Exit Drawer.


Sea. Come boys, Virginia longs till we share the rest of her Maidenhead,


Spend. Why is she inhabited already with any English?


Sea. A whole Country of English is there man, bred of those that were left
there in 79. They have married with the Indians, and make 'hem bring forth as
beautiful faces as any we have in England: and therefore the Indians are so in
love with 'hem, that all the treasure they have, they lay at their feet.


Scap. But is there such treasure there Captain, as I have heard?


Sea. I tell thee, Gold is more plentiful there then Copper is with us: and
for as much read Copper as I can bring, I Will have thrice the weight in Gold.
Why man all their dripping Pans and their Chamber pottes are pure Gold; and all
the Chains, with which they chain up their streets, are massy Gold; all
the Prisoners they take, are fetterd in Gold: and for Rubies and Diamonds, they
go forth on holidays and gather 'hem by the Seashore, to hang on their
childrens Coats, and stick in their Capps, as commonly as our children wear
Saffron guilt Brooches, and groates with hoales in 'hem.


Scap. And is it a pleasant Country withal?


Sea. As ever the Sun shinde on: temperate and full of all sorts of excellent
viands; wild Boar is as common there, as our tamest Bacon is here: Venison,
as Mutton. And then you shall live freely there, without Sargeants, or
Courtiers, or Lawyers, or Intelligencers. Then for your means to advancement,
there, it is simple, and not preposterously mixed: You may be an Alderman there,
and never be Scauinger; you may be any other officer, and never be a Slave. You
may come to preferment enough, and never be a


Pandar. To Riches, and Forune enough and have never the more Villainy, nor the
less wit. Besides, there, we shall have no more Law then Conscience, and not
too much of either; serve God enough, eat and drink enough, and enough is as
good as a Feast.


Spend. Gods me! and how far is it thither?


Sea. Some six weeks sail, no more, with any indifferent good wind: And If I
get to any part of the coaste of Africa, I Will sail thither with any wind. Or
when I come to Cape Finister, there is a foreright wind continual wastes us till
we come at Virginia. See, our Collonell's come.


Enter Sir Petronell with his Followers. Petr. Well met good Captain
Seagull, and my Noble Gentlemen! Now the sweet hour of our freedom is at
hand.

Come Drawer. Fill us some carowses; and prepare us for the mirth, that will be
occasioned presently: Here will be a pretty wenche Gentlemen, that will bear us
company all our voyage.


Sea. Whatsoever she be; here is to her health Noble Colonel, both with Cap and
Knee.


Petr. Thanks kind Captain Seagull. She Is one I love dearly; and must not
be known till we be free from all that know us: And so Gentlemen, here is to
her health.


Ambo. Let it come worthy Collonell, We do hunger and thirst for it,


Petr. Before heaven, you have hitte the phrase of one that her presence will
touch, from the foot to the forehead, if ye knew it.


Spend. Why then we will join his forehead, with her health, sir: and Captain
Scapethrift, here is to 'hem both,


Enter Security and Bramble. Secu. See, see, Master Bramble; fore heaven
their voyage cannot but prosper, they are o'their knees for success to it.


Bram. And they pray to God Bacchus.


Secu. God save my brave Colonel with all his tall Captains and Corporalls;
see sir, my worshipful learned Counsel, M. Bramble, is come to take his
leave of you.


Pet. Worshipful M. Bramble, how far do you draw us into the sweet bryer
of your kindness? come Captain Seagull, another health to this rare Bramble,
that has never a prick about him.


Sea. I pledge his most smooth disposition sir: come master Security, bend
your supporters, and pleadge this notorious health here.


Secu. Bend you yours likewise, M. Bramble, for it is you shall pleadge me.


Sea. Not so, M. Security, he must not pleadge his own health.


Secu. No Master Captain? Enter Quickesiluer with Winny disguised.

Why then here is one is fitly come to do him that honor.


Quick. Here Is the Gentlewoman your cousin sir, whom with much entreatie I have
brought to take her leave of you in a Tavern; ashamed whereof, you must pardon
her if she put not off her Mask.


Pet. Pardon me sweet Cosen, my kind desire to see you before I went, made
me so importunate to entreat your presence here.


Secu. How now M. Frances? have you honored this presence with a fair
Gentlewoman?


Quick. Pray sir, take you no notice of her, for she will not be known to you.


Secu. But my learned Counsel, M. Bramble here, I hope may know her.


Quick. No more then you sir, at this time, his learning must pardon her.


Secu. Well, God pardon her for my part, and I do I Will be sworn; and so
Master Francis, here is to all that are going Eastward to night, toward
Cuckolds haven; and so to the health of Master Bramble.


Quick. I pledge it Sir, has it gone round, Captains?


Sea. It has sweet Franck, and the round closes with thee.


Quic. Well Sir, here is to al Eastward and toward Cuckolds, and so to famous
Cuckolds haven so fatally remembered. Surgit.


Pet. Nay pray thee Cuz weep not; Gossip Security?


Secu. I my brave Gossip.


Pet. A word I beseech you Sir; our friend, Mistress Bramble here, is so
dissolved in tears, that she drownes the whole mirth of our meeting: sweet
Gossip, take her aside and comfort her.


Secu. Pity of all true love, Mistress Bramble, what weep you to enjoy your
love? what is the cause Lady? is it because your husband is so near, and your
heart earnes, to have a little abused him? Ahlas, Ahlas, the offense is too
common to be respected; So great a grace, has seldom chanced to so
unthankful a woman; to be rid of an old ielous Dotard; to enjoy the arms, of
a loving young Knight; that when your prick-lesse Bramble is withered with
grief of your loss, will make you floorish a fresh in the Bed of a Lady.


Enter Drawer. Draw. Sir Petronell, here is one of your water men come to tell
you, it will be flood these three hours; and that it will be dangerous going
against the Tide: for the sky is over cast, and there was a Porcpisce, even
now seen at London bridge, which is always the messenger of tempests, he
says.


Pet. A Porcpisce? what is that to th'purpose? charge him if he love his life to
attend us: can we not reach Black wall (where my ship lies) against the tide,
and in spite of Tempests? Captains and Gentlemen, we will begin a new ceremony
at the beginning of our voyage, which I believe will be followd of all future
adventurers.


Sea. What Is that good Colonel?


Pet. This, Captain Seaguli; we will have our provided Supper brought a board
Sir Francis Drakes Ship, that has compast the world: where with full Cupps,
and Banquets we will do sacrifice for a prosperous voyage. My mind gives me
that some good Spirits of the waters should haunt the desert ribs of her; and
be auspicious to all that honor her memory, and will with like Orgies, enter
their voyages.


Sea. Rarely conceipted; one health more to this motion, and aboard to perform
it. He that will not this night be drunk, may he never be Sober. They compass
in Wynnifrid, dance the dronken round, and drink carowses.


Bram. Sir Petronell and his honorable Captains in these young services, we
old Seruitors may be spard: We only came to take our leaves, and with one
health to you all, I Will be bold to do so. Here neighbor Security, to the
health of Sir Petronell, and all his Captains.


Secu. You must bend then Master Bramble; So, now I am for you: I have one
corner of my brain, I hope, fit to bear one carouse more. Here Lady, to you
that are encompast there, and are ashamed of our company. Ha, ha, ha, by my
troth, (my learned counsel Master Bramble) my mind runs so of Cuckolds
haven to night, that my Head runs over with admiration.


Bram. But is not that your wife, Neighbor?


Secu. No by my troth Master Bramble; ha, ha, ha, a Pox of all Cuckolds-hauens
I say.


Bram. A'my faith, her garments are exceeding like your wives.


Secu. Cucullus non facit Monachum, my learned Counsel; all are not Cuckolds
that seem so, nor all seem not that are so. Give me your hand, my learned
Counsel, you and I will Supp some where else, then at Sir Frances Drakes
Shipp to night. Adue my Noble Gossip.


Bram. Good Fortune brave Captains; fair skies God send ye.


Omnes. Farewell my hearts, farewell.


Pet. Gossip, laugh no more at Cuckolds-hauen Gossip.


Secu. I have done, I have done Sir, will you lead Master Bramble? ha, ha, ha.


Pet. Captain Seagull, charge a boat.


Omnes. A Boat, a boat, a boat. Exeunt.


Draw. You Are in a proper taking indeed to take a Boat, espepecially at this
time of night, and against Tide and Tempest; They say yet, drunken men never
take harm; this night will try the truth of that Proverb. Exit.


Enter Security. Secu. What Winnie? Wife, I say? out of doors at this time*
where should I seek the Gad-flye? Billingsgate, Billingsgate,


Billingsgate. She Is gone with the Knight, she is gone with the Knight; woe be
to thee Billingsgate. A boat, a boat, a boat, a full hunderd Marks for a
boat. Exit.


Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.
Enter Slitgut, with a pair of Ox horns, discovering Cuckolds-Hauen above.
Slit. All hail, fair Haven of married men only, for there are none but
married men Cuckolds. For my part, I presume not to arrive here, but in my
Masters behalf, (a poor Butcher of East-cheape) who sends me to set up (in
honor of Saint Luke) these necessary Ensigns of his homage: And up I got
this morning, thus early, to get up to the top of this famous Tree, that is
all fruit and no leaves, to advance this Crest of my Masters occupation. Up
then, Heaven and Saint Luke bless me, that I be not blown into the Thames as
I clime, with this furious Tempest; Slight, I think the Devil be abroad, in
likeness of a storm, to rob me of my Horns: Hark how he roares. Lord! what
a coil the Thames keeps! she bears some unjust burden I believe, that she
kicks and curuets thus to cast it: Heaven bless all honest passengers, that
are upon her back now, for the Bitte is out of her mouth I see, and she will
run away with 'hem. So, so, I think I have made it look the right way, it
runs against London Bridge (as it were) even full butt. And now, let me
discover from this lofty prospect, what pranckes the rude Thames plays in her
desperate lunacie. O me, here is a Boat has been cast away hard by. Alas,
alas, See one of her passengers, laboring for his life, to land at this Haven
here; pray heaven he may recover it: His next land is eue^ just under me; hold
out yet a little: whatsoever thou art, pray, and take a good heart to thee. It Is
a man, take a man's heart to thee; yet a little further, get up a thy legs
man: now, it is snallowe enough. So, so, so! Alas, he is down again; hold thy
wind Father: it is a man in a Night-cappe. So! now he is got up again: now
he is past the worst: yet thanks be to heaven; he comes toward me pretty and
strongly.


Enter Security without his hat, in an Nightcap, wett, band, etc. Secu.
Heaven, I beseech thee, how have I offended thee! where am I cast a shore now,
that I may go a righter way home by land? Let me see. O I am scarce able to
look about me! where is there any Sea-marke that I am acquainted withal?


Slit. Look up Father, are you acquainted with this Mark?


Secu. What! landed at Cuckolds haven? Hell and damnation. I will run back
and drown my self. {He falls down.


Slit. Poor man how weak he is! the weak water has washed away his strength.


See. Landed at Cuckolds haven? if it had not bin to die twenty times a live,
I should never have escaped death: I will never arise more: I will grouell here,
and eat dirt till I be choked: I will make the gentle earth do that, which
the cruel water has denied me.


Slit. Alas good father, be not so desperate; Rise man: if you will, I Will come
presently and lead you home.


Secu. Home? shall I make any know my Home, that has known me thus abroad? how
Iowe shall I crouch away, that no eye may see me? I will creep on the earth
while I live, and never look heaven in the face more. {Exit creep.


Slit. What young Planet reigns now troe, that old men are so foolish? What
desperate young Swaggerer would have bin abroad such a wether as this, upon the
water? Ay me, see a another remnant of this unfortunate shipwreck! or some
other. A woman! in faith, a woman, though it be almost at S. Kath'rins, I
discern it to be a woman for all her body is above the water, and her clothes
swim about her most handsomely. O they bear her up most bravely! has not a
woman reason to love the taking up of her clothes the better while she lives,
for this? Alas, how busy the rude Thames is about her? A pox a'that wave. It
will drown her, in faith, twill drown her. Cry God mercy, she has escaped it! I
thank heaven she has escaped it. O, how she swimmes like a Mermaide! some
vigilant body look out, and save her. That Is well said, just where the Priest
fell in, there is one sets down a Ladder, and goes to take her up: Gods
blessing a thy heart boy, now take her up in thy arms and to bed with her.
She Is up, she is up! She Is a beautiful woman I warrant her, the Billows
durst not devour her.


Enter the Drawer in the Tavern before with Wynnyfrid. Draw. How fare you now
Lady?


Wynn. Much better, my good friend then I wish: as one desperate of her Fame,
now my Life is preserved.


Draw. Comfort your self; That power that preserved you from death: can
likewise defend you from infamy, howsoever you deserve it. Were not you one
that took Bote, late this night, with a Knight, and other Gentlemen at
Billings-gate?


Wynn. Unhappy that I am, I was.


Draw. I am glad it was my good hap to come down thus far after you, to a
house of my friends here in S. Kath'rines, since I am now happily made a mean
to your rescue, from the ruthlesse tempest; which (when you took Bote) was so
extreme, and the Gentleman that brought you forth, so desperate and vnsober,
that I feared long ere this I should hear of your ship-wracke, and therefore
(with little other reason) made thus far this way: And this I must tell you,
since perhaps you may make use of it, there was left behind you at our
Tavern, brought by a Porter (hyr'd by the young Gentleman that brought you) a
Gentle woman's Gown, Hat, Stockings, and Shoes; which if they be yours, and
you please to shift you, taking a hard bed here, in this house of my friend, I
will presently go fetch you.


Wynn. Thanks my good friend, for your more then good news. The Gown with all
things bound with it are mine; which if you please to fetch as you have
promised, I will bouldly receive the kind favor you have offered, till your
return: entreating you, by all the good you have done in preserving me
hitherto, to let none take knowledge of what favor you do me, or where such a
one as I am bestowed, lest you incur me much more damage in my fame, then
you have done me pleasure in preserving my life.


Draw. Come in Lady, and shift your self; resolve, that nothing, but your own
pleasure, shall be used in your discovery.


Wynn. Thank you good friend: the time may come, I shall requite you. Exeunt.


Slit. See, see, see! I hold my life, there is some other a taking up at
Wapping, now! Look, what a sort of people cluster about the Gallows there! in
good troth it is so. O me! a fine young Gentleman! What? and taken up at the
Gallows? Heaven grant he be not one day taken down there: A, my life it is
ominous. Well, he is delivered for the time, I see the people have all left
him; yet will I keep my prospect a while, to see if any more have bin
shipwrackt. Enter Quick, bareheade.


Quick. Accur'st, that ever I was saved, or borne.
How fatal is my sad ariuall here?
As if the Stars, and Providence spoke to me,
And said, the drift of all unlawful courses,
(What ever end they dare propose themselves,
In frame of their licentious policyes.)
In the firm order of just Destiny,
They are the ready high ways to our Ruins.
I know not what to do, my wicked hopes
Are, with this Tempest, torn up by the roots.
O, which way shall I bend my desperate steps,
In which insufferable Shame and Misery
Will not attend them? I will walk this Banck,
And see if I can meet the other relics
Of our poor ship-wrackt Crew, or hear of them.
The Knight (alas) was so far gone with wine,
And the other three, that I refus de their Boat,
And took the hapless Woman in another,
Who cannot but be suncke, what ever Fortune
Has wrought upon the others desperate lives.

Enter Petronel, and Seagul, bareheaded. Pet. Zounds Captain, I tell thee, we
are cast up of the Coast of France, Sfoote, I am not drunk still, (I hope?)
Do remember where we were last Night?


Sea. No by my troth Knight, not I. but me thinks we have bin a horrible
while upon the water, and in the water.


Pet. Aye me we are undone for ever: have any money about thee?


Sea. Not a penny by heaven.


Pet. Not a penny betwixt us, and cast a shore in France?


Sea. Faith I cannot tell that; my brains, nor mine eyes are not mine own,
yet.


Enter 2. Gentlemen Pet. Sfoote wilt not believe me? I know it by th'eleuation
of the Pole; and by the altitude and latitude of the Climate. See! hers comes a
coople of French Gentlemen* I knew we were in France: do thou think our
Englishmen are so Frenchyfied, that a man knows not whether he be in France,
or in England, when he sees 'hem? What shall we do? we must cene to 'hem, and
entreat some relief of hem: Life is sweet, and we have no other means to
relieve our lives now, but their Charities;


Sea. Pray you, do you beg on 'hem the^, you can speak French.


Pet. Monsieur, plaist il d'auoir pity de nostre grand infortunes? Iesuis un
pour Cheualier D'Angloterre qui a souffris infortune de Naufrage.


1. Gent. Un pour Cheualier D'Angliterre?


Pet. Oui Monsieur, il est trop vraye; mais vousscaues bien nous somes toutes
subject a fortune.


2. Gent. A poor Knight of England? a poor Knight of Windsore, are you not?
Why speak you this broken French, when you are a whole English man? on what
coaste are you, think you?


Pet. on the coast of France, sir.


1. Genesis On the cost of Dogs Sir: You Are in the I Will a Dogs I tell you. I see
you have been washed in the Thames here, and I believe ye were drowned in a Tavern
before, or else you would never have took boat in such a dawning as this was.
Farewell, farewell, we will not know you for shaming of you. I ken the man weel,
he is one of my thirty pound Knights.


2. Genesis No no, this is he that stole his knighthood of the grand day, for four
pound giving to a Page, all the money in's purse I wot well. Exeunt.


Sea. Death, Collonell, I knew you were over shot.


Pet. Sure I think now indeed, Captain Seagull, we were something ouershot.
Enter Quicksiluer.

What* my sweet Franck Quicksiluer! do thou surviue to rejoice me? But what*
no body at thy heels, Franck? Ay me, what is become of poor Mistress
Security.


Quick. Faith gone quite from her Name, as she is from her Fame I think; I
left her to the mercy of the water.


Sea. Let her go, let her go: let us go to our ship at Blackwall and shift us.


Pet. Nay by my troth, let our clothes rotte upon us. and let us rotte in them:
twenty to one our Ship is attacht by this time? if we set her not under Sail
this last Tide, I never looked for any other. Woe, woe is me, what shall become
of us? the last money we could make, the greedy Thams has deuourde; and if our
Ship be attach't, there is no hope can relieve us.


Quic. Sfoote Knight, what an vn-knightly faintness transports thee? let our
Ship sinck, and all the world that's without us be taken from us, I hope I have
some tricks, in this brain of mine, shall not let us perish.


Sea. Well said Francke faith. O my nimble-spirited Quicksilver, Foregod,
would thou had been our Colonel.


Petr. I like his spirit rarely, but I see no means he has to support that
spirit.


Quic. Go to Knight, I have more means then thou art aware off: I have not
lived amongst Gould-smiths and Gouldmakers all this while, but I have learned
something worthy of my time with 'hem. And, not to let thee stinck where thou
standst, Knight, I Will let thee know some of my skill presently.


Sea. Do good Francke I beseech thee.


Quic. I will blanch Copper so cunningly, that it shall endure all proofs,
but the Test: it shall endure malleation, it shall* have the ponderositie of
Luna, and the tenacitie of Luna, by no means friable.


Petr. Slight, where learn'st thou these terms, tro?


Quic. Tush Knight, the terms of this Art, every ignorant Quack-saluer is
perfect in: but I Will tell you how your self shall blanch Copper thus cunningly.
Take Arsnicke, otherwise called Realga, (which indeed is plain Ratsbane)
Sublime 'hem three or four times, then take the Sublimate of this Realga, and
put'hem into a Glass, into Chymia, and let'hem have a convenient decoction
Natural, four and twenty hours, and he will become perfectly fixed: Then
take this fixed powder, and project him upon wel-purgd Copper, et habebis
Magistriu^.


Ambo. Excellent Francke, let us hug thee.


Quick. Nay this I will do besides; I Will take you off twelve pence from every
Angel, with a kind of Aquafortis, and never deface any part of the Image.


Pet. But then it will want weight?


Quic. You shall restore that thus: Take your sal Achyme prepared, and your
distild Urine; and let your Angels lie in it but four and twenty hours, and
they shall have their perfect weight again: come on now I hope this is enough
to put some spirit into the livers of you, I Will infuse more an other time. We
have saluted the proud Air long enough with our bare skonces, now will I have
you to a wenches house of mine at London, there make shift to shift us, and
after such fortunes as the stars shall assign us.


Ambo. Notable Franck! we will ever adore thee. Exeunt.


Enter Drawer with Wynifrid, new attird. Wyn. Now sweet friend you have
brought me nere enough your Tavern, which I desired that I might with some
color be seen near, enquiring for my husband; who I must tell you stale
thither last with my wet gown we have left at your friends: which, to continue
your former honest kindness, let me pray you to keep close from the knowledge
of any; and so, with all vow of your requital, let me now entreat you to
leave me to my woman's wit, and fortune.


Draw. All shall be done you desire; and so, all the fortune you can wish for,
attend you. Exit Draw.


Enter Security. Secu. I will once more to this unhappy Tavern before I shift
one ragge of me more, that I may there know what is left behind, and what news
of their passengers. I have bought me a Hat and band with the little money I
had about me, and made the streets a little leave staring at my nightcap.


Win. O my dear husband! where have you bin to night? al night abroad at
Tauernes? rob me of my garments? and fare as one run away from me? Ahlas! is
this seemly for a man of your credit? of your age? and affection to your wife?


Secu. What should I say? how miraculously sorts this? was not I at home, and
called thee last night?


Win. Yes Sir, the harmless sleep you broke, and my answer to you would have
witnest it, if you had had the patience to have staid and answered me; but your
so sudden retreat, made me imagine you were gone to Master Brambles, and so
rested patient, and hopeful of your coming again, till this your unbeleeued
absence brought me abroad with no less then wonder, to seek you, where the
false Knight had carried you.


Secu. Villain, and Monster that I was, how have I abused thee, I was
suddenly gone indeed! for my sudden jealousy transferred me. I will say no
more but this dear wife I suspected thee.


Win. Did you suspect me?


Secu. Talk not of it I beseech thee, I am ashamed to imagine it; I will home,
I will home, and every morning on my knees ask thee heartily forgiveness.
Exeunt. Now will I descend my honorable Prospect; the farthiest seeing Sea
mark of the World: Noe marvel then if I could see two miles about me. I hope
the red Tempests anger be now over blown, which sure I think Heaven sent
as a punishment, for profaning holy Saint Lukes memory, with so ridiculous a
custom. Thou dishonest Satyr, farewell to honest married Men; Farewell, to all
sorts, and degrees of thee. Farewell thou horn of hunger that calst th'Inns a
court to their Manger; Farewell thou horn of abounda^ce, that adornest the
headsmen of the Commonwealth; Farewell thou home of Direction, that is the
City Lantern; Farewell thou Horn of Pleasure, the Ensign of the huntsman;
Farewell thou Horn of Destiny, thensigne of the married man; Farewell thou
Horn Tree that bear nothing but Stone fruit Exit.


Enter Touchstone. Touch. Ha Sirah! Thinks my Knight Aduenturer we can no
point of our compass? Do we not know North-north-east? North-east and by
East? East and by North! nor plain Eastward? Ha? have we never heard of
Virginia? nor the Cauallaria? not the Colonoria? Can we discover no
discoueries? well, mine errant Sir Flash, and my runnagate Quicksiluer, you may
drink drunk, crack cannes, hurl away a brown dozen of Monmouth Capps or so,
in sea-ceremonie to your boon voyage but for reaching any Coast save the coast
of Kent; or Essex, with this Tide, or with this fleet, I Will be your warrant for
a Grauesend Tossed: There Is that gone asore, will stay your Admiral and
Vice Admiral, and Rere-admirall, were they al (as they are) but one Pinnace,
and under sail, as well as a Remora, doubt it not; and from this Sconce,
without either powder or shot, work upon that now. Nay, and you will show
tricks, we will vie with you, a little. My Daughter, his Lady, was sent
Eastward, by land, to a Castle of his, in the air (in what region I know not)
and (as I hear) was glad to take up her lodging in her Coach, she and her two
waiting women, her maid, and her mother, like three Snailes in a shall, and
the Coachman a top on 'hem, I think. Since they have all found the way back
again by weeping Cross. But i will not see them. And for two on 'hem, Madam, and
her Malkm, they are like to bite o the bridle for William, as the poor horses
have done all this while that hurried 'hem, or else go graze of the common: So
should my Dame Touchstone too, but she has been my Cross these thirty years,
and i will now keep her, to fright away sprights; In Faith. I wonder I hear no
news of my son Goulding! He was sent for to the Guild Hall, this Morning
betimes, and I marvel at the matter, if I had not laid up Comfort, and hope
in him, I should grow desperate of al. See, He is come I'my thought! How now
Son? what news at the Court of Aldermen?


Enter Goulding. Gould. Troth Sir, an Accident somewhat strange, else it has
little in it worth the reporting.


Touch. What? It is not borrowing of money then?


Gold. No sir it has pleased the worshipful Commoners of the city, to take me
one i'their number at presentation of the inquest


Touch. Ha!


Gould. And the Alderman of the ward wherein Idwel, to appoint me his Deputy
--


Touch. How!


Gold. In which place, I have had an oath ministered me, since I went.


Touch. Now my dear, and happy Sonnellet we kiss thy new worship, and a little
boast mine own happiness in thee: What a fortune was it (or rather my judgment
indeed) for me, first to see that in his disposition, which a whole City so
conspires to second? Taken into the Liuory of his copany, the first day of his
freedo^e? now (not a week married) chosen Commoner? and Aldermans Deputy in a
day? note but the reward of a thrifty course. The wonder of his Time! Well, I
will honor M. Alderman, for this act, (as becomes me) and shall think the
better of the common Councels wisdo^e, and worship, while I live, for thus
meeting, or but coming after me in the opinion of his desert. Forward, my
sufficient Son, and as this is the first, so esteem it the least step, to
that high and prime honor that expects thee.


Goul. Sir, as I was not ambitious of this, so I covet no higher place; it has
dignity enough, if it will but save me from contempt: and I had rather my
bearing, in this, or any other office, should add worth to it; then the Place
give the least opinion to me.


Touch. Excellently spoken: This modest Answer of thine blushes, as if it said,
I will wear Scarlet shortly. Worshipful Son! I cannot contain my self, I
must tell thee, I hope to see thee one of the Monuments of our City, and
reckoned among her worthies, to be remembered the same day with the Lady Ramsey,
and grave Gresham: when the famous fable of Whittington, and his Pusse, shallbe
forgotten, and thou and thy Acts become the Posies for Hospitals, when thy
name shall be written upon Conduits, and thy deeds played i'thy life time, by
the best companies of Actors, and be called their Get-peny. This I divine. This
I Prophecy.


Gold. Sir, engage not your expectation farther, then my abilities will answer:
I that know mine own strengths, fear 'hem; and there is so seldom a loss in
promising the least, that commonly it brings with it a welcome deceit. I have
other news for you Sir.


Touch. None more welcome, I am sure?


Gould. They have their degree of welcome, I dare affirm. The Colonel, and
all his company, this morning putting forth drunk from Belinsgate, had like to
have been cast away of this side Greenwich: and (as I have intelligence, by a
false Brother,) are come dropping to town, like so many Masterlesse men,
i'their doublets and hose, without Hatte, or Cloak, or any other --


Touch. A miracle! the Justice of Heaven! where are they? lets go presently
and lay for 'hem.


Goul. I have done that already Sir, both by Constables, and other officers,
who shall take 'hem at their old Anchor; and with less tumult, or suspicion,
then if your self were seen in it: under color of a great Press, that is
now abroad, and they shall here be brought before me.


Touch. Prudent, and politic son! Disgrace 'hem all that ever thou can;
their Ship I have already arrested. How to my wish it falls out, that thou have
the place of a Iusticer upon 'hem! I am partly glad of the injury done to me,
that thou may punish it. Be severe i'thy place, like a new officer of the
first quarter, vnreflected: you hear how our Lady is come back with her
train, from the invisible Castle?


Gould. No, where is she?


Touch. Within, but I have not seen her yet, not her mother; who now begins to
wish her daughter vndub'd, they say, and that she had walkd a foot-pase with
her sister. Here they come, stand back.

Touchstone, Mistress Touchstone, Gyrtrude, Goulding, Mildred, Syndefie. God
save your Ladyship; 'saue your good Ladyship: your Ladyship is welcome from
your enchanted Castle; so are your beauteous Retinew. I hear your Knight
errant is trauayld on strange adventures: Surely in my mind, your Ladyship
has fished fair, and caught a Frog, as the saying is.


Mist. Tou. Speak to your Father, Madam, and kneel down.


Gyrt. Kneel? I hope I am not brought so low yet: though my Knight be run
away, and has sold my land, I am a Lady, still.


Touch. Your Ladyship says true, Madam, and it is fitter, and a greater
decorum, that I should curtsie to you that are a knights wife, and a Lady, then
you be brought a'your knees to me, who am a poor Cullion, and your Father.


Gyr. Law! my Father knows his duty.


Mist. Tou. O child!


Touch. And therefore I do desire your Ladyship, my good Lady Flash in all
humility, to depart my obscure Cottage, and return in quest of your bright,
and most transparent Castle, how ever presently conceald to mortal eyes. And
as for one poor woman of your train here, I will take that order, she shall
no longer be a charge unto you, nor help to spend your Ladyship; she shall
stay at home with me, and not go abroad, not put you to the pawning of an odd
Coach-horse, or three wheels, but take part with the Touchstone: If we lack,
we will not complain to your Ladyship. And so good Madam, with your Damoselle
here, please you to let us see your straight backs, in equipage; for truly,
here is no roust for such Chickens as you are, or birds o'your feather, if it
like your Ladyship.


Gyrt. Mary, fyste o'your kindness. I thought as much. Come away Sin, we
shall as soon get a fart from a dead man, as a farthing of court'sie here.


Mild. O, good Sister!


Gyrt. Sister, sir reverence? come away, I say, Hunger drops out at his nose.


Goul. O Madam, Fair words never hurt the tongue.


Gyrt. How say you by that? you come out with your gold ends now!


Mi. Tou. Stay Lady-daughter: good husband.


Touch. Wife, no man loves his fetters, be they made of gold: I list not have my
head fastened under my child's girdle; as she has brewed, so let her drink, a
Gods name: she went witless to wedding, now she may go wisely a begging. It Is
but hony-Moone yet with her Ladyship; she has Coach horses, Apparel, Jewels
yet left, she needs care for no friends, nor take knowledge of Father, Mother,
Brother, Sister, or any body: When those are pawned, or spent, perhaps we shall
return into the list of her acquaintance.


Gyrt. I scorn it in faith. Come Sin. (Exit Gyrt.


Mi. Tou. O Madam, why do you provoke your Father, thus?


Touch. Nay, nay, eene let Pride go before, Shame will follow after, I warrant
you. Come, why do thou weep now? thou art not the first good Cow have had
an ill Calfe, I trust. What Is the news, with that fellow? Enter Constable.


Goul. Sir, the Knight, and your man Quickesiluer are without, will you ha 'hem
brought in?


Touch. O by any means. And Son, here is a Chair; appear terrible unto
'hem, on the first enter view. Let them behold the melancholy of a Magistrate,
and taste the fury of a Citizen in office.


Goul. Why Sir, I can do nothing to 'hem, except you charge 'hem with somewhat.


Touch. I will charge 'hem, and recharge 'hem, rather then Authority should
want foil to set it of.


Gould. No good Sir, I will not.


Touch. Son, it is your place; by any means.


Goul. Believe it, I will not Sir.


Enter Knight Petronell, Quickesiluer, Constable, Officers. Pet. How Misfortune
pursues us still in our misery!


Quic. Would it had been my fortune, to have been trust up at Wapping, rather
then ever have come here.


Pet. Or mine, to have famisht in the Island.


Quic. Must Goulding sit upon us?


Consta. You might carry an M. under your girdle to Master Deputis worship.


Gould. What are those, master Constable?


Constable. And't please your worship, a couple of Maisterlesse men, I pressed for
the Low Countries, Sir.


Goul. Why do you not carry 'hem to Bridewell, according to your order, they may
be shipped away?


Constable. An't please your Worship, one of'hem says he is a Knight; and we
thought good to show him to your worship, for our discharge.


Goul. Which is he?


Constable. This Sir.


Goul. And what is the other?


Constable. A Knights Fellow Sir, an't please you.


Goul. What? a Knight, and his Fellow thus accoutred? Where are their Hattes
and Feathers, their Rapiers, and their Cloakes?


Quic. O they mock us.


Constable. Nay truly sir, they had cast both their Feathers, and Hattes too,
before we see 'hem. Here Is all their furniture, an't please you, that we
found. They say, Knights are now to be known without Feathers, like Cockrels
by their Spurs, Sir.


Goul. What are their names, say they?


Touch. Very well this. He should not take knowledge of 'hem in his place,
indeeed.


Con. This is Sir Petronell Flash.


Touch. How!


Con. And this Francis Quickesiluer.


Touch. Is It possible? I thought your Worship had been gone for Virginia, Sir*
You are welcome home sir. Your Worship has made a quick return, it seems and
no doubt a good voyage. Nay pray you be co^^^^ Sir. How did your Bisquet hold
out Sir? Me thought, I had seen this Gentlemen before; good Master
Quickesiluer! How a degree to the Southward has changed you.


Gould. Do you know 'hem Father? Forbear your offers a little, you shall be
heard anon.


Touch. Yes, Master Deputy: I had a small venture with them in the voyage, a
Thing, called a Son in Law, or so. Officers, you may let 'hem stand alone,
they will not run away, I Will give my word for them. A couple of very honest
Gentlemen. One of 'hem was my Prentise, M. Quicksiluer, here, and when he had
2. year to serve, kept his whore, and his hunting Nag, would play his 100.
pound at Gresco, or Primero, as familiarly (and al a'my purse) as any bright
piece of Crimson on 'hem all, had his changable trunks of Apparel, standing at
livery, with his Mare, his Chest of perfumd linen, and his Bathing Tubbs,
which when I told him off, why he -- he was a Gentleman, and I a poor
Cheapeside Groom. The remedy was, we must part. Since when he has had the
gift of gathering up some small parcels of mine, to the value of 500. pound
dispersed among my customers to furnish this his Virginian ve^ture; wherein this
knight was the chief, sir Flash: one that married a daughter of mine, Ladefied
her, turned two thousand pounds worth of good land of hers, into Cash, within
the first week, bought her a new Gown, and a Coach, sent her to seek her
fortune by land, whilst himself prepared for his fortune by sea, took in
fresh flesh at Beling sgate, for his own diet, to serve him the whole voyage,
the wife of a certain usurer, called Security, who has been the broker for
'hem in all this business: Please Master Deputy, Work upon that now.


Goul. If my worshipful Father have ended.


Touch. I have, it shall please M. Deputy.


Goul. Well then, under correction. --


Touch. Now son, come over 'hem with some fine guird, as thus, Knight you
shall be encountered, that is, had to the Counter; or Quicksiluer, I will put
you in a crucible or so.


Gould. Sir Petronell Flash, I am sorry to see such flashes as these proceed
from a Gentleman of your Quality, and Rank; For mine own part, I could wish,
I could say, I could not see the^: but such is the misery of Magistrates, and
men in Place, that they must not wink at Offenders. Take him aside, I will
hear you anon sir.


Tou. I like this well yet: there is some grace in the knight, left, He cries.


Goul. Francis Quicksilver, would God thou had turned Quack-saluer, rather
then run into these dissolute, and lewd courses; It is great pity, thou art a
proper young man, of an honest and clean face, somewhat near a good one, (God
has done his part in thee) but, thou haste made too much, and been to proud
of that face, with the rest of thy body; for maintenance of which in neat and
garish attire, (only to be looked upon by some light houswifes) thou have
prodigally consumed much of thy Masters estate: and being by him gently
admonished, at several times, have returned thy self haughty, and rebellious,
in thine answers, thundering out uncivil comparisons, requiting al his kindness
with a course and harsh behavior, never returning thanks for any one benefit,
but receiving all, as if they had bin Debts to thee, and no Courtesies. I must
tell thee Francis, these are manifest signs of an ill nature; and God does
often punish such pride, and butrecuidance, with scorn and infamy, which is
the worst of misfortune. My worshipful father, what do you please to charge
them withal? from the press I will free 'hem Master Constable.


Constable. Then i will leave your worship, Sir.


Gold. No, you may stay, there will be other matters against 'hem.


Touch. Sir I do charge this Gallant, Master Quicksiluer, on suspicion of
Felony; and the Knight as being accessory, in the receipt of my goods.


Quick. O God Sir!


Touch. Hold thy peace, impudent varlot, hold thy peace. With what forehead or
face, do thou offer to choppe Logic with me, having run such a race of Riot,
as thou have done? Does not the sight of this worshipful man's fortune and
temper, confound thee, that was thy younger fellow in household, and now come to
have the place of a Judge upon thee? Do not observe this? Which of al thy
Gallants, and Gasters, thy Swearers and thy Swaggerers, will come now to moan
thy misfortune, or pity thy penury? They le look out at a window, as thou
rid'st in triumph to Tiborne, and cry, yonder goes honest Franck, mad
Quicksiluer; He was a free boon companion, when he had money, says one; Hang
him fool, says another, he could not keeepe it when he had it; A pox of the
Cullio^ his Mr. (sais a third) he has brought him to this: when their Pox of
pleasure, and their piles of perdition, would have been better bestowed upon
thee, that have ventred for 'hem with the best, and by the clew of thy knavery,
brought thy self weeping, to the Cart of Calamity.


Quic. Worshipful Master.


Touch. Offer not to speak, Crocodile, I will not hear a sound come from
thee. Thou have learnt to whine at the Play yonder. Master Deputy, pray yon
commit 'hem both to safe custody, till I be able farther to charge 'hem.


Quic. O me, what an unfortunate thing am I!


Pet. Will you not take security Sir.


Touch. Yes mary will I sir Flash, if I can find him, and charge him as deep
as the best on you. He has been the plotter of all this: he is your Inginer, I
hear. Master Deputy, you will dispose of these? In the mean time, I Will to my
Lo. Mayor, and get his warrant, to seize that Serpent Security into my hands,
and seal up both house, and goods, to the Kings use, or my satisfaction.


Goul. Officers take 'hem to the Counter.


Qui. and Pet. O God.


Touch. Nay on, on: you see the issue of your Sloth. Of Sloth comes Pleasure,
of Pleasure comes Riot, of Riot comes Whoring, of Whoring comes Spending, of
Spending comes Want, of Want comes Theft, of Theft comes Hanging; and there is
my Quickesiluer fixed. Exeunt.


Actus Quintus. Scena Prima.
Gyrtrude. Sindefie.
Gyr. Ah Sin! have thou ever read in the Chronicle of any Lady, and her
waiting woman, driven to that extremity, that we are, Sin?


Syn. Not I truly, Madam, and if I had, it were but cold comfort, should come
out of books, now.


Gyr. Why, good faith Sin, I could dine with a lamentable story, now. O
hone, hone, o no nera, etc. Can thou tell nere a one, Sin?


Sin. None, but mine own, Madam, which is lamentable enough; first to be
stolen from my Friends, which were worshipful, and of good account, by a
Prentile, in the habit and disguise of a Gentleman, and here brought up to
London, and promised marriage, and now likely to be forsaken (for he is in
possibility to be hanged.)


Gyr. Nay weep not good Sin. My Petronell, is in as good possibility as he.
Thy miseries, are nothing to mine, Sin: I was more then promised marriage,
Sin, I had it Sin: and was made a Lady; and by a Knight, Sin: which is now
as good as no Knight, Sin: And I was borne in London, which is more then
brought up, Sin: and already forsaken; which is past likelihood, Sin: and in
stead of Land in the Country, all my Knights Living lies in the Counter, Syn.
there is his Castle now?


Syn. Which he cannot be forced out off, Madam.


Gyr. Yes, if he would live hungry a week, or two. Hunger they say breaks
stone walls. But he is eene well enough served, Sin, that so soon as ever he had
got my hand to the sale of my inheritance run away from me, and I had been his
Punke, God bless us. Would the Knight of the Sun, or Palmerin of England,
have vsd their Ladies so, Syn? or sir Lancelot? or sir Tristram?


Syn. I do not know, Madam.


Gry, Then thou know nothing, Syn. Thou art a Fool, Syn. The Knighthood now
a days, are nothing like the Knighthood of old time. They rid a horseback Ours
go afoote. They were attended by their Squires. Our by their Lacquaies. They
went buckled in their Armor, Ours muffled in their Cloaks. They trauaild
wildernesses; and deserts, Ours dare scarce walk the streets. They were still
pressed to engage their Honor, Ours still ready to paune their clothes. They
would gallop on at sight of a Mo^ster, Ours run away at sight of a Serieant.
They would help poor Ladies, Ours make poor Ladies.


Syn. I Madam, they were Knights of the Round-Table at Winchester, that sought
Adue^tures, but these of the Square Table at Ordinaries, that sit at Hazard.


Gyr. True Syn, let him vanish And tell me, what shall we pawn next


Syn. I mary, Mada^, a timely consideration, for our Hosts (profane woman)
has sworn by bread, and salt, she will not trust us another meal.


Gyr. Let it stink in her hand the^: I Will not be beholding to her. Let me see,
my Jewels begone, and my Gowns, and my red velvet Petticote, that I was married
in, and my wedding silk stockings, and al thy best apparel, poor Syn. Good
faith, rather the^ thou should pawn a ragge more, Il'd lay my Ladyship in
lauender, if I knew where.


Syn. Alas, Madam, your Ladyship?


Gir. I, why? you do not scorn my Ladyship, though it is in a Wastcoate? Gods
my life, you are a Peate indeed! do I offer to morgage my Ladyship, for you,
and for your avail, and do you turn the Lip, and the Alas to my Ladyship?


Syn. No Madam, but I make question, who will lend any thing upon it?


Gyr. Who? marry inow, I warrant you, if you will seek 'hem out. I Am sure I
remember the time, when I would have given a thousand pound, (if I had had it)
to have bin a Lady; and I hope I was not bred and borne with that appetite
alone: some other gentle-borne of the City, have the same longing I trust. And
for my part, I would afford 'hem a peny'rth, my Ladyship is little the worse,
for the wearing, and yet I would bate a good deal of the sum. I would lend
it (let me see) for 40 li^ in hand, Syn, that would apparel us; and ten pound
a year: that would keep me, and you, Syn, (with our needles) and we should
never need to be beholding to our sciruy Parents? Good Lord, that there are no
Fayries now adays, Syn.


Syn. Why Madame?


Gyr. To do Miracles, and bring Ladies money. Sure, if we lay in a cleanly
house, they would haunt it, Sin? I Will try. I Will sweep the Chamber soon at
night, and set a dish of water of the Hearth. A Fayrie may come, and bring a
Pearl, or a Diamonde We do not know Syn? Or, there may be a pot of Gold hid
of the backe-side, if we had tools to dig for it? why may not we two rise
early in the morning (Syn) before any body is up, and find a Jewel, in the
streets, worth a 100. li.? May not some great Court-Lady, as she comes from
Revels at midnight, look out of her Coach, as it is running, and loose such a
Jewel, and we find it? Ha?


Syn. They are pretty waking dreams; these.


Gyr. Or may not some old Usurer be drunk ouer-night, with a Bag of money,
and leave it behind him on a Stall? for God-sake, Syn, let us rise to morrow by
break of day, and see. I protest law, If I had as much money as an Alderman, I
would seatter some on it, i'th'streetes for poor Ladies to find, when their
Knights were laid up. And, now I remember my Song of the Golden shower, why may
not I have such a fortune?

I Will sing it, and try what luck I shall have after it.

Fond Fables tell of old,
How love in Danaes lap
Fell in a shower of Gold,
By which she caught a clappe;
O, had it been my hap,
(How ere the blow does threaten)
So well I like the play,
That I could wish all day
And night to be so beaten.
Enter Mistress Touchstone. O, here is my Mother! good luck, I hope. Have you
brought any money, Mother? Pray you Mother, your Blessing. Nay, sweet Mother,
do not weep.


Mistress Touch. God bless you; I would I were in my Grave.


Gyr. Nay, dear Mother, can you steal no more money from my father? dry your
eyes, and comfort me. Alas, it is my Knights fault, and not mine, that I am in
a Wast-coate, and attyred thus simply.


Mistress Touch. Simply? It Is better then thou deseru'st. Never whimper for the
matter. Thou should have looked, before thou had leap't. Thou were a fire
to be a Lady, and now your Ladishippe and you may both blow at the Cole, for
ought I know. Self do, self have. The hasty person never wants woe, they
say.


Gyr. Nay then Mother, you should ha loook'd to it; A body would think you
were the older: I did but my kind, l. He was a Knight, and I was fit to be a
Lady. It Is not lack of liking, but lack of living, that seuers us. And you
talk like your self and a Cittiner in this, in faith. You show what Husband you
come on Iwys. You smell the Touchstone. He that will do more for his
daughter, that he has married a sciruie Gold-end man, and his Prentise, then he
will for his the other Daughter, that has wedded a Knight, and his Customer. By
this light, I think he is not my legittimate Father.


Syn. O good Madam, do not take up your mother so.


Mistress. Touch. Nay, nay, let her cene alone. Let her Ladishippe grieve me
still, with her bitter taunts and terms. I have not dole enough to see her in
this miserable case, l? without her Velvet gowns, without Ribbands, without
Jewels, without French-wires, or Cheat bread, or Quails, or a little Dog, or a
Genttleman Usher, or any thing indeed, that is fit for a Lady. --


Syn. Except her tongue.


Mistress Touch. And I not able to releive her neither, being kept so short, by
my husband. Well, God knows my heart. I did little think, that ever she
should have had need of her sister Golding.


Gyr. Why Mother, I ha not yet. Alas, good Mother, be not intoxicate for me,
I am well enough. I would not change husbands with my Sister, I. The leg of a
Lark is better then the body of a Kight.


Mistress Touch. I know that. But --


Gyr. What sweet Mother, What?


Mistress Touchstone. It Is but ill food, when nothing's left but the Claw.


Gyr. That Is true Mother; Aye me.


Mistress Touchstone. Nay, sweet Lady-bird, sigh not. Child, Madame. Why do
you weep thus? Be of good cheer. I shall die, if you cry, and mar your
complexion, thus?


Gyr. Alas Mother, what should I do,


Mistress Touch. Go to thy Sister's Child, She Will be proud, thy Lady-ship
will come under her roof. She Will win thy Father to release thy Knight, and
redeem thy Gowns, and thy Coach, and thy Horses, and set thee up again.


Gyr. But will she get him to set my Knight up, too?


Mistress Touchstone. That she will, or any thing else thou'it ask her.


Gyr. I will begin to love her, if I thought she would do this.


Mistress. Touch. Try her good Chucke, I warrant thee.


Gyr. Do thou think she will do it?


Syn. I Madame, and be glad you will receive it.


Mistress. Touch. That Is a good Maiden, she tells you true. Come, I Will take
order for your debts i the Alehouse.


Gyr. Go, Syn, and pray for thy Franck, as I will, for my Pet.


Enter Touchstone, Goulding, Woolfe. Touch. I will receive no Letters, M Woolf,
you shall pardon me.


Gould. Good Father let me entreat you.


Touch. Son Goulding, I will not be tempted, I find mine own easy nature,
and I know not what a well-pend subtle Letter may work upon it: There may be
Tricks, Packing, do you see? Return with your Packet, Sir.


Woolfe. Believe it Sir, you need fear no packing here. These are but Letters
of Submission, all.


Touch. Sir, I do look for no Submission. I will bear my self in this like
Blind Justice, Work upon that now. When the Sessions come, they shall hear
from me.


Gould. From whom come your Letters, M. Woolfe?


Woolfe. And't please you Sir. One from Sir Petronell. Another from Francis
Quickesiluer. And a third, from old Security, who is almost mad in Prison.
There are two, to your worship: One from M. Francis, Sir. Another from the
Knight.


Touch. I do wonder, M. Woolfe, why you should travail thus, in a business
so contrary to kind, or the nature o'your Place! that you being the Keeper
of a Prison, should labor the release of your Prisoners! Whereas me thinks,
it were far more Natural, and Kindly in you, to be ranging about for more,
and not let these escape you have already under the Tooth. But they say, you
Wolves, when you have sucked the blood once, that they are dry, you have done.


Woolfe. Sir, your Worship may descant as you please of my name, but I protest,
I was never so mortified with any men's discourse, or behavior in Prison; yet I
have had of all sorts of men in the Kingdom, under my Keys, and almost of all
Religions in the land, as Papist, Protestant, Paritane, Brownist, Anabaptist,
Millenary, Fam^ly o'Loue, Jew, Turk, Infidel, Atheist, Good Fellow, etc.


Gould. And which of all these (thinks M. Woolfe) was the best Religion?


Woolfe. Troth, M. Deputy, they that pay Fees best: we never examine their
consciences farther.


Gould. I believe you M. Woolfe. Good faith, Sir, Here Is a great deal of
humility i'these Letters.


Woolfe. Humility, Sir? I, were your Worship an Eyewitness of it, you would
say so. The Knight will in the Knights-Ward, do what we can Sir, and Master
Quickesiluer, would be in the Hole, if we would let him. I never knew, or saw
Prisoners more penitent, or more devout. They will sit you up all night singing
of Psalms, and aedifying the whole Prison only, Security sings a note to
high, sometimes, because he lies in the Two-penny ward. far of, and can not
take his tune. The Neighbors can not rest for him, but come every Morning to
ask, what godly Prisoners we have.


Touch. Which on 'hem is it is so devout, the Knight, or the to'ther?


Woolfe. Both Sir. But the young Man especially! I never heard his like! He has
cut his hair too* He is so well given, and has such good gifts! He can tell
you, almost all the Stories of the Book of Martyrs, and speak you all the
Sicke-mans Salve without Book.


Touch I, if he had had grace, he was brought up where it grew, I wis. On
Master Wolf.


Wolf. And he has converted one Fangs a Sarieant, a fellow could neither
write, nor read, he was called the Bandog of the Counter: and he has brought him
already to pare his nails, and say his prayers, and it is hoped, he will sell
his place shortly, and become an Intelligencer.


Touch. No more, I am coming all ready. If I should give any farther ear, I
were taken. Adue good Master Wolf. Son, I do feel mine own weaknesses,
do not importune me. Pity is a Rheum, that I am subject too, but I will resist
it. Master Wolf, Fish is cast away, that is cast in dry Pooles: Tell
Hypocrisy, it will not do, I have touchd, and tried too often; I am yet
proof, and I will remain so: when the Sessions come, they shall hear from
me. In the mean time, to all suites, to all entreaties, to all letters, to all
tricks, I will be deaf as an Adder, and blind as a Beetle, lay mine care to
the ground, and lock mine eyes i'my hand, against all temptations. Exit.


Gold. You see, master Wolf, how inexorable he is. There is no hope to
recover him Pray you commend me to my brother Knight, and to my fellow Francis,
present 'hem with this small token of my love; tell 'hem, I wish I could do
'hem any worthier office, but in this, it is desperate: yet I will not fail to
try the uttermost of my power for 'hem. And sir, as far as I have any credit
with you pray you let 'hem want nothing: though I am not ambitious, they should
know so much.


Wolse. Sir, both your actions, and words speak you to be a true Gentleman.
They shall know only what is fit, and no more. Excunt.


Holdfast. Bramble. Security.
Hold. Who would you speak with, Sir?


Bra^. I would speak with one Security, that is prisoner here.


Hold. You'are welcome Sir. Stay there i will call him to you. Master Security.


Secu. Who call's?


Hold. Here Is a Gentleman would speak with you.


Secu. What is he? Is It one that grafts my forehead now I am in prison, and
comes to see how the Horns shoot up, and prosper.


Hold. You must pardon him Sir: The old man is a little crazed with his
imprisonment.


Secu. What say you to me, Sir? Look you here. My learned Counsel, M.
Bramble! Cry you mercy, Sir: when saw you my wife?


Bram. She is now at my house, Sir, and desired me that I would come to
Visit you and inquire of you your Case, that we might work some means to get
you forth.


Secur. My Case, M. Bramble, is stone walls, and iron grates; you see it, this
is the weakest part on it. And, for getting me forth, no means but hang my
self, and so to be carried forth, from which they have here bound me, in
intolerable bands.


Bram. Why but what is it you are in for, Sir?


Secu. For my Sins, for my Sins Sir, whereof Marriage, is the greatest. O,
had I never married, I had never known this Purgatory, to which Hell is a
kind of cool Bathe in respect: My wives confederacy Sir, with old
Touchstone, that she might keep her Iubilaee, and the Feast of her New-Moone.
Do you understand me Sir? Enter Quickesiluer.


Quick. Good Sir, go in and talk with him. The Light dos him harm, and his
example will be hurtful to the weak Prisoneis. Fit, Father Security, that
you will be still so profane, will nothing humble you? Enter two Prisoners,
with a Friend.


Friend. What Is he?


Pri. 1. O he is a rare young man. Do you not know him?


Frien. Not I. I never saw him. I can remember.


Pri. 2. Why, it is he that was the gallant Prentise of London, M. Touchstones
man.


Frien. Who Quickesiluer?


Pri. 1. I, this is he.


Frien. Is this he? They say, he has been a Gallant indeed.


Pris. O, the royal est fellow, that ever was bred up in the City. He would
play you his thousand pound, a night at Dice; keep Knights and Lords Company;
go with them to baudie houses; had his fix men in a Liuerie; kept a stable of
Hunting horses; and his Wench in her velvet Gown, and her Cloth of silver.
Here Is one Knight with him here in Prison.


Frien. And how miserably he is chaung'd!


Pris. 1. O, that is voluntary in him; he gave away all his rich clothes,
as soon as ever he came in here, among the Prisoners: and will eat of the
Basket, for humility.


Friend. Why will he do so?


Pris. 2. Alas he has no hope of life. He mortifies himself. He dos but
linger on, till the Sessions.


Pris. 2. O, he has penned the best thing, that he calls his Repentance, or
his Last Farewell, that ever you heard: He is a pretty Poet, and for Prose --
You would wonder how many Prisoners he has helped out, with penning Petitions
for 'hem, and not take a penny. Look, this is the Knight, in the rugge Gown.
Standby.


Enter Petronel, Bramble, Quickesiluer, Woolfe. Bram. Sir, for Securities Case,
I have told him; Say he should be condemned to be carted, or whipped, for a
Bawd, or so, why I Will lay an Execution on him o'two hundred pound, let him
acknowledge a Judgment, he shall do it in half an hour, they shall not all
fetch him out, without paying the Execution, of my word.


Pet. But can we not be bay'ld M. Bramble?


Bram. Hardly, there are none of the Judges in Town, else you should remove
your self (in spite of him) with a Habeas Corpus: But if you have a Friend to
deliver your tale sensibly to some Justice of the Town, that he may have
feeling of it, (do you see) you may be bayl'd. For as I understand the Case,
it is only done, In Terrorem, and you shall have an Action of false Imprisonment
against him, when you come out: and perhaps a thousand pound Costs. Enter M.
Woolfe.


Quick. How now, M, Woolfe? What news? what return?


Woolfe. Faith, bad all: yonder will be no Letters received. He says the
Sessions shall determine it. Only, M. Deputy Golding commends him to you, and
with this token, wishes he could do you other good.


Quick. I thank him. Good M. Bramble, trouble our quiet no more; do not
molest us in Prison thus, with your winding devises: Pray you depart. For my
pat, I co mm t my cause to him that can succor me, let God work his will. M.
Woolfe, I pray you let this be distributed, among the Prisoners, and desire
'hem to pray for us.


Woolfe. It shall be done, M. Francis.


Pris. 1. An excellent temper!


Pris. 2. Now God send him good-lucke. Exeunt.


Pet. But what said my Father in Law, M. Woolfe?


Enter Hold. Hold. Here Is one would speak with you, Sir.


Woolfe. I Will tell you anon Sir Petronell. who is it?


Hold. A Gentleman, Sir, that will not be seen. Enter Gold.


Woolfe. Where is he? M. Deputy! your worcester: is wel-come. --


Gold. Peace!


Woolfe. Away, Srah.


Gold. Good faith, M. Woolfe, the estate of these Gentlemen, for whom you were
so late and willing a Suitor, does much affect me: and because I am desirous to
do them some fair office, and find there is no means to make my Father
relent, so likely, as to bring him to be a Spectator of their Miseries; I have
ventured on a device, which is, to make make my self your Prisoner:
entreating, you will presently go report it to my Father, and (sayning, an
Action, at suit of some third person) pray him by this Token, that he will
presently, and with all secrecy, come hither for my Bail; which train, (if
any) I know will bring him abroad; and then, having him here, I doubt not but
we shall be all fortunate, in the Event.


Woolf. Sir, I will put on my best speed, to effect it. Please you come in.


Gold. Yes; And let me rest concealed, I pray you.


Wolf. See, here a Benefit, truly done; when it is done timely, freely, and
to no Ambition. Exit.


Enter Touchstone, Wife, Daughters, Syn, VVinyfred. Touchstone. I will sail
by you, and not hear you, like the wise Ulysses.


Mild. Dear Father.


Mistress Touch. Husband.


Gyr. Father.


VVin. and Syn. M. Touchstone.


Touc. away sirens, I will inmure my self, against your cries; and lock my
self vpto our Lamentations.


Mistress Touch. Gentle Husband, hear me.


Gyr. Father, It is I Father; my Lady Flash: my sister and I am Friends.


Mil. Good Father.


VVyn. Be not hardened, good M. Touchstone.


Syn. I pray you, Sir, be merciful.


Touch. I am dease, I do not hear you; I have stopped mine ears, with
Shoomakers wax, and drunk Lethe, and Mandragora to forget you: All you speak
to me, I commit to the Air. Enter Wolf.


Mil. How now, M. Wolf?


Wolf. Where Is M. Touchstone? I must speak with him presently: I have lost
my breath for have.


Mild. What Is the matter Sir? pray all be well.


Wolf. Master Deputy Goulding is arrested upon an execution, and desires him
presently to come to him, forthwith.


Mild. Aye me; do you hear Father?


Touch. Tricks, tricks, confederacy, tricks, I have 'hem in my nose, I sent
'hem.


Wol. Who Is that? master Touchstone?


Mi. Tou. Why it is M. Wolf himself, husband.


Mil. Father.


Touch. I am dease still, I say: I will neither yield to the song of the Siren,
nor the voice of the Hyena, the tears of the Crocodile, nor the howling of the
Wolf: avoid my habitatio mo^sters,


Wolf. Why you are not mad Sir? I pray you look forth, and see the token I
have brought you, Sir.


Touch. Ha! what token is it?


Wolf. Do you know it Sir?


Tou. My son Gouldings ring! Are you in earnest May. Wolf?


Wolf. I by my faith sir. He is in prison, and required me to use all speed,
and secrecy to you.


Touch. My Cloak there (pray you be patient) I am plagued for my Austeritie;
my Cloak: at whose suite master Wolf?


Wolf. I Will tell you as we go sir. Exeunt.


Enter Friend. Prisoners. Fry. Why, but is his offense such as he cannot hope
of life?


Pri. 1. Troth it should seem so: and it is great pity; for he is exceeding
penitent.


Fri. They say he is charged but on suspicion of Felony, yet.


Pri. 2. I but his master is a shrewd fellow, Heel prove great matter against
him.


Fri. I Would as live as any thing, I could see his Farewell.


Pri. 1. O it is rarely written: why Tobis may get him to sing it to you, he is
not curious to any body.


Pri. 1. O no. He would that all the world should take knowledge of his
Repentance, and thinks he merits in it, the more shame he suffers.


Pri. 1. Pray thee try, what thou can do.


Pri. 2. I warrant you, he will not deny it; if he be not hoarce with the often
repeating of it. Exit.


Pri. 1. You never saw a more courteous creature, then he is; and the Knight
too: the poorest Prisoner of the house may command 'hem. You shall hear a
thing, admirably pend.


Fri. Is the Knight any, Scholar too?


Pris. 1. No, but he will speak very well, and discourse admirably of running
Horses, and White-Friers, and against Baudes; and of Cocks; and talk as loud
as a Hunter, but is none.


Enter Wolf and Touchstone. Wolf. Please you stay here sir, i will call his
worship down to you.


Pris. 1. See, he has brought him, and the Knight too. Salute him I pray, Sir,
this Gentleman, upon our report, is very desirous to hear some piece of your
Repentance. Enter Quick. Pet. etc.


Quic. Sir, withal my heart, and as I told M. Tobie, I shall be glad to have
any man a witness of it. And the more openly I prosesse it, I hope it will
appear the hartier and the more unsained.


Touch. Who is this? my man Francis? and my son in Law?


Quick. Sir, it is all the Testmonie I shall leave behind me to the World, and
my Master, that I have so offended.


Friend. Good Sir


Qui. I writ it, when my spirits were oppressed.


Pet. I, I Will be sworn for you Francis.


Quick. It is in imitation of Maningtons; he that was hanged at Cambridge, that
cut of the Horses head at a blow.


Fry. So sir.


Quick. To the tune of I wail in woe, I plunge in pain.


Pet. An excellent Ditty it is, and worthy of a new tune.


Qui. In Cheapside famous for Gold and Plate,
Quicksiluer I did dwell of late:
I had a Master good, and kind,
That would have wrought me to his mind.
He bad me still, Work upon that,
But alas I wrought I knevv not what.
He was a Touchstone black, but true:
And told me still, what would ensue,
Yet, vvoe is me, I would not learn,
I savv, alas, but could not discern.

Frien. Excellent, excellent well.


Gould. O let him alone, He is taken already.


Quic. I cast my Coat, and Cap away,
I went in silkci, and saitens gay,
False Metal of good manners, I
Did daily coint valavvsully.
I scornd my Master, being drunk.
I kept my Golding, and my Punke,
And with a knight, sir Flash, by name,
(Who now is sorry for the same)

Pet. I thank you Francis.

I thought by sea to run, But Thames, and Tempest did me stay.


Touch. This cannot be fained sure. Heaven pardon my seucrity. The Ragged Colt,
may prooke a good Horse.


Gould. How he listens! and is transported? He has forgot me.


Quic. Still Eastward hoe was all my word:
But VVestward I had no regard.
Nor never thought, what would coin aster
As did alas his youngest Daughter,
At last the black Ox trod of my foot,
And I savv then what longd vntoo't,
Now try I, Touchstone, touch me still,
And make me current by thy skill.

Touch. And I will do it, Francis.


Wolf. Stay him M. Deputy, now is the time, we shall loose the song else.


Fry. I protest it is the best that ever I heard.


Quick. How like you it Gentlemen?


All. O admirable, sir!


Quic. This Stanze now following, alludes to the story of Mannington from
whence I took my project for my invention.


Frin. Pray you go on sir.


Quic. O Manington thy stories show,
Thou cutst a Horse-head off at a blovv
But I confess, I have not the force
For to cut off the head of a horse,
Yet I desire this grace to win,
That I may cut off the Horse-head of Sin.
And leave his body in the dust
Of sinneshigh way and bogges of Lust,
VVherby I may take Virtues purse,
And live with her for better, for worse.

Frin. Admirable sir, and excellently conceited.


Quic. Alas sir.


Touch. Son Goulding and M. Wolf, I thank you: the deceit is welcome,
especially from thee whose charitable soul in this has shown a high point of
wisdom and honesty. Listen. I am ravished with his Repentance, and could
stand here a whole prentiship to hear him,


Frien. Forth good sir.


Quick. This is the last, and the Farewell.

Farevvel Cheapside, sarevvel svveet trade
Of Goldsmithes all, that never shall fade
Farevvell dear fellovv Prentises all
And be you warned by my sall:
Shun Usurers, Bauds, and dice, and drabs.
Avoid them as you would French scabs
Seek not to go beyond your Tether,
But cut your Thongs unto your Lether
So shall you thrive by little and little,
Escape Tiborne, Cou^ters, and the Spitle

Touch. And escape them shall thou my penitent, and dear Frances.


Quick. Master!


Pet. Fatherl


Touch. I can no longer forbear to do your humility right: Arise, and let me
honor your Repentance, with the hearty and joyful embraces, of a Father, and
Friends love. Quicksiluer, thou have eat into my breast, Quicksiluer, with the
dropps of thy sorrow, and killed the desperate opinion I had of thy reclaim:


Quick. O sir, I am not worthy to see your worshipful face.


Pet. Forgive me Father.


Touch. Speak no more, all former passages, are forgotten, and here my word
shall release you. Thank this worthy Brother and kind friend, Francis. -- M.
Wolf. I am their Bail;


A shoute in the Prison. Secu. Master Touchstone? Master Touchstone?


Touch. Who Is that?


Wolf. Security, Sir.


Secu. Pray you Sir, if you will be won with a Song, hear my lamentable tune,
too:

SONG.
O Master Touchstone,
My heart is full of vvoe;
Alas, I am a Cuckold:
And, why should it be so?
Because I was a Usurer,
And Bavvd, as all you know,
For which, again I tell you,
My heart is full of vvot.

Touch. Bring him forth, Master Wolf, and release his bands. This day shable
sacred to Mercy, and the mirth of this Encounter, in the Counter. -- See, we
are encountered with more Suitors.

Enter Mist. Touchst. Gyr. Mil. Synd. Winnif. etc. Save your Breath, save your
Breath; All things have succeeded to your wishes: and we are heartely satisfied
in their events.


Gyr. Ah Runaway, Runaway! have I caught you? And, how has my poor Knight done
all this while?


Pet. Dear Lady-wife; forgive me.


Gert. As heartely, as I would be forgiven, Knight. Dear Father, give me your
blessing, and forgive me too; I have been proud, and lascivious, Father; and a
Fool, Father; and being raisd to the state of a wanton coy thing, called a
Lady, Father; have scorned you, Father; and my Sister; and my Sisters Velvet
Cap, too; and would make a mouth at the City, as I rid through it; and stop
mine ears at Bow-bell: I have said your Beard was a Base one, Father; and that
you looked like Twierpipe, the Taberer; and that my Mother was but my Midwife.


Mi. Tou. Now God forgi'you, Child Madame.


Touch. No more Repetitions. What is else wanting, to make our Harmony full?


Gould Only this, sir. That my fellow Francis make amends to mistress
Sindefie, with marriage.


Quic. With all my heart.


Gould. And Security give her a do were, which shall be all the

(...)

