The kings Edict or decree upon the pacification of the troubles of his
Realm, made the.xxiij. of March.1568. Containing also the confirmation of
another like Edict, of the.xix. day of March.1562.

THE Copy whereof is also added, the better to satisfy the Readers.

And also certain requests, made by the Protestants, with the Kings answers
thereunto. All now translated out of French. The.19. of April.1568.

Imprinted by William Seres.

The Kings Edict upon the peace making of the troubles of his Realm. Made
the.xxiii. day of March, 1568. Containing also the confirmation of an other
like Edict of the.xix day of March. 1562.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of France.
To all them that shall see these present letters, greeting.
Considering the great harms and calamities chanced, by the great troubles
and wars, wherwithall our realm has been of late, and is yet at this
present much afflicted: and foreseeing the desolation which might hereafter
happen, if by the grace and mercy of our Lord God, the said troubles were not
speedily pacified: Wherefore to make an end thereof, and to remedy the
afflictions that do proceed by them: likewise to restore and cause our
subjects to live in peace, rest, unity, and concord, as it has been always
our intention.

We let you understand, that after we have thereupon taken the advice and
counsel of the Queen our right dear and right honorable Lady and mother.
And of our right dear and right well-beloved brethren the Duke of Anjou our
Lieutenant general. And Duke Alenson, Princes of our blood, and others great
and notable personages of our priuye Counsel; By their advice and counsel
for the causes and reasons aforesaid, and others good and great considerations
thereunto us moving. We have, in confirming again (so much as need should
be) our Edict of peace making of the.xix. of March. 1562. to be observed in
all and every his points, and articles, as fullye as if they were from word to
word here transcribed, annexed, said, declared, enacted, and ordained. We do
say, declare, euact, and ordeyne, we will and our pleasure is, as follows.

TO weet, that all those of the Religion

AND as touching the Lords and

MOREOVER, the Lords and Prouence, being of the aforesaid condition or
estate, shall enjoy the benefit of the said Edict, and cause preaching in
their houses, as those of the other provinces being of the above said sort and
condition: and nevertheless, as for the said County, and Stewardship of the
said Prouence, there shall none other place but that of Merindoll.

THAT every one of the said Religion, shall return and shall be preserved,
mainteyned, and kept under our protection in all their goods, honors,
estates, charges, offices, and dignities, of what quality soever they be.
Notwithstanding all Edicts, letters patentes, decrees, confiscatio^s,
proceedings, judgments, and sentences against them, as well living as dead,
given and made since the beginning of this last insurrection, and execution
thereof, as well for the matters of Religion, the reising and sold or wages of
strangers, the gatherings of money, enrolmentes of men, the voiages and
ambassades into strange countries, and within this our Realm, before and
during the last troubles, by the commandment of our Cousin the Prince of
Conde, as also for the arms taken for that occasion, and for all that is
happened thereof: The which we declare void and of none effect, so that
notwithstanding, neither they nor their children, heirs and others having
cause, should be any thing impeached or let, from the enjoying of their said
goods and honors, nor that they should be bound to take of us, any other
prouiso or warrant then these our present letters, by the which we do put their
persons in full liberty, discharging them of al takings of towns, bearing of
arms, assemblies, seasures and taking of our money and treasures,
establishmentes of justice amongst them, and judgments, and executions thereof.

AND to the end there should be no doubt of the right meaning and intention
other places of our said realm country and obedience ye which have followed,
succored, and accompanied him, in this present war, and during these
tumultes, in what place soever it be of this our said realm, for our good and
faithful subjects, and servants.

AND our said Cousin shall remain acquitted and discharged, as by these
presents signed with our own hand, we do acquit and discharge him, of all such
money as has been by him or by his commanndement and order, levied, and taken
in our recepts general and particular, unto whatsoever sums the same may
amount: And in like manner of such sums as has been (as it is said) by him
or by his order also raised and taken of the communaltie, Cities, towns, pay
masters, rentes, and revenues of Churches, and other by him bestowed in the
occasion of this present war: so that neither he, nor his, nor they that have
been appointed by him for the gathering of the said money, the which, and
likewise those which have furnished and given it, shall remain acquitted and
discharged, and the which, we do acquit and discharge, never to be in any wise
examined or called to any account, presently nor in time to come, nor also for
ye coining of money, melting or casting of Artillarie, making of Gunpowders and
saltpeters, fortifiyng of towns, demoliments made for the said fortifications,
by the commandment of the same our said Cousin, in all the towns of our
Realm, and country of our obedience: and generally of al other demoliments and
ruins, so that there shall be no pretense made for any recompense therefore in
time to come, whereof the bodies and inhabitants of the same shall remain in
like manner discharged, and we do discharge them therefore by these presents.

AND further, there shall none of the behalf of the Parliament of Paris, three
days after the date of these said presents, and for the behalf of the other
parliaments, eight days after the date of these said presents: within which
time, it shall be commanded with all diligence, unto our governors and
Lieutenaunts general, to cause it to be forthwith proclaimed and observed,
every one, in all the places of his government, where it shall appertain,
without tarying the proclaminges of the said Courts: to the end that no man
might pretend cause of ignorance, and that more redily all ways of hostility,
spoylings and demoliments, of the one part and the other, might cease.
Declaring now forthwith, that all demoliments, spoils, takings and rauishings
of goods, moueables, and other acts of hostility, which shall be done after
the said time, are subject to restitution and reparation.

WE do also command our Courts of parliaments, yt so sone as they shall receive
the said edict, they shall (leaving all other business apart) cause ye same
our edict to be proclaimed and registered in our said courts, according to the
form and tenor thereof: and to our atturneis general consideredly to require
and pursue the proclayming thereof, without any refusal, protracting of time,
nor tarying for any further bydding or commandment from us, for (as it is
said) to make a ready end unto all enimities, rancors and hostilities.

WE mean further that the town and Mayralty) and Viconty of Paris should be
and remain exempted from all exercise of the said Relygion, according to the
contents of the said edict of pacification, which remains in his first force
and virtue.

AND we will in like manner, that after be in nature, as also the houses of
several persons which have been in likewise occupied, should be with diligence
restored, unto whom they shall apperteyne: and all prisoners, whether it be of
war, or for the matter of Religion, shall be in like manner set again in
liberty, of their persons and goods, without paying any ransom.

AND to the end that hereafter, all occasions of troubles, tumults and
seditions may cease, and the better to reconcile and unite the intentions and
wills of our said subjects, the one toward the other, and with this union,
the more easily to maintain the obedience which they all do owe us, we have
ordained and do ordeyne, we mean, will and our pleasure is, that all
injuries and offenses, which the iniquity of the time, and the occasions which
have thereof happened, might have caused to have sprung amongst our said
subjects, and all other things passed, and caused, by these present tumults,
shall remain quenched, as dead, buried, and not happened. Right expressly and
most earnestly upon pain of death, forbidding all our said subjects, of what
soever estate and quality they may be, that they do forbear iniuriyng or
provoking the one ye other, in reproching that which is past, nor to dispute,
argue, quarrel, contest nor braule together of any matter, neither to outrage
and offend in deed nor word, but to contain and stay themselves, and to live
peaceably together, as brethren, friends and felow-citizens: upon pain unto
those, which may offend, and which shall be cause and moouers of the injury
and offense which should happen, to be in the place and forthwith, and without
any other form of process, punished according to the rigor of our present
ordinance.

AND to cause all scruple and doubt to and as contemners and breakers of our
commaundments and orders.

FVRTHER right expressly and straightly charging them, and upon the like pains,
not to trouble, molest, nor disquiet the Ecclesiastical in the celebration of
the divine service, the inioying and perceiving of the fruits and revenues of
their benefices, tithes and all other rightes and duties which do appertain
unto them: so yt none of the said religion may use, take or retain any Temple
or Church of the said Ecclesiastickes, which we do mean should be presently
remitted in their Churches, houses, goods, tithes, possessions and revenues, to
enjoy and use them even as they did before these tumults, to use and continue
the service divine and accustomed by them in their said Churches, without any
manner of molestation, impechment or disturbance.

WE will, do ordein and our pleasure is, that the contents hereaboue, and also
our said first Edict of pacification whereunto these presents are referred,
and are to confirm the same, should be inuiolately entertained kept and
observed, over all and every the places of our realm, unto the time that it
may please God to give us the grace that our subjects may be reunited in one
self religion.

AND also we do command our beloved and faithful, the keepers of our
courts

In witness whereof we have signed these presents with our hand, and have
caused our seal to be set thereunto. Given at Paris the.xxiij. day of March,
the year of our Lord GOD 1568. and the eight year of our reign. And so
signed. CHARLES.
And there under, By the King in his Counsel. Signed. ROBERTET.
And sealed upon a double labell with yelow Wax.
Red, published and registered, requiring and hearing the same the kings
attorney general, at Paris in Parliament the.xxvij. day of March, the year.
1568.

Signed, DV TILLET.

The Extract of the Privilege.
BY the Kings special privilege given at Paris, the.xxvi. day of March.
1568. signed by the king in his Counsel: ROBERTET and sealed with the great
seal of the said Lord, in yelow Wax upon a single labell: confirming the
Letters Patents given by the said Lord at Saint Germane in Lay, the viij. of
October. M.D.lxi. Signed by the king, the Lord Chauncelour present, De
Laubespine, sealed as above and verified in the Court of Parliament at Paris,
the.xviij. day of February in the said year: it is permitted unto Robert
Stephanus his ordinary printer to print or cause to be imprinted, to sell and
to depute this present Edict of late, for the pacyfying of the troubles of this
kingdom: so that none other Library nor Imprinter may print them, nor cause to
be imprinted without his permission and consent, within three Months after
his said imprinting thereof, upon pain, for such as shall offend therein to
confiscate and forfait all that which they may have imprinted, and to fine at
pleasure.

An Edict or decree and declaration, made by the king Charles, the ninth of
that name, upon the peace making of the troubles of France, the xix. day of
March 1562.
Printed at Paris by Robert Stephanus the kings printer. 1562.
With Privilege of the said king.
CHARLES by the grace of God king of France,
unto all those that shall see these presents, greeting.
Every man has seen and known how it has pleased the Lord God, within these
few years, to suffer yt this our Realm, should be afflicted and wersed with
many troubles, seditions and tumultes amongst our subjects, styrred and raised
by the diversity of opinions, and scruple of their consciences for ye matter of
Religion. For remedy whereof, and that this fire should not kindle further,
there has been heretofore made, diverse assemblies and conuocations, of the
most great and notable personages of our kingdom, and by their good counsel
and advise, set forth many Edictes and ordinances, according to the behoof
and need which was offered: thinking thereby to prevent the evil, and to go
before the inconvenience hanging thereupon.

Nevertheless the malice of these days has willed, and the Lord also has
by his judgment unknown (provoked as we must needs believe, with our offenses
and sins) left the bridle unto the said tumults. In such wise, as men have
armed themselves, so far forth, as there is come thereof infinite murders,
vengeaunces, robberies, forcing and pillage of towns, the ruin of temples and
Churches, battles given, and so many other euilles, calamities, and desolations
committed and exercised in diverse places, that this evil continuing, and seeing
already so many strangers in our said Realm, knowing also the preparatiues
made for the bringing in of more, the evident ruin of the same to be
incuitable: Considering also the great and vnreparable loss, which (to our
great grief) we have had, since the beginning of these tumults, of so many
Princes, Lords, Knights of our order, great Capitaynes and men of war: which
is next unto the hand of God, the true susteyner, pillar, defense, and
protection of this our Crown, and an argument unto our neighbors, which
should be of an ill will, to pearce and invade us, as we have been and are
threatened thereof.


Which by us considered, serching al possible remedies (how be it that thanks
be to God our forces be great, and that in appearance, we want no men:) Seeing
nevertheless, that all the evil, and inconvenience which comes of this
war, turns to the decay and hurt of our Realm, and having erperime^ted to
our great loss, such remedy to be neither fit nor convenient (the sickness
being hidden within the bowelles and minds of our people.) We have thought
that the best and most profitable, which we might apply thereunto, was (as a
Prince most christian, whereof we bear the name) to have recourse, to the
infinite grace and goodness of our Lord, and with his good help, to find
the means to pacify by our gentleness, the sharpness of the sickness: In
calling again and reconciling, the wills of our said subjects, to an union,
and to the acknowleging, which they all owe unto our obedience, to the honor
of God, wealth, health, and conservation of this our Realm: In prouidinge such
means as may reteyne and content our said Subjects: hoping that the time, the
fruit of a good, holy, free, and general or national counsel, and the virtue
of our ripe age, nere coming, led and directed by the hand and grace of our
Lord, (who of his goodness has always had care and guard of this Crown)
shall bring hereafter the certain and true establishing (unto his honor and
glory) rest and tranquilitye to our said people and subjects.

Whereupon we have well willed, to take the good and prudent council, of the
Queen our right dear and right honorable Lady and mother, of our right dear
and right well-beloved Cosins the Cardnal of Bourbon, Prince of Conde, Duke of
Mountpensier, and Prince of the Roche-sur-Yon, Princes of our blood. Also of
our right dear and right well-beloved Cosines, the Cardnall of Guyse, Duke of
Aumale, Duke of Mountmorency Cunstable, Pairs of France, Duke of Estamps,
Marshalles of Brissack, and of Bordillon, Lords of Andilot, of Sansack, of
Sipierre, and others good and great personages, of our privy counsel: which
all have been of the advice, and found it reasonable for the common wealth of
this our Realm, to make and ordeyne that which follows.

We give to understand, that we according to their good counsel, and for the
causes, reasons and considerations abouesaid, and others good and weighty
thereunto moving us, have said, declared, constituted and ordained, do say,
declare, constitute and ordeyne, we will and our pleasure is. That from
henceforth, all Gentlemen, which are Barons, Chastelains, high Iusticers, and
Lords holding full fee of Hawbert and every one of them may live in their
houses, (wherein they shall dwell) in liberty of their consciences and
exercise of the Religion, the which they do call reformed, with their family
and subjects, which freely and without any constraint would be thereat. And
the other Gentlemen having see, also in their houses, for them and their
families only. So that they dwell not in the Towns, Boroughes and Villages of
the Lords, high Iusticers, besides our self. In which case they may not use in
the said places, any exercise of the said Religion, except it be by permission
and license of their said Lords, high Iusticers, and none otherwise.

That in every Baylywick, Stewardship and Government, holding place of a
Baylywick, as Peronne, Montdidier Roy, and Rochelle, and others of like nature,
resorting barely and without any means in our Courts of Parliaments. We
shall ordeine, at the request of those of the Religion, a Town, in the
Suberbes whereof, the exercise of the said Religion may be used, of all those
of the resort which would go unto it, and none otherwise nor else where.

And nevertheless, every one may live and dwell over al, in his house freely,
without being examined or molested, forced or constrained for the matter of his
conscience. That in all the towns, wherein the said Religion was unto
the.vij. of this present month of March exercised, besides the other towns
which shall be (as it is said) perticularly named of ye said Baylywicks and
Stewardships: The said exercise shall be continued in one or two places within
the said Town, such one or both as by us shall be ordained.

Provided that those of the said religion shall not use or take, or reteyne
any Temple, or Church of the Ecclesiastical sort: which we do mean to be
now remitted in their Churches, houses, goods, possessions and revenues, to
enjoy and use them, so fully as they did before these tumultes. To use and
continue the service divine and accustomed by them, in their said Churches,
without any manner of molestation, impechment or let: nor also that they may
challenge any recompense for the ruins and hurtes, which have been done
thereunto.

We mean also that the Town and resort of the Preuostie, or Marialtie and
Vicountie of Paris, shall be and remain exempted, of al exercise of the said
Religion. And that notwithstanding those which have their houses within the
said Town and resort, may return into their said houses, and enjoy their
said goods peaceably: without being forced or constrained, examined or
molested for the time past, nor for to come, for ye matter of their conscience.
All Towns shall be remitted and set in their first estate and free traffic,
and all strangers put and sent out of this our Realm, the soonest that it
may be done.

And to make the wills of our said subjects the more contented and satisfied,
we do ordeine, will, and also our pleasure is, that every one of them return
and be conserved, maintained and kept under our protection, in all his goods,
honors, estates, charges and offices, of what quality they may be:
Notwithstanding all decrees, seasures, proceedings, judgments, arrestes, and
sentences given against them, since the death of the late king Henry, our
right honorable Lord and father (of laudable memory) and the execution of
them: as well for the matter of Religion, voyages and iourneis made, within and
without this kingdom, by commandment of our said Cousin the Prince of Conde,
as for the arms taken for this occasion and that which has followed thereof:
the which we have declared and do declare void and of none effect. So that by
their means, they nor their children, heirs and having cause, be in any thing
impeched or let, from the enjoying of their said goods and honors, nor that
they should be bound to take, obtain nor procure of us, any other prouiso or
warrant then these presents, by the which we do put their persons and goods
in full liberty.

And to the end it should not be doubted of the sincerity and right intention
of our said Cousin the Prince of Conde, we have said and declared, do say
and declare, that we do repute the same our said Cousin, for our good kinsman,
faithful subject and servant: as also we do account all the Lords,
Knights, Gentlemen and others, dwelling in the Cities, Towns, Cominalties,
Boroughes and other places of our Realm and Country, under our obedience,
which has followed, succored, helped and accompanied him, in this present
war, and during the said tumultes in any part and place whatsoever of our
said Realm, for our good and lawful subjects and servants: believing and
esteeming, that the same which has been done heretofore by our said subjects,
as well for the matter of arms, as the stablishing of the justice set amongst
them, judgment and executions thereof, has been done, to a good end and
entention, and for our service.

We do ordeyne also, we will and our pleasure is, that our said Cousin the
prince of Conde, do remain acquitted and by these presents, signed with our
hand, we do acquit him, of all the money which have been by him and his
commandment and order taken and raised in our receipts and of our treasures
unto whatsoever sum they may amount.

And likewise that he should remain discharged of those which have been (as it
is said) by him and his order also taken and raised of the cominaltie, Cities,
towns, paymasters, rents, revenues of Churches, and other, by him employed for
the occasion of the present wars: so that he nor his, nor those which have
been by him committed, to take up ye said money (ye which sort) and in like
manner those which have furnished and delivered it to them, shall remain
acquitted and discharged therefore, and shall not be in any wise, examined or
called to any account, for the time present or herafter: nor also for the
coining of money, melting or casting of artillarie, making of Gunpowders and
saltpeters, fortifications of towns, ruins and demoliments made for ye said
fortifications, by commandment of the same our said Cousin the Prince of
Conde, in all Towns of this our Realm, and Countries of our obedience,
whereof the bodies and Inhabitaunts of the said towns, shall remain also
discharged by these said presents. That all prisoners whether it be for the
war, or for the matter of religion, shall be consideredly and duly set at
liberty, of their persons and goods, with out paying any ransom, excepting
robbers, felons, thieves, and murderers, which shall not be comprehended in
these said presents.

And for that we do singularly desire, that all the occasions of these
troubles, tumults and sedicions may cease, to reconcile and unite the minds
and wills of our said subjects the one toward the other, and the more easier
by this union, to maynteyn the obedience which the one part and the other does
owe us, we have ordained and do ordeyne, intend, will, and our pleasure is.
That al injuries and offenses, which ye iniquity of ye time, and occasions
which have thereby happened, might have caused to spring among our said
subjects, and all other things passed and caused, by these tumultes, shall
remain quenched, as dead, buried and not chanced: defending right straightly,
upon pain of death, unto all our said subjects, of whatsoever estate and
quality they may be of, that they do not endeavor themselves, to vex nor
provoke the one the other, by injurious words, in reproching that which is
passed, nor to dispute, quarrel nor contest and brawle together, of the matter
of religion, offend nor outrage or wrong by word or deed, but to conteyne and
refrain themselves, and to live peaceably together, as brethren, friends,
fellow citezens and neighbors, upon pain, for them which shall offend, and
which shall be cause and motion of the vexation, injury and offense, which should
happen, to be upon the place forthwith, and without any other form of process
executed, according to the rigor of our present ordinance.

In consideration also whereof, and of the contents here before, and to cause
all scruple and doubt to cease, our said subjects shall depart and divide
themselves and shall forbear al manner of associatio^s, and gatherings
together, which they have within and without this Realm, and shall not from
henceforth, make any takings up of money, enrolings of men, congregations, nor
assemblies, other then is abouesaide, and without arms. Which we do also
prohibit and forbid them upon pain to be rigorously punished, and as
contempters and breakers of our ordinances and commandments.

We do further command by these self same presents, unto our beloved and
faithful, such as keep our Courts of Parliaments, Chambers of our accounts,
Courts of our helps, Bailiues, Stewards and other our Iusticers, and officers
to whom it may appertain, or unto their wieutenants, that they do cause
this our present declaration and ordinance, to be red, published and
registered, in their Courts and jurisdictions, and the same to interteyne and
cause to be interteyned kept and observed inuiolably from point to point, and
they to whom it shall appertain to enjoy and use, fully and peaceably, the
content thereof. Ceassing and causing to cease all troubles impechments and
letts to the contrary. For such is our pleasure.

In witness whereof, we have caused our Seal to be set to these presents.
Yeuen at Amboise the.xix. day of March in the year of our Lord God. 1562. and
in the third year of our reign. Signed CHARLES.
And there under, By the King in his Counsel. Signed ROBERTET.
And sealed in yelowe Wax with a duble labell of Parchement appending.
Red, published and registered, in the hearing of the kings Attorney general,
in the presence of the right mighty princes and Lords, the Cardinal of Borbon,
the Duke of Montpenseir, thereunto specially sent, by our Lord the most
christian king. In the Parliament of Paris, the.xxvij. day of the month of
March, in the year of our Lord. 1562.

Signed DV TILLET.

In like manner red, published and registered, in the hearing of the kings
Attorney general, in the Chamber of his accountes, the year and day
abouesayde.

Signed FORMAGET.

Red, published and registered in the Courts of helps, hearing and consenting
the kings Attorney general.

Signed LE SVEVR.

Red, proclaimed and published, with sound of Trumpet, and public
proclamation, in the accustomed places of the City of Paris, by the Kings
majesty's Heralts, assisting and being present the Lord Lieutenant civil and
others, the Thursedaye the.xxvij. of May. 1563.

The extract of the Kings Privilege.
BY the kings Majesty's special Privilege, Yeuen at the Camp near Orleance
the.xxv. day of March. 1562. signed by the King in his counsel, by the
Laubespine and sealed with the great seal of the said King in yelow Wax, upon
a single labell confirmatiue of the Letters patents of the said Lord, Yeuen
before at Saint Iermane in Lay, the.viij. of October. 1561. signed by the King,
the Lord Chaunceler being present, and Laubespine, sealed as above and
verified in the Court of Parliament at Paris the.xviij. day of February in the
said year. It is permitted to Robart Stephanus his Printer, to imprint or
cause to be imprinted, sold and to depute this present Edict of late made for
the peace making of the troubles of this Realm. So that no other Printers
whatsoever, may print the same, or cause to be imprinted, without license,
permission and consent for three months after this his impression, upon pain
unto the offenders, to confiscate and forfeit all that which they may have
imprinted, and to fine at pleasure.

Certain Articles of the requests made, in the behalf of the Protestants,
unto the King, with his Majesty's Aunsweres thereunto.
The same was delivered ye.4. day of March.M.D.lxviij. by the Lords ye
Chastillon, Count of the Rochfoucault, and of Bouchauanes deputies of the right
noble Prince of Conde, Lords, gentilmen and others of the religion pretended
reformed, which in treating of peace have required to be presented to the King,
to have thereupon express and special answers, and provident remedies. And to
serve unto those abouesaid of the religion pretended reformed, in all places,
and euerywhere as need shall be, to the end, that upon the Execution of the
Edict of peace making, there should nothing be left in doubt of his Majesty's
intention, and that the Governors, Lieuetenants, Generalles of Provinces,
Courts of Parliament, and other Judges, should not be ignorant of every one of
the said Articles, presented to his Majesty. After they have been by him seen
in his counsel, it was answered according as it shall be hereafter said.

The first Article
HIs Majesty may consider, if it may please his highness, that here before
his subjects have sustained great troubles and charges, in suyng for the
change of the unmeet places which were given them against the Edict, whereby
they could find no fruit for the comfort of his Subjects, wherefore it may
please his Majesty himself, to ordeyn such places, as may be more commodious
in the Suburbs of Cities, and Towns, according to the Edict.

The Aunsweres made by the Kings Counsel. And first to the ^foresayde
Article.
Gyuing the king to understand the places which they pretend unmeet, and
requiring to be changed, his majesty will provide for them accordingly.

The second Article.
Because those of the said Religion, do desire chiefly, that the Edict which
shall be, whereof depends the commonwealth and health, may be sincerely
observed, they have most humbly besought his Majesty, as yet they do, that
after the proclayming thereof, the Princes and Lords of his counsel, officers
of his Crown, and governors of his Provinces, do promise and swear, by his
commandment and authority, and in his own hands, to continue the
execution and intertainement thereof, every one in his charge, not thereby
paragoning or comparing any one to the greatness of his Majesty, but because
they have experimented that the example in forbering of the great, shall do
much harm in the matter, and therefore to refrain them, and bind them
further by their said promises and oath.

The Answer.
The king after the proclayming of the Edict, shall cause the princes and
Lords of his counsel, officers of his crown, and Governors of Provinces,
to put their oath into his hands, to observe and continue the execution and
entertainment of the said Edict, every one for his own respect or part, and
in his charge.

The third Article.
They beseech further, that the same which shall be done, may be purely and
sincerely observed, without making hereafter any declaration, or interpretation
thervppon, and that these words may be added: (Unto the time that God may give
us the grace, that our subjects may be reunited and brought into one
religion.) Not understanding (as they say) by this article, that the said
reuniting, and bringing into one, may come unto them from else where then from
the grace of God, and of the benefit and goodness of the kings Majesty.

The Answer.
The King does grant them that these words shall be added. (Unto the time
that God may give us the grace, that our subjects may be reunited into one
religion.)

The fourth Article.
Which Majesty they do supply most humbly, seeing that the same does promise
to cause to be administered unto them, good and sincere justice, that it may be
permitted unto them for this effect, to have recourse to put requests unto his
said majesty, when as there may be done unto them any wrong and oppressions.

The Answer.
The king grants, and will always think it good, that they shall put unto
him their requests and griefs, whereupon he will cause to be administered
unto them good and sincere justice.

The fifth Article.
As touching the conferences of the Ministers, they do require, that seeing
the same is but for the keeping and containing of the Ministers and others in
their duty, and to rule the doctrine and discipline of their religion, wherein
there is contained no jurisdiction, that it may please the King, for that they
are necessary exercises, and the which (as they do pretend) are permitted by
his Edictes, to grant the same unto them. And to cause such letters to be set
forth and dispatched in such forms, as they may be assured in that behalf.

The Answer.
The king does grant it them, always provided, that when they will use their
said conferences, they shall advertise the Governor of the Cuntrie, or his
Lieutenant in his absence, who shall commit some person to be there, to the end
there should be traycted of none other things, then of the doctrine, and
discipline of the religion.

The.vj. Article.
And for schools they do require that the children may be publicly and
openly instructed and taught, and priuatelye in particular houses.

The Answer.
The King grants and permits to instruct their children, in the places
appointed in the Baylywikes, and stewardships for the exercise of the said
religion, and in like manner in the other Cities, Towns and places, in the
which the exercise of their Religion was the vij. of March. 1562. and has been
always continued. And in like manner, that every one of them may cause their
children to be taught in their houses.

The.vij. Article.
Showing also, that the little obedience which some officers have given unto
the Kings Edicts, and the boldness whereof they have used, and further
hereafter will use, toward those of the religion, if it would not please him to
provide them of present remedy, and that to this end, it would please him to
ordein in every parliament, a Chamber made and gathered, of those which shall
find themself most quiet and least offended, unto which only, it shall
privately, but to al others appertain, for such time as it shall please his
Majesty to ordeyne for the knowledge of the matter of religion, and the
observations of the Edicts of peace, in which chamber, all those of the said
religion may (when they seem good) cause to be sent all their process and
matters depending in the said Courts.

The Answer.
The king can not make any alteration in the estate and order established in
the laws, but he will provide to cause it to be administered with such
sincerity and equality, to all his subjects indifferently, that every man
shall have justice.

The.viij. Article.
They have also declared, because that those which are out of the resort of
the Court of Parliament of Paris, cannot have assured access, nor withdrawing
unto their houses, before that the Edict be published at the Parliaments, in
the seats and resortes of the which they are dwelling: that it would please his
Majesty, to ordein a certain time to make the said Proclamation, and the
means whereby they may safelye retire them selves unto their houses, and there
to lay down their arms.

The Answer.
It shall be commanded and enjoined, unto the parliaments, to publish the
Edict forthwith, which shall be promptly, by a man specially sent, and to the
kings Attorneyes and Generals to procure and require, the said publication,
and nevertheless in this mean time, it shall be ordained unto them, and
especially unto the Governors of Cuntries, to provide and be with all their
power, helping that those of the said Religion, may retire themselves safelye
into their houses. And there to remain in all safety, and to leave them in the
peaceable enjoying of all their goods, although the said Edict were not yet
published.

The.ix. Article.
They do require that it would please the King, that his Emologation,
comprobation and allowing for the authority of the said Edict, may be wihout a
secret register, and that the Kings Attorney be consenting thereunto.

The Answer.
Agreed, and his Majesty means that all the answers hereaboue made, upon
every one of the said Articles, shall be hereafter observed and kept, over al
his Realm, by all his Governors, Lieutenants, Generals, Courts of Parliament,
and other Judges, having to this end, signed them with his hand, and caused
his Secretary of estate by name, to countersigne them, and does command that
a copy of the Articles, be put into the hands of the said Lord Cardinal of
Chastillon, Count of the Rochefoucault, and of Bouchauanes, to use it at their
need.

Given the.xxiij. day of March. 1568. Signed Charles.
And therevnder, signed, Fizes.


