A TRVE Relation AND IOVRNALL, OF THE MANNER OF THE ARRIVAL, and Magnificent
Entertainment, given to the High and Mighty Prince CHARLES, Prince of GREAT
BRITAIN, by the King of Spain in his Court at MADRID.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for WILLIAM BARRET. M. DC. XXIII.

ON Friday, being the ninth of March, Stilo veteri, about eight of the clock
in the evening, the Prince, and the Lord Marquess of Buckingham, being all
alone with the Postillion (as they had rid post together, three days before)
arrived at Madrid, and conueighed themselves with such secrecy into the house
of the Earl of Bristoll, his Majesty's Ambassador extraordinary to the King of
Spain, that for that night, they were hardly known by any, but they could not
be long concealed. For early upon the next day being Saturday, there grew a
whispering amongst many, as if the Marquess were come, but not a word of the
Prince. The same morning the Conde de Gondomar, was advertised privately of the
arrival, not only of the Lord Marquess, but of the Prince also, and so he
went instantly to the Earl of Bristowes house. After he had done reverence to
his Highness, and had passed an hour in his presence, and in discourse with
his Highness, and those Lords, it was desired that he would give the King his
Mastor notice of the arriual of the Marquess; but that he should say nothing
of the Prince at that time: at least not in any such sort, as that they might
take knowledge of his being there. The Conde de Gondomar undertook it, and
carried the news thereof to the Conde de Oliuares, who is that Kings great
Favorite: and indeed a Person, who for his noble conditions and choice parts,
does well deserve the large portion which the King his Master affords him of
his estimation and affection: He conueighed what he knew to his Majesty, and
then withal sent to the Marquess, desiring earnestly that he would give him
leave to go instantly and visit him. But the Marquess excused himself, and
did expressly refuse it through his desire of concealing the Prince; and so
they resolved upon another meeting place for the afternoon, which fell out to
be the Park. The Conde therefore sent a Coach to the Lord Marquess, and his
Lordship took with him the Conde de Gondomar, the Earl of Bristoll, and Sir
Walter Aston, his Majesty's ordinary Ambassador in that Court. The Conde de
Oliuares was already expecting the Lord Marquess, and at length they met, and
spent more then an hour together, in great expressions of contentment and joy.
After this, the Conde conducted the Lord Marquess, and all that Company into
the Court, and so up to the King by a private way. At which time, the Lord
Marquess delivered the King our Sovereigns Letters to the King of Spain, and
so much passed between them, as served to disclose that the Prince was come,
and at the Earl of Bristowes house, wherewith the King was extremely taken,
and much transported with joy. His Majesty sent a hearty salutation to the
Prince by the Lord Marquess, wherewith his Lordship returned to his Highness,
being extraordinarily satisfied, both with that Kings Princely courtesy, and
his many noble parts otherwise. The Conde de Oliuares conducted the Lord
Marquess home, and pressing even beyond his Commission (for he was not yet to
take knowledge of the Princes arrival) to kiss his Highness hand, he saw
him, and spoke with him. The Prince received him nobly, and like the Prince he
is, and was very earnest with him, to put on his hat; but the Conde would by no
means do it; although he be a Graunde of Spain, and may therefore be
covered before his own King.

During this visit, the Marquess desired the Conde, that he would oblige the
Prince by getting him a speedy sight of the Infanta his Mistress; wherein he
promised to do his best endeavor, though it were in Lent, which he said was a
time of extraordinary recollection and reservation, and so they parted for the
present, being all in great contentment one with another.

In conformity to the Princes desire, his Majesty (being that night acquainted
with it by the Conde) laid aside the consideration of the time, and instantly
resolved to give his Highness all satisfaction. And so he went abroad the next
day, at the hour appointed, which was about three a clock in the afternoon,
and to the Prado being the certain place agreed upon between them, his
Majesty conducting with him his Queen, his Sister the Infanta, the Infantes
Don Carlos, and the Cardinal Don Fernando, his brethren; the Conde de
Oliuares, and the Conde de Gondomar, following him with much of the Nobility of
that Court, both of Ladies and Lords. The Prince on the other side went
disguised in the Duke of Cea's Coach, and was attended in the same Coach by the
Lord Marquess, the Earl of Bristoll, the Conde de Gondomar, and Sir Walter
Aston. And so both the King and the Prince made diverse turns and returns in
their several Coaches, and in several parts of the Town and Prado (which is
a place of recreation) where the Nobility is often wont to take the air; and
every one of them saw each other in a clear light, not being able to abstain
from saluting mutually with the hat as they passed by, though they had agreed
to take no kind of notice of one another; and this was all they did for that
time. The King and all that royal Company returned by night by a world of
Torchlight, which made a most glorious show.

Immediately after this, his Majesty not being content with those single sights
of the Prince, sent the Conde de Oliuares, to pray him that they might meet,
and embrace, and speak together before they slept. The Prince accepted of the
occasion, but there rose a difference between them about the manner. For the
King did much press the Prince that he would accept of a visit from himself
in the Earl of Bristolls house, and really his Highness had much ado to refuse
it, but yet he would by no means admit thereof. On the other side, the Prince
did offer to go visit his Majesty in his Palace, but the King considering that
that must needs be to the Princes disadvantage, because he had no Equipage, his
Majesty refused expressly, and it grew to be agreed between them, that it
should be in the aforesaid Prado, and in the evening of the same Sunday when it
might be dark. Whereupon the Conde de Oliuares said pleasantly, that he would
by no means consent that his Master should meet him, and especially by night,
but upon even terms; that the Prince was a great man at arms, and that even
in the civil way he was strong in Ambassadors and Secretaries, whereas the
King was in effect alone, that therefore he desired that the Prince would lend
him the Marquess, and that he might carry him to the Court, and so he might
come to that meeting with the King and him, as a Spaniard, and not the Princes
servant for that time. The Prince gave leave, with much content, that he should
go, and so he went, and the King brought him and the Conde de Oliuares to the
Prado. Now the King being first arrived, sent a private message to the Prince,
to let him know that he expected his Highness. Thereupon the Prince made much
haste, being attended by the Conde de Gondomar, the Earl of Bristoll, Sir
Walter Aston, and Sir Francis Cottington his Highness Secretary.

When they were upon the point of meeting, they all alighted out of their
Coaches, and the King embraced the Prince, and made incomparable professions of
his love and affection, and of the straight obligation which the King our
Sovereign and his Highness had cast upon him, by that maine act of confidence
and favor.

Then his Majesty took the Prince into his Coach, and made him perforce go
in first, and sit upon his right hand, and so they continued some good time in
great sweetness of conversation, the Earl of Bristoll interpreting between
them. At the parting, the King lighted out of his Coach, with the Prince; and
used much endeavor to have conducted the Prince to his Coach; but the Prince
would by no means suffer it, and so they parted in the midway.

On Monday the tenth of March, his Highness was made acquainted, by the Conde
de Oliuares, and the Conde de Gondomar, whom the King had sent to visit him,
that the King was that morning going in devotion to a Monastery called the
Merced; and that he would pass the streets on horseback. When his Highness
showed some willingness to be a spectator thereof, the Conde de Oliuares
carried him to a convenient place, where he had a full view of all. That
evening, his Highness went into the fields by the River side, to take the
air. And the Conde de Oliuares, and the Conde de Monterey, went again to
visit him from the King, and they two waited on him in discourse, above an
hour.

On Tuesday his Majesty sent again to see how his Highness did; and withal
to let him know, that he could not but acknowledge the good service, which the
Conde de Gondomar had done him, in printing such a Character of his sincere
affection, in the heart of the King of great Britain, and of his Highness; as
that they should think fit to put such a precious treasure into his hands, as
his Highness was. And that therefore he could not suffer any subject of his to
be vnaduanced, whom he found so well accepted by the King of Great Britame, and
his Highness. For which cause he was resolved to make him of his Counsel of
State, though he accounted him indeed as an English man. Nay rather that for
that respect he would admit him, to the end that both the King of Great
Britain, and his Highness, might be more confident of his proceedings; and
made privy to the most inward passages. But the King withal, sent his Highness
word, that he desired him to give the first notice of it to the Conde, and
receive his thanks. The Prince sent him the news thereof by Master Secretary
Cottington; the Conde came to cast himself at the Princes feet, for so high an
honor and favor, and so being addressed by his Highness to the Court, was
instantly sworn.

In the afternoon of that day, the Prince having intimated a desire to see the
King, was conducted and attended by the Conde de Oliuares, toward the Palace,
through a back way. But before he could arrive there, he was prevented by the
King. Who being attended by the Marquess of Carpio alone, went down in
private manner, through a Garden to meet his Highness. Where after they had
saluted one another with a manner of courtesy, which indeed was Princely, the
King by the force of his favor, put him still first into his Coach, and seated
him on the right hand, and then entered himself, and sat by him; the Lord
Marquess, and the Conde de Oliuares, sitting at the other end of the Coach,
and the Earl of Bristow in one of the sides, and the Marquess of Carpio in
the other. Thus they went toward a house of pleasure, belonging to the King,
near Madrid, called the Casa del Campo. Where after they had spent about an
hour, the King making extraordinary great professions of his affection to the
King our Sovereign, and the Prince: it was found before they were aware, that
his Majesty had brought his Highness a mile and a half on his way homewards;
and indeed almost to the Earl of Bristolls house. The Prince would feign have
attended the King back toward the Palace, but he would not suffer him.

His Highness did then make a little turn another way, and before he could
get to the Earl of Bristolls, the Conde de Oliuares (having already left the
King) was ready there to attend his Highness. Shortly after, the Duke of
Infantado, Mayordomo Mayor to the King, did by special commandment from his
Majesty (for without order from the King, none as yet did visit the Prince)
repair unto his Highness, to kiss his hands, and offered him his uttermost
service, with great reverence, in whatsoever he should be pleased to command.

On the two next days being Wednesday and Thursday, there was not much done,
of particular and external note. The mornings were spent by his Highness in
giving order for his own private affairs; and the afternoones, for the most
part, in recreating himself abroad in the fields; the Earl of Bristoll
waiting on him with his hawks.

Only upon the Thursday night after supper, there were sent to his Highness
to entertain the time, choice persons both of men and women, selected out of
four companies of Comedians, who danced several kinds of dances before him,
and spent about two hours therein, the Condes of Monterey and Gondomar, being
present.

On Friday being the foureteenth, his Highness stirred not abroad all the
morning; but first sent Master Secretary Cottington, and afterward the Earl of
Bristoll, to the Conde de Oliuares: and it should seem to have been not only
about matter of complement, but for some particular business. After dinner the
Condes de Monterey and Gondomar, went to his Highness, and conducted him
again to the Casa del Campo, where he found the King, and with his Majesty
the Infantes Don Carlos, and Don Fernando the Cardinal, his brothers; whom his
Highness had not seen before that time. They saluted, embraced, and striued
mutually to kiss the hands of each other; after which they all took horse
together, and entertained themselves a good while in beholding sundry men,
which were disposed there on foot, of purpose to shoot at such kinds of game,
as they found in the place. And so there were Hares started, Partridges sprung,
and other foul put up to wing: they killed of all sorts as they went, either
running or flying by them. Upon the end of which pastime, the King
(notwithstanding all the resistance which was in the Princes power to make)
brought him again on his way homeward, to the same place whither he had
accompanied him on the Tuesday night before; The Condes de Monterey, and
Gondomar, attending his Highness to the Earl of Bristolls house.

Upon this Friday, (for a further expression of the great joy which that King
had conceived at the arrival of his Highness, and for his presence in that
place) his Majesty commanded, that a general pardon of all offenses should
instantly be proclaimed and published, and that all the Prisoners who were
restrained within the whole Kingdom or continent of Spain, should be
released; reserving only the rights and interests of third persons, as in the
case of Debts and Appeals for murder and the like. By virtue of which pardon
and Proclamation some hundreds of Prisoners in Madrid, were then freed, and all
the Prisons emptied; diverse offenders who had taken Sanctuary in Churches, and
retired to the Ambassadors houses (which are highly privileged in that Court)
having notice thereof before, did by way of anticipation dispose of themselves
into the hands of Justice; and so made a purchase of their liberty by their
imprisonment.

Instant order was also given, that all the English which were suruiuing in the
Galleys, and who had been condemned to that servitude, during life, for
committing of Piracy, and many other mortal crimes, should be released
without delay. And this Grace which his Majesty manifested in contemplation of
the Prince, has strangely increased the general applause wherewith he is
received and observed in that Court by all.

Saturday being the fifteenth, was spent at home by his Highness in private
manner, in regard of the solemn entry he was to make the next day, which was
designed by the King, to be performed with the same magnificence and splendor,
as is used at the Coronation of the Kings of Spain. Only a little before
dinner, the Conde de Monterey went to the Prince, and told his Highness that
the King had sent two horses thither, and desired him to make choice, upon
which he would be pleased to ride the day following, for that the King would
ride upon the horse which he should leave. Whereupon his Highness passed out
into a Garden, not far from the Earl of Bristols house, where, like
himself, he took pains and pleasure to try them both; to the end that if
there were a difference, he might take the less excellent to himself, and
return the other to the King.

On Sunday, being the sixteenth, when it was already well toward noone, there
went four Councillors of State, Don Augustine Mexia, the Marquess De Montes
Claros, Don Fernando Giron, and the Conde de Condomar, to wait upon the Prince
at the Earl of Bristols house, and to attend his Highness to a famous
Monastery, called Saint Ieronimo, near Madrid; from whence the Kings of Spain
are wont to go when they make their solemn entry into that town; and where
the King has a Quarter reserved for the honor and entertainment of his own
royal Person. There was his Highness feasted privately at dinner by his
Majesty's appointment, but yet as by the Conde de Gondomar, who has the
keeping of that Quarter in the said Monastery. The afternoon till four of the
clock, was spent by his Highness, in giving audience to the Inquisidor
General, and to the several Bodies of Counsels, which do all reside in that
Court, and did all present themselves to the Prince, excepting only the
Council of State, which never makes any visit in Corpse, but all the rest did
perform that duty of observance, namely the Council Royal of Castilia, the
Council Royal of Aragon, the Council of Portugal, the Council of Italy,
the Council of Military Orders, the Council of the Indies, the Council of
the Treasury, and the Council of the Exchequer.

The Corregidor, and the Regidores of Madrid, which are the persons who have
the government of that Town, did also desire audience of the Prince; for they
all had been commanded by the King to present themselves humbly before his
Highness. And here it is to be observed once for all, that all the Subjects of
that Kingdom, who had occasion to wait upon the Prince, did strive with as
much earnestness as good manners would permit, to have actually kissed his
Highness hands. But the Prince was resolute in not accepting that humble token
of their love, as conceiving it to be fitter between the natural subjects and
their Sovereign.

But about four in the afternoon of that Sunday, the King went to see the
Prince, whom his Highness received at the gate below. They made no very long
stay there when once the complements were ended, but all things being put in
order for his Highness entry, they disposed themselves to be going. And
whereas the King with his Nobility came in Coaches thither, the whole Court did
then mount on horseback, after the example of his Majesty and the Prince. The
King did still put the Prince into a necessity of taking the right hand, and so
they passed toward the Palace.

But as soon as they entered upon the liberties of Madrid, they were expected
and attended by four and twenty Regidores of the town, who had there a large
Canopie of rich Tissue, and it belonged to them by office to carry it over the
King. They were all apparelled in rich cloth of Tissue, lined with crimson
cloth of gold. The King took the Prince under the Canopie, and kept him still
on his right hand. Before them went the Courts and Ministers of Justice, then
the Grandes and all the other principal Nobles of that Court in colors and
great bravery, and they were attended by their followers in several Liueries,
which were very rich. Next after the King and Prince went the Lord Marquess of
Buckingham, and the Conde de Oliuares, executing the places of Masters of the
Horse to them both, the Conde giving the right hand to the Lord Marquess; and
either of them had a Horse of State, as the ensign of the place he held.

The Canopy which was to be the fee of the Conde de Oliuares, as Master of the
Horse to the King, was presented afterward by the Town to the Lord Marquess,
with all other fees belonging to that office, because he served that day as
Master of the Horse to the Prince, in whose honor the action was performed.
Then proceeded the Earl of Bristoll between the eldest Counselor of State,
and one of the Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber; and Sir Walter Aston after him,
accompanied in like manner; the rest both of the Counsel of State, and of the
Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber following them. After whom went that goodly
Guard which is called de los Archeros, who were bravely clad and arraied.

In the ways as the triumph passed, all the streets were adorned, in some
places with rich hangings, in others with curious pictures, and here and there
certain scaffolds were sprinkled, whereupon the bodies of those Counsels sat
to see, which formerly had been with the Prince to do him reverence. And in
other streets of the same passage diverse representations were made of the best
Comedians dancers, and men of music, to give contentment to that Royal
Pair, as they passed by.

As soon as the King and Prince were arrived and had lighted at the Palace,
there was great pressing between them two for the hindmost place; but in fine
they went hand in hand, or rather indeed embracing mutually their bodies with
one another arms, all the while as they were going up toward the Queens
side, to whom the King was already conducting the Prince. The Queen though
she were in a very large room, would by no means expect the Prince under her
State; but went down to within two paces of the very door to meet his
Highness; and then conducted him to her cloth of State; where there were set
three equal chaires, the Queens in the middle, with the Prince on her right
hand, and the King on the left. The room was as richly furnished as may well
be imagined: but the chief riches thereof consisted in that living Tapistry
of Ladies and Noblemens Children, called Menines, which stood and garnished all
the room round about close by the walls.

The King from hence conueighed the Prince to the quarter assigned him, and the
Queen would needs accompany him to the door of the same great room, bowing
very low unto him at the parting, in such manner as well expressed the value
her Majesty set upon his person, and the honor she desired to do him.

The King in the mean time, was upon his way to the Princes Quarter; which was
all very sumptuously furnished, and at the entrance thereof stood the Infantes
Dou Carlos, and the Cardinal Don Ferdinando his brothers; so they all three
conducted the Prince into his bedchamber, where the King took his leave for
that time. Only there, his Majesty was content to take the hand of the
Prince, because his Highness, was now as in his own proper home. And although
the Prince was even importunatly bent to attend the King back to his own
Quarter, yet the King would by no means suffer that he should return any
further than to make one only step out of his own lodgings.

The Prince had not been there an hour before the Queen sent the Conde de
Benauente, who is her Mayor domo Mayor, with sumptuous and curious Presents to
his Highness; namely, a fair great Basen of massy gold, borne by two men,
and a curious imbrodered Night-gowne laid double in it. Besides, her Majesty
sent him 2. great Truncks bound with bands of pure gold, and thick struck with
nails of gold, and locks and keys of the same. The couerings and linings
whereof are of Amber leather, and the Trunks full of several delicacies of
curious Linen and Perfumes. Besides these Trunks, she sent him a fair rich
Deske, every drawer whereof was full of rarities. The Countess of Oliuares sent
also a noble present to the Lord Marquess of Buckingham.

Fireworkes were made, and Torches set in all the Windows of Madrid for three
nights together, having been so commanded by Proclamation. And it is strange to
hear with what acclamations and benedictions the voice of the people does
attend the Prince, whenever he is discerned to be abroad, crying, Viua el
Principe de Galls, Viua el Principe de Galls. The King has also commanded
that his Highness be attended by all Officers and served in all points as
himself is. All they who wait upon the Princes person, are in the rank or
quality of Lords. The King has sent him half his own Guard. He has
assigned to his Highness for the Mayor domo Mayor, or high Steward of his
House, the Conde de Monterey, who is brother in law to the Conde de Oliuares,
President of Italy, of the Council of State, and a Graunde of Spain. He has
given him besides two other Mayor Domos to serve him, namely, the Conde de
Gondomar, and the Conde de la Puebla. And as for the Conde de Monterey, his
Majesty having observed the diligent affection which he daily carried to the
Princes service, did bestow a gilt Key upon him in contemplation thereof,
whereby he was ipso facto made a Gentleman of tho Kings Chamber, and it was
done the rather, for that so he should be the better able to comply with his
new place of Mayor domo Mayor.

The King did also send two gilt Keys to his Highness, desiring him to bestow
them upon what English he would, to the end that his Palace might be all open
unto them: whereupon his Highness gave one of them to the Lord Marquess of
Buckingham, and the other to the Earl of Bristoll.

His Majesty has moreover imposed upon diverse Counselors of State, that some
one of them shall daily attend in the Princes Quarter by turns, to understand
his pleasure from time to time, and that four Grandes, namely, the Admiral of
Castile, the Duke of Cea, the Marquess of Velada, and the Duke of Yjar be ever
at hand, to court, accompany and attend the Prince whithersoeuer his Highness
shall be pleased to go.

The next day after the Prince was conducted to the Palace, all the Counsels
came to wait upon his Highness, and to let him know that they had received
express order from the King their Master, to perform and obey all consultaes
and commands, which should come from his Highness, were it for the disposing
of any offices, Encomienda's, or any other provisions of Grace, which should
happen to fall, during the residence of his Highness in that Court, and that
as exactly, as if the King himself should command any such thing under his
hand.

There are also said to be other great Triumphs in preparation, and Letters
Mandatory sent to the principal Nobility of Aragon, that they come and give
attendance at the Court, upon the Princes pleasure; because they have the
reputation to be excellent men at Arms. And that the Court may appear in
greater luster and glory, the King has suspended for so long as his Highness
shall be there, the Edict which his Majesty lately had caused to be
proclaimed, for the restraint of all excess in point of apparel.

His Majesty has also been pleased to take particular care that the Lord
Marquess of Buckingham be well lodged in the Palace, in a Quarter of his own,
near adjoining to the Prince, and has commanded him to be served with a full
and plentiful Diet, and to be also nobly attended; besides many other such
demonstrations of grace and favor from that King, with so particular and great
respects from the Grandes and all the Nobles of that Court, as the like perhaps
has not been seen imparted to any stranger, merely a subject.

This is the substance of that which passed at Madrid concerning the reception
of the Prince, from the seventh of March (which was the day of his arrival in
that Court) till the eighteenth of the same Month. But that which may put a
good full point to this Relation; and withal, fill the hearts of all the King
our Sovereigns obedient and loyal Subjects, with much comfort, is, to know
that the last messenger which came from his Highness, left him in as
prosperous and perfect health, as ever he had been known to enjoy; and
whereas virtue when it is soundly practiced at home, shows fair abroad; the
Comportment of his Highness in the place where now he is, has made such a
prospect upon his Noble and Princely parts, in all respects, as may well give
us cause to rejoice and to render humble thanks unto Almighty God for the same.

FINIS.

