THE Anuals of great Britain. OR, A MOST EXCELlent Monument, wherein may be
seen all the antiquities of this Kingdom, to the satisfaction both of the
Universities, or any other place stirred with Emulation of long continuance.
Excellently figured out in a worthy Poem.

LONDON: Printed for MATTHEW LOWNES. 1611.

ROSALINS COMPLAINT, METAPHORIcally applied to Dame Nature at a Parliament held
(in the high Star Chamber) by the Gods, for the preservation and increase of
Earths beauteous Phoenix.
A Solemn day of meeting among the Gods,
And royal parliament there was ordained:
The heavenly Synod was at open ods,
And many hearts with earthly wrongs were pained;
Some came to crave excuse, some to complain
Of heavy burdend griefs they did sustain.
Vesta she told, her Temple was defiled:
Juno how that her nuptial knot was broken;
Venus from her son Cupid was exiled:
And Pallas tr^e with ignorance was shoken:
Bellora rau'd at Lordlike cowardice,
And Cupid that fond Ladies were so nice.
To this Assembly came Dame Nature weeping,
And with her handkercher through wet with tears,
She dried her rosy cheeks, made pale with sighing,
Hanging her woeful head, head full of fears:
And to Jove's self placed in a golden seat,
She kneeld her down, and thus began to entreat:
Thou mighty Imperator of the earth,
Thou everliving Regent of the air,
That to all creatures give a lively breath,
And thundrest wrath down from thy fiery chair,
Behold thy handmaid, king of earthly kings,
That to thy gracious sight sad tidings brings.
(...) ^are rich Phoenix of exceeding beauty,
(...)-like Lilly in the earth I placed;
(...), to whom men owe duty:
(...) country with a milke-white Dove I graced:
O^e and none such, since the wide world was found,
Has ever Nature placed on the ground.
Head.
Her head I framed of a heavenly map,
Wherein the seuenfold vert^es were enclosed,
When great Apollo slept within my lap,
And in my bosom had his rest reposed,
I cut away his locks of purest gold,
And placed them on her head of earthly mould.
Hair.
When the least whistling wind begins to sing,
And gently blows her hair about her neck,
Like to a chime of bells it soft does ring,
And with the pretty noise the wind does check,
Able to lull asleep a pensive heart,
That of the round worlds sorrows bears a part.
F^r^^ead.
Her forehead is a place for princely Io^e
To ^it, and censure matters of import:^
Wherein men read the sweet conceits of Love,
To which hart-pained Lovers do resort,
And in this ^ablet find to cure the wound,
For which no salve or herb was ever found.
Eyes.
Under this mirror, are her princely eyes:
Two Carbuncles, two rich imperial lights;
That ore the d^y and night do soueraignize,
And their dim tapers to their rest she frights:
Her eyes excel the Moon and glorious Son,
And when she rises al their force is done.
Cheeks.
Her morning-coloured cheeks, in which is placed,
A Lilly lying in a bed of Roses;
This part above all other I have graced,
For in the blew veins you may read sweet posies:
When she does blush, the Heavens do wax ^ed,
When she looks pale, that heavenly Front is dead.
Chinne.
Her chinne a little little pretty thing,
In which the sweet carnatian Gelli-flower,
Is round encompast in a crystal ring,
And of that pretty Orb does bear a power:
No storm of Envy can this glory touch,
Though many should assay it overmuch.
Lips.
Her lips two rubie Gates from whence does spring,
Sweet honied de^w by an entangled kiss,
From forth these glories does the Night-bird sing,
A Nightingale that no right notes will ^isse:
True learned Eloquence and Poetry,
Do come between these doors of excellency.
T^eth.
Her teeth are hewed from rich crystal Rocks,
Or from the Indian pearl of much esteem,
These in a closet her deep counsel locks,
And are as porters to so fair ^ Que^ne,
They taste the diet of the (...) train,
Other base gros^enesse they do still disdain.
Tongue.
Her tongue the vtterer of all glorious things,
The silver clapper of that golden bell,
That never ^oundeth but to mighty Kings,
And when she speaks, her speeches do excel:
He in a happy chair himself does place,
Whose name with her sweet tongue she means to grace.
Neck.
Her neck is Vestas silver conduict pipe,
In which she powers perfect chastity,
And of the muskie grapes in summer ripe,
She makes a liquor of ratietie,
That dies this swanne-like pillar to a white,
More glorious then the day with all his light.
^r^astes.
Her breasts two crystal orbs of whitest white,
Two little mounts from whence life's comfort springs,
Between those hillockes Cupid does delight
To sit and play, and in that valley sings:
Looking loue-babies in her wanton eyes,
That all gross vapors thence does chas^esize.
Arms.
Her arms are branches of that silver tree,
That men surname the rich H^sperides,
A precious circling show of modesty,
When she does spread these glories happiness*
Ten times ten thousand blessings he does ^aste,
Whose circled arms shall cling about her waste.
Hands.
Her hands are fortunes palms, where men may read
His first hours destiny, or weal or woe,
When she this sky-like map abroad does spread,
Like pilgrims many to this Saint do go,
And in her hand, white hand, they there do see
Love lying in a bed of yuorie.
Fing^rs.
Her fingers long and small do grace her hand;
For when she touches the sweet sounding Lute,
The wild untamed b^asts ^maz'd do stand,
And c^rroll-chanting birds are sudden mute:
O fingers how you grace the silver wires,
And in humanity burn Venus fires!
Belly.
Her belly (o grace incomprehensible)
Far whiter then the milke-white lilly flower,
O might Arabian Phoenix come invisible,
And on this mountain build a glor^ous bower,
Then Sun and Moon as tapers to her bed,
Would light loves Lord to take her ^aidenhead.
Nota.
Be still my thoughts, be silent all yea Muses,
Wit-flowing eloquence now gra^e my tongue:
Arise old Homer and make no excuses,
Of a rare peec^ of art must be my song,
Of more then most, and most of all beloved,
About the which Venus sweet do^es have houered.
There is a place in lovely paradize,
From whence the golden Gehon ouerflowes,
A fountain of such honorable prize,
That none the sacred, sacred virtues knows,
Walled about, be^ok'ning sure defense,
With trees of life, to keep ^ad errors thence.
T^igh^s.
Her Thighs two pillars fairer far then fair,
Two underprops of that celestial house,
That Mansion that is Iunos silver chair,
In which Ambrosie VENUS does carouse,
And in her thighs the pretty veins are running
Like Crystal ^iuers from the maine streams flowing.
Legg^s.
Her Legs are made as graces to the rest,
So pretty, white, and so proportio^ate,
That leads her to loves royal sportiue nest,
Like to a light bright Angel in her gate:
For why no creature in the earth but she,
Is like an Angel, Angel let her be.
Fee^e.
Her Feet (now draw I to conclusion)
Are neat and little to delight the eye,
No term in all humane invention,
Or in the vein of sweet writ Poetry
Can ere be found, to give her feet that grace,
That bears her corporate Soul from place to place.
And if by night she walk, the Marigold,
That does enclose the glory of her eye,
At her approach her beauty does unfold,
And spreads her self in all her royalty,
Such virtue has this Phoenix glassy shield,
That Flowers and Herbs at her fair sight do yield.
And if she grace the Walks within the day,
Flora does spread an Arras cloth of flowers,
Before her do the pretty Satires play,
And make her banquets in their leauie Bowers:
Head, Hair, Brow, Eyes, Cheeks* Chin and all,
Lips, Teeth, Tongue, Neck, Breasts, Belly are maiesticall.
This Phoenix I do fear me will d^cay,
And from her ashes never will arise
An other Bird her wings for to display,
And her rich beauty for to equalize:
The Arabian fires are too dull and base,
To make another spring within her place*
Therefore dread Regent of these Elements,
Pity poo^e Nature in her Art excelling,
Give thou an humble, ^are to my laments,
That to thee have a long true tale been telling,
Of her, who when (...) please the^ to behold,
Her outward sight shall bewties pride unfold.
At these words Jove stood as a man amazed,
And Iunos loue-bred beauty turned to wight,
Venus she blushed, and on dame Nature gazed.
And Vesta she began to weep outright:
And little Cupid poor boy* struck in love,
With repetition of this earthly Dove.
But at the last Jove began to rouse his spirit,
And told dame Nature in her sweet discourse;
Her woman's To^ng did run before her Wit,
Such a fair soul her self could never nurse,
Nor in the vastie earth was ever living,
Such beauty that all beauty was excelling.
Nature was struck with pale temeritie,
To see the God of thunders lightning eyes;
He shook his knotty hair so wrathfully,
As if he did the heavenly rout despise:
Then down upon her knee dame Nature falls,
And on the great gods name aloud she calls.
Jove thou shall see my comm^ndations,
To be unworthy and impartial,
To make of her an extallation,
Whose beauty is divine maiesticall;
Look on that painted picture there, behold
The rich wrought Phoenix of Arabian gold.
Jove's eyes were settled on her painted eyes;
Jove blushing smiled* the picture smiled again:
Jove spoke to her, and in his heart did rise
Loves amors, but the picture did disdain^
To love the god, Jove would have stole a kiss,
But Juno being by, denied him this.
When all the rest beheld this counterfeit,
They knew the substance was of rarer price:
Some gazed upon her face, on which did wait
As messengers, her two celestial eyes;
Eyes wanting fire, did give a lightning flame,
How much more would her eyes man's senses tame?
Then all the Gods and Goddesses did decree,
In humble manner to entreat of Jove,
And every power upon his bended knee,
Showed faithful service in dame Natures love,
Entreating him to pacify his Ire,
And raise another Phoenix of new fire.
Her picture from Jove's eyes has banished Hate,
And Mildness plaind the furrows of his brow,
Her painted shape has chastised debate,
And now to pleasure them he makes a vow:
Then thus Jove spoke, it is pity she should die,
And leave no offspring of her Progeny.
Nature go hie thee, get thee Phoebus chair,
Cut through the sky, and leave Arabia,
Leave that il working piece of fruitless air,
Leave me the plains of white Brytania,
These countries have no fire to raise that flame,
That to this Phoenix bird can yield a name.
There is a country Clymat famed of old,
That has to name delight some Paphos I Will,
Over the mountain tops to trudge be bold,
There let thy winged Horses rest awhile:
Where in a vale like Ciparissus grove,
Thou shall behold a second Phoenix love.
A champion country full of fertile Plains,
Green grassie Meadows, little pretty Hills,
Abundant pleasure in this place remains,
And plenteous sweetes this heavenly clymat filles:
Fair flowing bathes that issue from the rocks,
Abundant herds of beasts that come by flock^s.
High stately Caedars, sturdie big armed Oaks,
Great Poplers, and long trees of Libanon,
Sweet smelling Fur that frankensence prouokes,
And Pine apples from whence sweet juice does come:
The sommer-blooming Hauthorne; under this
Fair Venus from Adonis stole a kiss.
Fine Thickets and rough Brakes for sport and pleasure,
Places to hunt the light-foote nimble Roe:
These groves Diana did account her treasure,
And in the cold shades, oftentimes did go
To lie her down, faint, weary on the ground,
Whilst that her Nimphs about her daun^t a round.
A quire of heavenly Angels tune their voices,
And counterfeit the Nightingale in singing,
At which delight some pleasure she reioyces,
And Plenty from her cell her gifts is bringing:
Pears, Apples, Plums, and the red ripe Cherries,
Sweet Strawberries with other dainty berries.
Here haunt the Satyrs and the Driades,
The Hamadriades and pretty Elues,
That in the groves with skipping many please,
And run along upon the water shelues:
Hear Mermaides sing, but with Ulysses ears,
The country Gallants do disdain their tears.
The Crocadile and hissing Adders sting,
May not come near this holy plot of ground,
No Night worm in this continent may sing,
Nor poison-spitting Serpent may be found:
Here Milk and Honey like two rivers ran,
As fruitful as the land of Canaan.
What shall I say? their Orchards spring with plenty,
The Gardens smell like Floras paradise,
Bringing increase from one to number twenty,
As Lycorice and sweet Arabian spice:
No place is found under bright heavens fair bliss,
To bear the name of Paradise but this.
Hard by a running stream or crystal fountain,
Wherein rich Orient pearl is often found,
Enuiron'd with a high and steepie mountain,
A fertile soil and fruitful plot of ground,
There shall thou find true Honors lovely Squire,
That for this Phoenix keeps Prometheus fire.
His bower wherein he lodges all the night,
Is framed of Caedars and high lofty Pine,
I made his house to chastise thence despite,
And framed it like this heavenly roof of mine:
His name is Liberal honor, and his heart,
Aims at true faithful service and desert.
Look on his face, and in his brows does sit,
Blood and sweet Mercy hand in hand united,
Blood to his foes, a president most fit
For such as have his gentle humor spited:
His Hair is curled by nature mild and meek,
Hangs careless down to shroud a blushing cheek.
Give him this Ointment to anoint his Head,
This precious Balm to lay unto his feet,
These shall direct him to this Phoenix bed,
Where on a high hill he this Bird shall meet:
And of their Ashes by my doom shall rise,
Another Phoenix her to ^qualize.
This said the Gods and Goddesses did applaud,
The Censure of this thundering Magistrate,
And Nature gave him everlasting laud,
And quickly in the days bright Coach she gate
Down to the earth, she is whirled through the air;
Jove join these fires, thus Venus made her prayer.
An Introduction to the Prayer.
GVide thou great Guider of the Sun and Moon,
Thou elementall favorer of the Night,
My undeserved wit, wit sprung too soon,
To give thy greatness every gracious right:
Let Pen, Hand, Wit and undeserving tongue,
Thy praise and honor sing in every song.
In my poor prayer guide my Hand aright,
Guide my dull Wit, guide all my dulled Senses,
Let thy bright Taper give me faithful light,
And from thy Book of life blot my offenses:
Then armed with thy protection and thy love,
I Will make my prayer for thy Turtle-doue.
A Prayer made for the prosperity of a silver colored Dove, applied to the
beauteous Phoenix.
O Thou great maker of the firmament,
That rid'st upon the winged Cherubins,
And on the glorious shining element,
Hear'st the sad prayers of the Seraphins,
That unto thee continually sing Hymns:
Bow down thy listening ears thou God of might,
To him whose heart will praise thee day and night.
Accept the humble Prayers of that soul,
That now lies wallowing in the mire of Sin,
Thy mercy Lord does all my powers control,
And searches reins and heart that are within:
Therefore to thee Jehovah I Will begin:
Lifting my head from my imprisoned grave,
No mercy but thy mercy me can save.
The foul untamed Lion still goes roaring,
Old hell-bread Satan enemy to mankind,
To lead me to his jaws that are devouring,
Wherein no Grace to humane flesh^s assigned,
But thou celestial Father can him bind:
Tread on his head, tread Sin and Satan down,
And on thy servants head set Mercies crown.
Thus in acceptance of thy glorious sight,
I purge my deadly sin in hope of grace,
Thou art the Door, the Lantern and the Light,
To guide my sinful feet from place to place,
And now O Christ I bow before thy face:
And for the silver colored earthly Dove,
I make my earnest prayer for thy love.
Shrowde her o Lord under thy shadowed wings,
From the worlds envious malice and deceit,
That like the adder-poisoned serpent stings,
And in her way lays a corrupted bait,
Yet raise her God unto thy mercies height:
Guide her, o guide her from pernicious foes,
That many of thy creatures overthrows.
Wash her O Lord with Hysope and with Thime,
And the white snow she shall excel in whiteness,
Purge her with mercy from all sinful crime,
And her souls glory shall exceed in brightness,
O let thy mercy grow unto such ripeness:
Behold her, O behold her gracious King,
That unto thee sweet songs of praise will sing.
And as thou leadst through the red colored waves,
The host of thy elected Israel,
And from the wrath of Pharoe dids^ them save,
Appointing them within that land to dwell,
A chosen land, a land what did excel:
So guide thy silver Dove unto that place,
Where she Temptations envy may outface.
Increase thy gifts bestowed on thy Creature,
And multiply thy blessings manifold,
And as thou have adorned her with nature,
So with thy blessed eyes her eyes behold,
That in them does thy workmanship unfold,
Let her not wither Lord without increase,
But bless her with joys offspring of sweet peace.
Amen. Amen.
To those of light belief.
YOu gentle favorers of excelling Muses,
And gracers of all Learning and Desert,
You whose Conceit the deepest work peruses,
Whose Judgments still are governed by Art:
Read gently what you read, this next conceit
Framed of pure love, abandoning deceit.
And you whose dull Imagination,
And blind conceited Error has not known,
Of Herbs and Trees true nomination,
But think them fabulous that shall be shown:
Learn more, search much, and surely you shall find,
Plain honest Truth and Knowledge comes behind.
Then gently (gentle Reader) do thou favor,
And with a gracious look grace what is written,
With smiling cheer peruse my homely labor,
With Enuies poisoned spiteful look not bitten:
So shall thou cause my willing thought to strive,
To add more Honey to my new made Hiue.
A meeting Dialogue-wise between Nature, the Phoenix, and the Turtle Dove.
Nature. ALl hail fair Phoenix, whither art thou flying?
Why in the hot Sun do thou spread thy wings?
More pleasure should thou take in cold shades lying,
And for to bathe thy self in wholesome Springs,
Where the woods feathered quier sweetly sings:
Thy golden Wings and thy breasts beauteous Eye,
Will fall away in Phoebus royalty.

Phoenix. O stay me not, I am no Phoenix I,
And if I be that bird, I am defaced,
Upon the Arabian mountains I must die,
And never with a poor young Turtle graced;
Such operation in me is not placed:
What is my Beauty but a painted wall,
My golden spreading Feathers quickly fall.

Nature. Why do thou shead thy Feathers, kill thy Heart,
Weep out thine Eyes, and stain thy golden Face?
Why do thou of the worlds woe take a part,
And in relenting tears thy self disgrace?
Joys mirthful Tower is thy dwelling place:
All Birds for virtue and excelling beauty,
Sing at thy reverend feet in Love and Duty.

Phoenix. O how thou feed'st me with my Beauties praising!
O how thy Praise sounds from a golden Tongue!
O how thy Tongue my Virtues would be raising!
And raising me thou do corrupt thy song:
Thou see not Honey and Poison mixed among;
Thou not'st my Beauty with a jealous look,
But do not see how I do bayte my hook.

Nature. Tell me, o tell me, for I am thy friend,
I am Dame Nature that first gave thee breath,
That from Jove's glorious rich seat did descend,
To set my Feet upon this lumpish earth:
What is the cause of thy sad sullen Mirth?
Have thou not Beauty, Virtue, Wit and Favor:
What other graces would thou crave of Nature?

P^oenix. What is my Beauty but a vading Flower?
Wherein men read their deep-conceiued Thrall,
Alluring twenty Gallants in an hour,
To be as servile vassals at my Call?
My Sunne-bred looks their Senses do exhall:
But (o my grief) where my fair Eyes would love,
Foul bleare-eyed Envy does my thoughts reprove.
What is my Virtue but a Tablitorie:
Which if I did bestow would more increase?
What is my Wit but an inhumane glory:
That to my kind dear friends would proffer peace?
But O vain Bird, give ore in silence, cease;
Malice perchance does hearken to thy words,
That cuts thy thread of Love with twenty swords.

Nature. Tell me (O Mirror) of our earthly time,
Tell me sweet Phoenix glory of mine age,
Who blots thy Beauty with foul Enuies crime,
And locks thee up in fond Suspicions cage?
Can any humane heart bear thee such rage?
Daunt their proud stomachs with thy piercing Eye,
Vnchaine Loves sw^etnesse at thy liberty.

Phoenix. What is it to bath me in a wholesome Spring,
Or wash me in a clear, deep, running Well,
When I no virtue from the same do bring,
Nor of the balmie water bear a smell?
It better were for me among Crows to dwell,
Then flock with Doves, when Doves sit always billing,
And waste my wings of gold, my Beauty killing.

Nature. I Will chain foul Envy to a brazen Gate,
And place deep Malice in a hollow Rock,
To some black desert Wood I Will banish Hate,
And fond Suspicion from thy sight I Will lock:
These shall not stir, let any Porter knock.
Thou art but young, fresh, green, and must not pass,
But catch the hot Sun with thy steeled glass.

Phoenix. That Sun shines not within this Continent,
That with his warm rays can my dead Blood chearish,
Gross cloudie Vapors from this Air is sent,
Not hot reflecting Beams my heart to nourish.
O Beauty, I do fear me thou will perish;
Then gentle Nature let me take my flight,
But ere I pass, set Envy out of sight.

Nature. I Will conjure him, and raise him from his grave,
And put upon his head a punishment:
Nature thy sportiue Pleasure means to save;
I Will send him to perpetual banishment,
Like to a totterd Fury ragd and rent:
I Will baffle him, and blind his Jealous eye,
That in thy actions Secrecy would prye.

Ph^enix. I Will conjure him, I Will raise him from his Cell,
I Will pull his Eyes from his conspiring head,
I Will lock him in the place where he does dwell;
I Will starve him there, till the poor slave be dead,
That on the poisonous Adder often has fed:
These threatenings on the Helhound I will lay,
But the performance bears the greater sway.

Nature. Stand by fair Phoenix, spread thy Wings of gold,
And daunt the face of Heaven with thine Eye,
Like Iunos bird thy Beauty do unfold,
And thou shall triumph ore thine enemy:
Then thou and I in Phoebus coach will fly,
Where thou shall see and taste a secret Fire,
That will add spreading life to thy Desire.
Arise thou bleare-ey'd Envy from thy bed,
Thy bed of Snakie poison and corruption,
Unmask thy big-swol^e Cheeks with poison red,
For with thee I must try Conclusion,
And plague thee with the Worlds confusion.
I charge thee by my Power to appear,
And by Celestial warrant to draw near.

P^oenix. O what a mistie Dampe breaks from the ground,
Able it self to infect this noisome Air:
As if a cave of Toades themselves did wound,
Or poisoned Dragons fell into despair,
Hels damned sent with this may not compare,
And in this foggie cloud there does arise
A damned Feend ore me to tyrannize.

Nature. He shall not touch a Feather of thy wing,
Or ever have Authority and power,
As he has had in his days secret prying,
Over thy calmie Looks to send a shower:
I Will place thee now in secrecies sweet Bower,
Where at thy will in sport and dallying,
Spend out thy time in Amarous discoursing.

Phoenix. Look Nurce, look Nature how the Villain sweates,
His big-swolne Eyes will fall unto the ground,
With fretting anguish he his blacke-breast beats,
As if he would true hearted minds confound:
O keep him back, his sight my heart does wound:
O Envy it is thou that made me perish,
For want of that true Fire my heart should nourish.

Nature. But I will plague him for his wickedness,
Envy go pack thee to some foreign soil,
To some desertfull plain or Wilderness,
Where savage Monsters and wild beasts do toil,
And with inhumane Creatures keep a coil.
Be gone I say, and never do return,
Till this round compast world with fire do burn.

Ph^enix. What is he gone? is Envy packt away?
Then one foul blot is moved from his Throne,
That my poor honest Thoughts did seek to slay:
Away foul grief, and ouer-heauie Moan,
That do orecharge me with continual groans.
Will you not hence? then with dowue-falling tears,
I Will drown my self in ripeness of my Years.

Nature. Fie peevish Bird, what art thou frantic mad?
Will thou confound thy self with foolish Grief?
If there be cause or means for to be had,
Thy Nurse and nourisher will find relief:
Then tell me all thy Accidents in brief;
Have I not banished Envy for thy sake?
I greater things for thee i will undertake.

Phoenix. Envy is gone and banished from my sight,
Banished for ever coming any more:
But in Arabia burns another Light,
A dark dim Taper that I must adore,
This barren Country makes me to deplore:
It is so saplesse that the very Spring,
Makes tender new-growne Plants be withering.
The noisome Air is grown infectious,
The very Springs for want of Moi^ture die,
The glorious Sun is here pestiferous,
No hea^bes for Physic or sweet Surgerie,
No balm to cure hearts inward malady:
No gift of Nature, she is here defaced,
Heart-curing Balsamum here is not placed.

Nature. Is this the sum and substance of thy woe?
I^ this the Anker-hold unto thy bote?
Is this thy Sea of Grief does ouerflow?
Is this the River sets thy ship a^lote?
Is this the Lesson thou have learned by rote?
And is this all? and is this plot of Ground
The substance of the Theme does thee confound?

Phoenix. This is the Anker-hold, the Sea, the River,
The Lesson and the substance of my Song,
This is the Rock my Ship did seek to shiuer,
And in this ground with Adders was I stung,
And in a loathsome pit was often flung:
My Beauty and my Virtues captiuate,
To Love, dissembling Love that I did hate.

Nature. Cheer up thy spirit Phoenix, prune thy wings,
And double-gild thy Feathers for my news;
A Nightingale and not a Raven sings,
That from all black contention will excuse
Thy heavy thoughts, and set them to peruse
Another Clymat, where thou may express,
A plot of Paradise for worthiness.
Jove in divine diuinesse of his Soul,
That rides upon his fiery axaltree,
That with his Mace does humane flesh control,
When of man's deeds he makes a Registrie,
Loving the good for singularity:
With a veiled Countenance and a gracious Smile,
Did bid me plant my Bird in Paphos* I Will.

Ph^enix. What ill divining Planet did presage,
My timelesse birth so timely brought to light?
What fatal Comet did his wrath engage*
To work a harmless Bird such worlds despite,
Wrapping my days bliss in black ^ables night?
No Planet nor no Comet did conspire
My downfall, but foul Fortunes wrathful ire.
What did my Beauty move her to Disdain?
Or did my* Virtues shadow all her Bliss?
That she should place me in a desert Plain,
And send forth Envy with a Judas kiss,
To sting me with a Scorpions poisoned hiss?
From my first birthright for to plant me hear,
Where I have always fed on Grief and Fear.

Nature. Rail not against Fortunes sacred Deity,
In youth thy virtuous patience she has tired,
From this base earth she will lift thee up on hie,
Where in Contents rich Cha^iot thou shall ride,
And never with Impatience to abide:
Fortune will glory in thy great renown,
And on thy feathered head will set a crown.

Phoenix. It Was time to come, for I was comfortless,
And in my Youth have been Unfortunate:
This I Will of Paphos I do hope will bless,
And alter my halfe-rotten tottering state;
My hearts Delight was almost ruinate.
In this rich I Will a Turtle had his nest,
And in a Wood of gold took up his rest.

Nature. Fly in this Chariot, and come sit by me,
And we will leave this ill corrupted Land,
We Will take our course through the blew Azure sky,
And set our feet on Paphos golden sand,
There of that Turtle Dove we will understand:
And visit him in those delightful plains,
Where Peace conioyn'd with Plenty still remains.

Pho^nix. I come, I come, and now farewell that strond,
Upon whose craggie rocks my Ship was rent;
Your ill beseeming follies made me fond,
And in a vastie Cell I up was pent,
Where my fresh blooming Beauty I have spent.
O blame your selves ill nurtred cruel Swains,
That filled my scarlet Glory full of Stains.

Nature. Welcome immortal Beauty, we will ride
Over the Semicircle of Europa,
And bend our course where we will see the Tide,
That parts the Continent of Africa,
Where the great Cham gouernes Tartaria:
And when the starrie Curtain vales the night,
In Paphos sacred I Will we mean to light.

Phoenix. How glorious is this Chariot of the day,
Where Phoebus in his crystal robes is set,
And to poor passengers directs a way:
O happy time since I with Nature met,
My immelodious Discord I vnfret:
And sing sweet Hymns, burn Myrrh and Frankensence,
Honor that Isle that is my sure defense.

Nature. Look Phoenix ore the world as thou do ride,
And thou shall see the palaces of Kings,
Great huge-built Cities where high States abide,
Temples of Gods, and Altars with rich offerings,
To which the Priests their sacrifices brings:
Wonders past wonder, strange Pyramides,
And the gold-gathering Strong of Euphrates.

(...). O what rich pleasure dwells in this Land!
Green springing Meadows, high vpreared Hills,
The white-fleest Ewe brought tame unto the hand,
Fair running Rivers that the Country fills,
Sweet flowers that fair balmy Deaw distills,
Great peopled Cities, whose earth-gracing show,
Time is ashamed to touch or overthrow!

Nature. Besilent gentle Phoenix* I Will repeat,
Some of these Cities names that we descrie,
And of their large foundation I Will entreat,
Their Fonnder that first reared them up on hie,
Making a glorious Spectacle to each eye:
Wars wald Defender and the Countries grace,
Not battred yet with Times controlling Mace.
Alfred the father of fair El^^eda, This Alf^ed first divided England into
Shires, being King of No^thumb^rs.

Founded three goodly famous Monasteries,
In this large I Will of sweet Britania,
For to refresh the poor souls miseries,
That were afflicted with calamities:
One in the Town surnamed Edlingsey,
Which after ages called Athelney.
The second House of that Devotion,
He did erect at worthy Winchester,
A place well planted with Religion,
Called in this age the new-builded Minster,
Still kept in notable reparation: Alfred buried in the Cathedral Church of
Winchester.

And in this famous builded Monument,
His body was interd when life was spent.
The last not least surpassing all the rest,
Was Oxfords honorable foundation, The University of Oxford built by Alfred.

Since when with Learnings glory it is blessed,
Begun by the godly exhortation
Of the Abbot Neotus direction:
From whose rich womb pure Angell-like Divinity,
Has sprung to save us from Calamity.
Leyre the son of Baldud being admitted,
To bear the burden of the British sway,
A Prince with Natures glory being fitted, This Sore is a Riu^r that runs
by Leicester, called of some Brenber water.

At what time Ioas reigned King of Judah,
To make his new got Fame to last for aye,
By Sore he built the Town of Caerleir,
That to this day is called Leycester.
Belin that famous worthy Brytaine King, In this City were t^ree famous
Churches one of S. Julius the Martyr, the second of S. Aron: and the other the
mother Church of all Demetia.

That made the Towns of France to fear his frown,
And the whole Romish Legion to sing.
And to record his gracious great renown,
Whose host of men their Towns were firing:
Builded in Southwals height Caerlion,
Or termed Arwiske Caerlegion.
This glorious City was the only Pride,
In eldest age of all Demetia:
Where many notable Monuments abide* This Belin also build^d a notable Gate in
London now called Billings gate and Belins Castle.

To grace the Country of Britania,
That from Times memory can never slide:
Amphibulus was borne in this sweet place,
Who taught S. Albon, Albon full of grace.
King Lud surnamed the great Lud-hurdibras,
The son of Leil, builded the famous Town
Of Kaerkin, with a huge Tower of brass, Lud, father t^ Baldud, a man well
seen in the Sciences of Astronomy and Necromancie.

Now called Canterbury of great renown,
Able to bide the raging Foes stout frown:
The Metropolitans seat where Learning sits,
And chief of all our English Bishoprics.
This noble King builded fair Caerguent,
Now cleped Winchester of worthy fame, This Baldud son of Lud-Hurdibras,
made first the hot Baths at Caerbran, now called Bathe.

And at Mount Paladour he built his Tent,
That after ages Shaftsburie has to name,
His first foundation from King Leyls son came:
About which building Prophet Aquila,
Did prophecy in large Brytania.
King Leill a man of great religion, He also repaired the City of Caer l^on,
now called Chester.

That made his bordring neighbors for to yield,
And on their knees to plead Submission,
Being eldest son to Brute surnamed Greeneshield,
The City of Caerleits he did build,
Now called Carleyle by corruption,
And Time that leads things to confusion.
Cambridge a famous University, The City of Cambridge built in the days of
Gurguntius the son of Beline, by one Cantaber a Spaniard, brother to
Partholony, or as some write by Gorbonian.

The Nurse of Learning and Experience,
The Chearisher of true Divinity,
That for the Souls good wisdom does commence,
Confuting Vice, and driving Error thence:
Was built by Sigisbert: but wrought effectually
By Kings and Lords of famous memory.
Ebranke the son of stout Mempritius,
Having in matrimonial copulation,
Twenty one wives in large Rithmi gratia.
Britanicus,
And thirty daughters by just computation,
And twenty sons of estimation,
Builded Caerbranke famous for the name,
Now called Englands York a place of Fame.
He in Albania large and populous,
Now termed Scotland of the Scottish Sect,
Because his deeds should still be counted famous,
The Castle of Maidens there he did erect,
And to good purpose did this work effect:
But iron-eating Time the Truth does stain,
For Edingburgh the City does remain.
And in that Maiden Castle he did frame,
To grace the building to the outward eye,
Nine Images of stone placed in the same,
Which since have stayed times perpetuetie,
In the true form of worke-mans excellency:
Not any whit diminisht, but as pe^fect
As in the first^dayes minute they were set.

Phoenix. Nature I muse at your description,
To see how Time that old rust-cankard wretch,
Honors forgetful Friend, Cities confusion,
That in all Monuments has made a Breach,
To ancient names brought alteration:
And yet at this day snch a place remains,
That all Times honor past with honor stains.

Nature. Those carved old-cut stony Images,
That beautify the Princes stately Towers,
That graces with their grace the Palaces,
And high imperial Emperizing bowers,
Were never razed by Times controlling hours:
Nine worthy women almost equivalent,
With those nine worthy men so valient.
Three of the nine were Jews, and three were Gentiles,
Three Christians, Honors honorable Sex,
That from their foes did often bear the spoils,
And did their proud controlling neighbors vex,
Which to their name did Nobleness annexe,
An Embleame for true borne Gentilitie,
To imitate their deeds in chivalry.
The first Minerua a right worthy Pagon,
That many manlike battles manly fought,
She first deuiz'd Artillery of iron,
And Armor for our backs she first found out,
Putting our li^es dear hazard from some doubt:
She governed the Libians, and got Victories,
With Honor by the lake Lacus Mi^^ae.
Tritonides.
Our maine pitched Battles she first ordered,
Setting a Form down to this following Age,
The orders of Incamping she first registered,
And taught the laws of Arms in equipage,
To after time her skill she did engage:
Apollo was her dear begotten son,
In Abraham's time she lived till life was done.
Semiramis Queen of Assiria,
Was second worthy of this worlds great wonder,
She conquered large Aethiopia,
And brought the Neck of that stout Nation under,
Wasting the Countries of rich India:
Her days of Honor and of Regiment,
Was in the time of Isaacks government.
The third and chiefest for Audaciousnesse,
And Enterprises that she took in hand,
Was Tomyris full of true Nobleness,
Queen of the North (as I do understand,)
From forth her eyes she lightened Honors Brand,
And brandished a Sword, a sword of Fame,
That to her weak Sex yielded Hectors name.
When she received news her son was dead,
The Hope and Underprop of Scithia,
She put on Armor, and encountered
The Monarch Cyrus King of Persia,
And Governor of rich Getulia:
Slew him in sight her Fame for to renew,
Two hundred thousand Soldiers overthrew.
Amongst the Hebrew women we commend,
Iahel the Kenite for the first in bounty,
Whose incomprehensible valor in the end,
Did free and set at large her captived Country,
Oppressed with tyrannical Miseri^:
From dangers imminent of ^irie War,
By killing hand to hand her foe great Sisar.
Debora an Hebrew worthy the second place,
She forty years did govern Israel,
In peace preserved her Land, her land of Grace,
Where honest sportiue Mirth did always dwell:
Her holy holiness no tongue can tell,
Nations astonished at her happiness,
Did grieve to loose her Wisdoms worthiness.
Judith the third that redeliuered,
The strong besieged City of Bethulia,
And when the proud Foe she had vanquished,
And overcame hot-spur'd Assiria,
Bringing in triumph Holofernes head,
She got a great and greater Victory,
Then thousand Soldiers in their majesty.
The first of Christians was fair Maud the Countess,
Countess of Aniow, daughter to a King*
Englands first Henry: Almaines Empress,
Heir in dubitate, and her Fathers offspring,
She titles to the English Crown did bring:
She never desisted from the warlike field,
Till that usurped Stephen of Blois did yield,
And condiscended to her sons dear right,
That warlike Maude had reobtain'd by might.
The second was Elizabeth of Aragon,
Queen and wife to honorable Ferdinando:
She stoutly fought for propagation
Of Christian Faith; brought to subversion,
The forsaken infidels of Granado,
Reducing that p^oud province all in one,
To follow Christ's unspotted true Religion.
The last was Iohane of Naples true borne Queen,
Sister to Ladislaus King of Hungary,
A woman that defended (as it was seen,)
Her countries great and gracious liberty,
By force of laudable Arms and Chivalry,
Against the Sarasins invasion,
And proud hot wars of princely Aragon.
Thus have I in the honor of their worth,
Laid open their Progeny, their Deeds, their Arms,
T^eir offspring, and their honorable Birth,
That is a Lantern lightning their true Fames,
Which Truth can never burn in Enuies flames:
Worthy of wonder are these three times three,
Folded in brazen Leaves of memory.
Windsor a Castle of exceeding strength,
First built by Aruiragus Brytaines King,
But finished by Arthur at the length,
Of whose rare deeds our Chronicles do ring,
And Poets in their verse his praise do sing:
For his Round-table and his warlike Fights,
Whose valiantness the coward Mind affrights.
This Brytish King in wars a Conqueror,
And wondrous happy in his Victories,
Was a companion of this noble Order,
And with his person graced these Dignities,
Great dignities of high exceeding Valor:
For he himself the selfsame Honor took,
That all his following States did ever brook.
This Paragon whose name our time affrights,
At Windsor Castle dubbed in one day,
One hundred and just forty valiant Knights,
With his keen trusty Sword, and only stay,
(Called Dridwin) that his Love did ouersway:
And with that Sword the very day before,
He slew as many Saxon fo^s or more.
But English Edward third of Memory,
In blessed and religious zeal of Love,
Built up a College of exceeding glory,
That his kind care to England did approve,
This College does this Castle beautify:
The Honor of the place is held so dear,
That many famous Kings are buried th^re.
But one rare thing exceeding admirable,
That to this day is held in great renown,
And to all Forreiners is m^morable,
The Name of which makes Englands foes to frown,
And pulls the pride of foreign Nations down,
Knights of the Garter and Saint Georges Cross,
Betok'ning to the Foe a bloody loss.

Here follows the Birth, Life and Death of honorable Arthur King of
Britain.
To the courteous Reader.
COurteous Reader, having spoken of the first foundat^on of that yet renowned
castle of Windsor by Aruiragus king of Britain, and finished by that succeeding
prince of worthy memory famous king Arthur; I thought good (being entreated by
some of my honourable-minded Friends, not to let slip so good and fit an
occasion, by reason that there yet remains in this doubtful age of opinions,
a controversy of that esteemed Prince of Britain) to write not according to
ages obliuio^, but directed only by our late Historiographers of England, who
no doubt have taken great pains in the searching forth of the truth of that
first Christian Worthy: and whereas (I know not directed by what blindness)
there have been some Writers (as I think enemies to truth) that in their
erroneous censures have thought no such man ever to be living; How fabulous
that should seem to be, I leave to the judgment of the best read^rs, who know
for certain, that that never dead Prince of memory, is more beholding to the
French, the Roman, the Scot, the Italian, yea to the Greeks themselves, then
to his own Countrymen, who have fully and wholly set forth his fame and
liuelyhood: then how shameless is it for some of us, to let slip the truth of
this Monarch? And for more confirmation of the truth, look but in the Abbey of
Westminster at Saint Edwards shrine, there shall thou see the print of his
royal Seal in red wax closed in Berrill, with this inscription, Patricius
Arthurus Gallie, Germaniae, Daciae Imperator, At Dover likewise you may see Sir
Gawins skull and Cradocks mantle: At Winchester, a City well known in
England, his famous round Table, with many other notable monuments too long to
rehearse: Besides I my self have seen imprinted, a french Pamphlet of the
arms of king Arthur, and his renowned valiant Knights, set in colors by the
Heralds of France: which charge of impression would have been too great,
otherwise I had inserted them orderly in his Life and Actions: but (gentle
Reader) take this my pains gratefully, and I shall hereafter more willingly
strive to employ my simple wit to thy better gratulation; I have here set down
(turned from French prose into English meeter) the words of the Herald under
the arms of that worthy Britain.

King Arthur in his warlike Shield did bear
Thirteen rich Crowns of purified gold*
He was a valiant noble Conqueror,
As ancient Memory has truly told:
His great Round-table was in Britanie*
Where chosen Knights did do their homage yearly.
The strange Birth, honorable Coronation, and most unhappy Death of famous
Arthur King of Brytaine.
OF noble Arthurs birth, of Arthurs fall,
Of Arthurs solemn Coronation,
Of Arthurs famous deeds Heroyicall,
Of Arthurs battles and invasion,
And that high minded worthy Brytish King,
Shall my wits memory be deifying.
In the last time of ^ter surnamed Pendragon*
So called for his witty policies,
Being a King of estimation,
In famous Brytaine among his own allies,
There was a mighty Duke that governed Cornwaile,
That held long warr^, and did this King assail.
This Duke was named the Duke of Tintagil:
After these hot bred wars were come to end,
He soiourn'd at a place called Terrabil,
From whence Pendragon for this Duke did send,
And being wounded sore with Cupids sting,
Charged him his Wife unto the Court to bring.
His Wife a passing Lady, lovely, wife,
Chaste to her husbands clear unspotted bed,
Whose honor-bearing Fame none could supprize,
But Vesta-like her little time she led:
Igrene her name on whose unequal beauty
Pendragon doted, led by humane folly.
At length ^e broke his mind unto a Lord,
A trusty Counselor and noble Friend,
That soon unto his minds grief did accord,
And his Kings loving loue-thoughts did commend,
Telling Pendragon this should be his best,
To tell the Duchess of his sweet request.
But she a Woman, stern, inexorable,
Willing fond Lusts inchauntments to resist,
All his tongues smoothing words not penetrable,
In her chaste bosoms Gate could not insist,
But straight she told her Husband how she sped,
Lest that his grace should be dishonored.
And counseld him to pass away in haste,
That Nights dark duskie mantle might ore shade,
Their flying bodies, least at last they taste,
More misery then Time did ere invade,
" For Lust is such a hot inflamed thing,
" It governs man's senses, rules a King.
And as the Duchess spoke, the Duke departed,
That neighter Vter nor his Council knew,
How his deep bosoms Cupid.
Lord the Duchess thwarted,
But mark the story well what did ensue:
Soon as the King perceived their intent,
Intemperate Rage made him impatient.
Away with Music for your strings do jar,
Your sound is full of Discords, harsh and ill,
Your Diapazon, makes a humming war
Within mine ears, and does my senses fill
With im^^lodious mourning; She is gone
That ruled your selves and Instruments alone.
Away fond riming Ovid, lest thou write
Of Prognes murder, or Lucreti^ rape,
Of Igrens iou^ney taken in the night,
That in the black gloom'd silence did escape:
O could no Dog have barked, no Cock have crow'd*
That might her passage to the King have showed.
No mirth pleased Vter, but grimme Melancholy
Haunted his heels, and when he sat to rest,
He pondred in his mind Igrenas beauty,
Of whom his care-craz'd head was full possessed:
Nothing was now contentiue to his mind,
But Igrenes name, Igrene to him unkind.
At last his noble Peers with pity moved,
To see the Kings sudden perplexity,
With a great care that their Liege Emperor loved,
For to allay his great extremity,
Did counsel him to send for Garloyes wife,
As he would answer it upon his life.
Then presently a Messenger was sent,
To tell the Duke of his wifes secret folly:
This was the substance of his whole intent,
To bring his wife to Court immediately:
Or within threescore days he did protest,
To fetch him thither to his little rest.
Which when the Duke had warning, straight he furnish'^
Two Castles with wel-fenc'd artillery,
With vitailes and with men he garnished,
His strongest Holds for such an enemy:
And in the one he put his hearts-deare Treasure,
Fair Igrene that he loved out of measure,
That Castle which the Duke himself did hold,
Had many Posternes out and issues thence,
In which to trust his life he might be bold,
And safely the war^es Fury to commence:
But after-telling time did wonders wo^ke,
That Foxes in their holes can never lu^ke.
Then in all haste came Vter with his host,
Pitching his rich pauilions on the ground,
Of his aspiring mind he did not boast,
For Love and Anger did his thoughts confound,
Hot war was made on both sides, people s^aine,
And many Death-doore-knocking Souls complain.
Love and minds anguish so perplexed the King,
For Igrene that incompa^able Dame,
That Cupids sickness pearc'd him with a sting,
And his wars loud Alarums overcame,
Venus entreated Mars awhile to stay,
And make this time a sporting Holiday.
Then came sir Vl^i^s a most noble Knight,
And asked his king the cause of his disease,
Being willing in a subjects gracious right,
Vt^ (...) mind in heart to please:
Ah said the King, Igrene does captiuate
My Heart, and makes my Se^ses subiugate.
Courage my gracious Liege* I will go find
That true divining prophet of our Nation,
M^rlin the wise that shall content your mind,
And be a Moderator in this action:
His learning, wisdom, and unseen experienc^,
Shall quickly give a Salve for loves of^ence,
So Vl^ius at the length from him departed,
A^king for Merlin as he past the way,
Who by great fortunes chance sir Vl^ius thwarted,
As he went by in beggars base array:
Demanding of the Knight in baseness meek,
Who was the man he went so far to seek?
Vl^ius amazed at his base attire,
^old him it was presumption to demand
The name of him for whom he did enquire,
And therefore would not yield to his command:
Alas said Merlin I do plainly see,
Merlin you seek, that Merlin I am he.
And if the King will but fulfill my hest,
And will reward my true deserving heart,
In his loves agonies he shall be blessed,
So that he follow what I shall impart,
Upon my Knighthood he will honor thee,
With favor and rewards most royally.
Then Vlfius glad departed in all have,
And rode amain to king Pendragons sight,
Telling his Grace Merlin he me^ at last,
That like a Lamp will give his Louelaies light.
Where is the man? I wished for him before.
See where he stands my Liege at yonder door.
When Vter saw the man, a sudden joy,
And vncompre'nded gladness fi^d his heart:
With kind embracements met him on the way,
And to him began his secrets to impart.
Leave off, quoth Merlin, I do know your mind,
The faire-fac'd Lady Igrene is unkind.
But if your Majesty will here protest,
And swear as you are lawful King anointed,
To do my will, nothing shall you molest,
But follow my directions being appointed.
I swear quoth Vter by the Evangelists,
He dies for me that once thy will resists.
Sir, said the Prophet Merline, this I crave,
That shall betoken well what ere betide,
The first fair sportiue Night that you shall have,
Lying safely nuzled by fair Igrenes side,
You shall beget a son whose very Name,
In after-stealing Time his foes shall tame.
That child being borne your Grace must give to me,
For to be nourished at my appointment,
That shall redound much to his majesty,
And to your G^aces gracious good intent:
That shall be done: (quoth Merlin) let us away*
For you shall sleep with Igrene ere't be day.
And as Jove stole to fair Al^men^s bed,
I^ counterfeiting great Amphytrio,
By the same lust-directed line being led,
To Igrenes lovely chamber must you go:
You shall be like the Duke her husbands greatness,
And in his place possess her Husbands sweetness*
And you my noble Lord sit Vl^ius,
Shall be ^uch like sir Brustias a fair Knight,
And I will counterfeit the good Iordanus,
And thus we will pass together in the night,
But see you question not, say you are diseased,
And hie to bed there shall your heart be pleased.
But on the morrow do not rise my Liege,
Vn^ill I come to council for the best,
For ten miles off you know does lie the Siege,
That will not turn these night-sports to a jest*
Pendragon pl^as'd hasted for to embrace,
The sweet'st got pray that ever King did chase.
Soon as the Duke of Tintagill did perceive,
That Vter left alone his royal army,
He issued from his Castle to bereave,
The soldiers of their lives by policy:
But see his fortune, by that wily train,
That he had laid for others he was slain.
The subtill-lust directed King went on,
Maskt in a strange devised new found shape,
To simple-minded Igrene unlike Pendragon,
And three long hours lay in his lovers lap:
There he begat the christian King of Kings,
Whose fame Caister Swannes in pleasure sings.
As Soon as day-betok'ning Phoebus Chariot,
Had crossed his sisters wagon in the sky,
Merlin in haste to Vters chamber got,
Bidding good morrow to his Majesty:
And told him vnrecalled Time did stay,
To haste him from his pleasure thence away.
Vter amazed with Igrene in his arms,
Wished that the Prophet had no use of tongue,
Whose doleful sound breathed forth these harsh Alarmes,
And like the night-Crow craokt a deadly song*
Ah what a hell of grief it was to depart,
And leave the new-got Treasure of his heart.
Then by the lawne-like Hand he took his lover,
Being warmed with blood of a dissembling Husband,
Desire in her cheeks she could not smother,
And her Loue-dazeling eye none could withstand:
He kissed her twice or thrice and bad adu^,
As willing his nights pleasure to renew:
But when the late betrayed Lady knew,
How that her true betrothed Lord was slain,
Ere that nights reuelling did first ensue,
In secret to her self she wept amain:
Amazed and maruelling who that should be,
That robbed her husband of his treasury.
And to her self she began for to relate,
The injuries of her unspotted life,
And in her mind she lived disconsolate,
Banning her base-bad Fortune being a wife;
Wishing for ever she had lived a maid,
Rather then her chaste thoughts should be betrayed.
The noble Council that attended Vter,
Began with gravity for to devise,
That (where their King had doted much upon her)
Her beauty his young thoughts to equalize,
To knit them both in Hymen's sacred right,
And then in lawful wi^e to ^ast delight.
This motion made unto their Sovereign,
Of a warm lus^^e stomach youthful blood,
Thought it a heaven such a Saint to gain,
That would revive his spirits, do him good:
And gave consent to have her honored,
With marriage Rites, the which were soon performed.
Half a year after as the King and Queen,
Then growing great with child a bed were lying,
The Curtains drawn unwilling to be seen:
This policy the King himself devising:
Asking whose child it was that she did bear,
Speak gentle Igren^ tell me without fear,
The Q^eene amazed at this question,
Being fully wrapped in pale timiditie,
Knew not to answer this sad action,
Because she fully knew her innocence:
He urged her still, at length she waxed bold,
And stoutly to the King the truth she told.
With that he kissed his Queen that was beguiled,
And did recomfort her being half forlorn,
Telling it was he that did beget the child,
The child that from her fair womb should be borne:
With that a sudden joy did repossesse
Her pensive heart, whom Fortune late did bless.
Then Merlin (that did always love the King,
As bearing chief affiance to his country)
Sought to provide for the child's nourishing,
Therein to show his well disposed duty.
As thou decreest said Vter, must it be,
My dear Sons fortunes I Will commit to thee.
Well said the Prophet, I do know a Lord,
A faithful passing tru^ disposed man,
That to your Graces pleasure will accord,
And in your service do the best he can:
Commit your child unto his custody,
A man renoun'd in famous Britany.
His name Sir Hector: send a Messenger,
To will him come unto the Court with speed,
And that your Mai^sti^ must needs confer,
Of matters helpefull in a Princes need.
When he is come your Grace may certify,
You Will put your son and heir to his delivery.
And when that Fortunes child kind Fortunes heir,
(For so the Destinies prognostica^e)
Shall be brought forth into the open air,
That of fair Igrene lately was be gate:
At yonder p^iuie Posterne being unchristened,
You must deliver it me to be baptized.
As Merlin had devised, so it was done:
For all the Court to him did yield ob^ysance:
And now Sir Hector to the King is come,
And to Pendragon made his dear affiance,
Wishing his Wife might nourish that bright son,
Whose Mornings glory was not yet begun.
Then when the lovely Queen was soon delivered,
Of that rich bearing Burden to her joy,
The King himself in person has commanded,
Two Ladies and two Knights to bear the boy*
Bound up in cloth of gold being rich of State,
And give it to the pooreman at the gate,
So Merlin had the Prince at his disposing,
Committing it to Hectors faithful wife:
Now nothing wanted but the sweet baptizing.
To grace the Prince of Princes all his life:
A holy reverent Man ind^'de with fame,
Arthur of Britain called the Princes name.
After the royal Solemnation,
Of that black mournful weping funeral,
Of Vter that we name the great Pendragon,
By subtle practice brought unto his fall:
The sixteenth year of his victorious reign,
By poison was this brave Pendragon slain.
His body unto Stone-heng being brought,
Hard by his brother Aur^lius is he laid,
In a fair Monument then richly wrought,
Dead is the King whose life his foes dismayed,
But from his loyues he left a son behind,
The right Idea of his fathers mind.
Great Arthur whom we call the Britains King,
A man renowned for famous victories,
Saxons and Pictes to homage he did bring, (...).

As you may read in ancient histories:
Our later Chronicles do testify,
King Arthurs noble mind in Chivalry.
Twelve noble battles did King Arthur fight,
Against the Saxons men of hardy strength,
And in the battles put them still to flight,
Bringing them in subjection at the length:
He never strove to drive them quit^ away*
But straggling here and there he let them ^tay*
In Southry, Kent, and Norfolk did they dwell,
Still owing homage to king Arthures greatness,
Whose puissance their pride did always quell,
Yet did he temper rigor with his meekness:
And like a Lion scorned to touch the Lamb,
Where they submissiue-like unto him came,
Against the Pictes he held continual war,
The which unto the Saxons were allide,
And with the subtle Scot did always jar,
Who never true to Arthur would abide:
But (sco^ning his ad^ancement to the Crown)
Did think by force to pull his greatness down.
The chiefest cause of this hot mortal strife,
That moved these Kings to be dissentious,
Was that the King of Pictes had taken to wife
The ^ldest sister of Aureliu^,
And Cornon king of Scots had married
The youngest sister to his Princely bed*
Wherefore they thought the Brytish Regiment,
Should have descended to the lawful heirs
Of Anna, wife to both in government,
And he as King to rule their great affairs:
And do infer^e king Arthures barstardie,
And unjust claim to that high dignity.
And presently they do dispatch i^ have,
Ambassadors to famous Brytanie,
Of their great Peers for to demand at last,
The kingdoms Crown and kingdoms Royalty:
Who scorning for to hear a stranger named,
Crowned king Arthur, whom the world has famed.
The Coronation of King Arthur, and the Solemnity thereof: the proud message
of the Romans, and the whole resolution of King Arthur and his Nobles.
THe appointed time and great Solemnity,
Approached of king Arthurs Coronation,
To which high states of mighty Dignity,
Assembled at the City of Caerlean,
In Caesar's time called Vrbs Legionum:
A Title d^ubtlesse b^^ring some import,
Where many famous Brytaines did resort.
To grace king Arthur whom the Britains loved*
Came th^ee Arch bishops Englands chief renown,
Both London, York* and Dubright H^nor moved,
On Arthurs head to set the British Crown,
That after pulled the pride of Nations down:
Unto the Palace of this (...) King*
They were conuay'd (...) (...) born Fame did spring.
Dubright (because the Court at that time lay
Within the co^pas^e of hi^ (...))
In his own p^^son o^ thi^ Ro^all day,
Richly to fur^ish him he did (...),
His love unto his King he did express,
And at his hands the King was dignified,
When Aue Caesar loud the people cride.
This happy Coronation being e^ded,
The King was brought in sumptuous royalty,
With all the peoples hearts being befriended,
To the Cathedral church of that ^^me See,
Being the Metropoliticall in nobility,
With loud exclai^ing joy of peoples voice,
That God might bless their Land for such a choice*
On either hand did two Archbishops ride,
Supporting Arthur of Brita^ia,
And sour Kings before him did abide,
Angisell King of stout Albania,
And Cadual King of Venedoci^,
Cador of Cornewaile among these Princes past*
And Sater of Demetia was the last.
These ^oure attired in ^ich ornaments,
Four golden Sword^ before the King did bear,
Betokening four royal Governments,
And four true Noble hearts not dreading fear,
That Envy from their (...) can never tear:
Before them play (...)-tuned melody,
That birds did sing to make it heavenly.
King Arthurs Queen unto the Church was brought*
With many noble Peer^^ being conducted:
Her Arms and Titles royally were wrought,
And to her noble Fame were ga^nished*
That In^amie had near diminished:
Four Queens before her bore four silver Doves,
Expressing their true Faith and husbands Loves.
To brave King Arthur on this solem^e feast,
This day of high unspeakable dignity,
Came four grave discreet persons of the best,
From Romes Lieutenant, proud in Majesty,
Carrying in token of their Embassage,
Green Olive boughs, and their dear Lieges message*
The Epistle of Lucius Tiberius the Roman Lieutenant, to Arthur King of
Britanie.
LVcius Tiberius, Romes great governor,
To Arthur King of large Britania*
As he deserves favor a^ our hands:
Rome and the Roman Senators do wonder*
And I my self exceedingly do muse,
To think of thy audacious haughty mind,
And thy tyrannical dealing to our State:
Hot fiery Anger boyleth in my breast,
And I am moved with honor of the cause,
For to revenge thy Injuries to Rome:
And that like one or'proud of his estate,
Refusest to acknowledge her thy head,
Neither regardest speedily to redress,
Thy base and blind obliuious oversight,
And unjust dealing to offend the Senate*
Unto whose high imperial Dignity,
V^lesse Forgetfulness do bleare thine eyes,
Thou know the whole huge Circle of the world,
Are made Contributorie and owe us homage.
The tribute that the Britains ought to pay,
The which the Senate did demand of thee,
Being due unto the Roman Emperie:
For that brave Julius Caesar had enjoyed,
And many worthy Romans many years,
Thou in contempt of us and our Estate,
Our honorable Estate and dignity,
Presum'st injuriously for to detain:
The consines of wel-seated Gallia,
The Provinces of Sauoy and Daulphine,
With hot-stam'd fiery war have thou subdude,
And gotten in thy large possession;
The Islands of the bordring Ocean,
The Kings whereof so long as we enjoyed them,
Paid tribute to our Noble ancestors.
The Senate highly moved with thy presumption,
Determine for to redemaund amends,
And restitution for thy open wrongs:
I therefore from the noble S^natours,
Command thee on thy true Allegiance,
To Rome, to them, to me, and our Estate,
That in the midst of August next ensuing,
Thou do repair to Rome, there for to answer,
Before the worthy Senate and the Lords
Thy Trespass; and abide arbitr^ment,
Such as by them shall there be ordered,
And iustic^ shall impose upon thy head:
Which thing if thou presumptuously refuse,
I will forthwith invade thy Territories,
Wast thy whole Country, burn thy Towns and Cities;
And what so ere thy rashness has detained,
From Rome or from the Roman Emperie,
I will by dint of sword subdue again.
Thus armed with hopeful Resolution,
We Will stay thy answer of submission.
Lu. Tib.

Cador the Duke of Cornewaile his Oration to the King.
Renowned Arthur and thrice-worthie Britain:
O how a lively blood does fill my veins,
At this proud message of the hawtie Romans,
I hitherto my Lord have been in fear,
Lest that the worthy Britains with much ease,
And long continual, peace and quietness,
Should grow to too much sloth and cowardice,
And lose that honorable Reputation,
Of Chivalry and Martial discipline:
Wherein (right Noble King) we have been counted,
For to surmount all Nations of the world.
For where the use of Arms is not esteemed,
But buried in Obliuions loathsome cave,
And want on dallying held in aestimate,
It cannot choose but pale-faced Cowardice,
Must dim and clean deface all worthy Virtue*
Five years have fully run their monthly course,
Sin^e (...) pu^ off our a^^our from our backs,
Or heard the Trumpets clang or in our ears,
Or marc^t in triumph with the rattling Drum,
Being ^uzzeled in ess^m^nate delights,
G^d wil^ing that our names should not be blotted,
^ith the ^oule stain of beastly sluggardi^,
H^th stirred up the proud insulting Romans,
To wh^t our dull edged swords not now in use,
To ^ut their heads off in this rightful cause,
And scour our rustie Armor long laid up,
To buckle with so proud an enemy,
Therefore great Arthur in thy greatness raise
Thy colors up, for to vpreare thy praise.
Ca. Cor.

The Oration of King Arthur to his Lords and Followers.
MY Fellows and my dear Companions,
^^th in the adverse chances of our age,
And prosperous successful happiness,
Whose true unspeakable fidelities,
In giving counsel touching wars abroad,
And homebred mutinies amongst our selves,
With good successefulnesse have I perceau'd,
In your deep wisdoms and your g^^^itie.
Afford me now your honorable (...),
Wisely foreseeing what you think convenient,
Touching the proud command'ment sent from Rome,
A thing at first carefully deliberated,
Is in the end most easily tolerated:
We therefore shall with easier burden brook,
The hawtie message of Tiberius Lucius,
If among our selves in wisdom we confer,
How and which way to answer his demand,
And surely (noble Followers) I suppose,
We have no cause to fear their foreign braues,
For that upon a most unjust request,
He seeks to have a tribute paid from Britain,
Because forsooth in Julius Caesar's time,
Through iarres and discords of the ancient Brytaine,
The tribute has been due and payable:
For when our country was at full possessed,
With civil garboiles and domesticke brawles,
Their Caesar did ariue wihin this land,
And with this armed soldiers full of force,
Brought in subjection that unquiet Nation,
By this alleadgance they unjustly crave,
Tribute and satisfaction at our hands,
For nothing that is got by violence,
May justly be possessed by violence.
Since therefore he presumes to demand,
A thing being most unlawful at our hands,
By the same reason let us demand of him,
Tribute at Rome mauger their Romish power,
And he that is the mightier in force,
Let him possess the honor of the tribute,
For if his allegations and demands,
Be forcible and worthy to be kept,
Because their Caesar and some Roman Princes,
Have sometimes conquered Brytania,
By the like reason I do think that Rome,
Ought to pay tribute and to do us homage,
Because my Predecessors conquered it:
Bellin the noble King of Brytanie,
With his brave brother Brennus warlike aid,
Being then accounted Sauoies noble Duke,
Razed the walls of Rome, and set his Standard
With victory upon the City gates,
And in the middle of their Market place,
Hung up twenty of their chiefest Noblemen.
And Constantine the son of Helena,
And Maximinianus my near Cou^ins,
Were both inthroniz'din the Imperial seat,
And government of Romes great Emperie*
As touching France and other Islands there,
We need not answer their out-brauing terms:
For they refused to defend their own,
When we by force redeemed them from their hands.
Then counsel me thrise-worthy Brytaine Peers,
Abandoning base cowardice and fears.
K. Arthur.

The Answer of Howell King of little Brytaine.
THough all your wisdoms and your grauities,
Handmaides to Counsel and Nobility,
Should be engraued in one golden leaf,
More to the purpose could not you infer,
Then thy most grave and exquisite Oration,
They eloquent and Tully-like advise
Has furnished us with such experiment,
Whereby we ought incessantly to praise,
In you the wisdom of a constant man:
For if with all post expedition,
You will prepare a voyage unto Rome,
That doh expect our haste and royal coming*
According to the reasons you allege,
I doubt not but that fair Victoria,
Will sit in triumph on our conquering Helmes,
To fright the minds of Romish adversaries,
Since we defend our ancient liberty,
Disdaining for to bear a servile yoke,
Which to this day the Britains do maintain:
Let us go chearefully and demand of them,
With Justice what unjustly they demand:
For he that does deface another right,
And thinks unjustly for to dispossess,
And take from him his own inheritance
Deservedly, and with a worthy means,
Not violating large and hostile Arms,
May he be put from that which is his own,
By him to whom the wrong is offered.
Seeing therefore that the Romans would usurp,
The royal dignity of worthy Britain,
Due to your honorable ancestors,
I doubt not (noble King) but we will regaine,
That which your Predecessors have possessed,
Even in the middle of their proudest City,
If we may come to buckle with our foes.
This is the conflict that true hearted Britains,
So long have wished to happen to our age.
These be the prophesies of wise Sibilla,
Long time ago, plainly and truly told,
And now at length fulfilled to our joy,
That of the third race of the worthy Britains*
There should be borne a Prince to repossesse,
The Romish Empire and their Dignity:
For two of these the prophecy is past,
In Belin and that worthy Constantine,
Who overcame, and gave the Arms of Rome:
Now have we none but you my gracious Liege*
The third and last, not least in all our eyes,
To whom this high Exploit is promised:
Make haste therefore most royal Sovereign,
For to receive that which our God will give,
Hasten for to subdue their willing minds,
Which profer up their honor to your hands,
Hasten dear Liege for to advance us all,
That willingly will spend our lives and lands,
For the advancement of our liberty.
And to a^chieue this Labor worthy King,
Ten thousand armed soldiers will I bring.
Ho. K. of Brit.

Angusel King of Albania his Answer to the King.
SInce first I heard my Sovereign speak his mind,
Full fraught with Eloquence and learned Counsel,
A sudden joy did so possess my soul,
As that in words I cannot utter forth
The explanation of my willing thoughts:
In all our Victories and Conquests won,
Subduing many Regions, many Kings,
Nothing at all in honor have we gained,
If that we suffer the proud-minded Romans,
And hautie Germans to usurp upon us,
And do not now revenge those bloody s^^ughtert*
Enacted on our friends and countrymen.
And since Occasion now is proffered,
And Liberty to try our force of Arms,
I do rejoice to see this happy day,
Wherein we may but meet and join with them:
I thrist my Lord in heart for sweet revenge,
As if three days I had been kept from drink^*
The wounds I should receive upon that day,
Would be as pleasant to my laboring soul,
As Water to a thirsty Traveler,
Or else Releasement to a man condemned,
Nay Death it self were welcome to my bosom,
For to revenge our Fathers injuries,
Defend our liberty, advance our King:
Let us give onset on that meacocke Nation*
Those fond effeminate unruly people,
And fight it out unto the latest man;
That after we have spread our wauing Colors,
In sign of Triumph and of Victory,
We may enjoy the Honors they possess,
And for my part renowned valiant King,
Two thousand armed horsemen will I bring.
An. K. A^b.

A Royal army Arthur has provided,
To beard the brauing Romans in their Country,
And like a Martialist has them divided,
To buckle with so proud an Enemy:
And Courage joined with Resolution*
Does prick them forwards ^o this Action.
The Britains hawtie and resolved men,
Stout, valiant, of Bellonas warlike brood,
Cheered on their Followers, and began again
For to revive their new decayed blood:
And to redeem to Arthur and his Line*
What once was won by valiant Constantine.
Now sounds his Drum a march in cheerful sort,
Now his loud winded Trumpets check the air,
And now the Britains to him do resort,
Not fearing wars affliction or despair:
But all with one voice promise victory
To Arthur King of famous Britainy.
His Colors they are wauing in the wind,
Wherein is wrought his Arms of ancestrie,
His Pendants are in formal wise assigned,
Q^artred at large by well read Heraldrie:
Cuffing the air that struggles for to kiss,
The gaudinesse of fair King Arthurs bliss.
Within his spreading Ensign first he bore,
Allotted from his royal family*
Three flying Dragons and three Crowns he wore,
Portraid de Or, the field of Azure die,
His fathers Coat, his Mothers Countries grace,
His honors Badge, his cruel foes deface*
At last unto himself he has assumpted,
And took to Arms proper to his desire,
As in his faithful mind being best accounted,
And fitting to those thoughts he did require:
A cross of Silver in a field of Vert,
A gracious Embleame to his great desert.
On the first quart^r of this field was figured*
The image of our Lady with her Son
Held in her arms; this he desired,
Wherein his new-growne valor was begone:
And bearing this same Figure forth right nobly,
Did marvelous Acts and feats of Chivalry*
This Sign in elder ages being odious,
And hated of the bad deserving mind,
By his dear blood is made most precious,
Our vnpure Sin by him being full refind:
A great triumphant Sign, a Sign of joy,
A blessed Cross to free us from annoy.
To this the righteous man bows down his head,
And this the heavenly Angels do ^dore,
By this our vnpure souls with life is fed,
And Devils fearing this do much d^plore:
Hereon he vanquished Satan, Hell, and Sin,
And by this Sign our new-life we begin.
Wise, learned Historiographers do write,
That this pure Sign of the most holy Cross
Was sent from God, to Mercuries delight,
Julian the Apost^ta's only loss,
And that an Angel brought to Mercury*
All Armor for his back most necessary.
A Shield of Azure herein colored,
A flowrie Cross between two golden Roses,
That the proud Jews minds much distempred,
Whose virtue in it self true Time encloses
A rich wrought Shield and a most heavenly Armor*
That to the proud Foe struck a deadly terror.
And in the time of Charles the seventh french King,
The Sun giving glory to the dim-fac'd Morn,
When early rising Birds alowd did sing,
And fair clear clouds the Element did adorn,
To Englishmen and French from heaven was sent
A milke-white Cross within the Firmament.
Which heavenly Sign of both these nations seen,
The haughty French moved with rebellion
Against their lawful King and true-borne Queen,
Began to yield their true submission,
And took it as a great admonishment,
And Sigue betok'ning bitter detriment.
Thus we may see, that the Religion
Which they conceived of this blessed sight*
Altered their minds to veneration*
And mollified their hearts then full of spite,
Yielding unto their Prince obedience,
And true submission for their great offense.
This sight of honor, to the French Kings fame
They did behold, a spectacle to France,
At the same time when the third Edward came,
And in the land his colors did advance,
Sending to Clodoueus then their King,
Which there became a Christian by Baptizing.
Haec sunt Francorum celebranda insignia Regum,
Quae demissa polo, sustinet almafides
Et nobis coelica dona:
Et pia Francorum placeant insignia Regum,
Aurea coelesti primum suffulta color
Lilia, Caesarijs olim iam credita ceruis
Auri flammadehinc, veterum victoria Regum.
And ever since great Clodoueus reign,
They did remain as Ensigns to that Nation,
Where still before three Toades they did sustain,
Their only pourtraiture of commendation,
By honor to the English Kings pertaining,
That conquered France, when all their pride was waining.
His barbed Horses beat the yielding ground,
And with their neighing terrifide their foe,
Proud of their riders, in whose hearts are found
A promise to the Romans overthrow.
The glistering shine of their well-fashion'd armor,
Tells all men here does ride a Conqueror.
Their Armor strongly made and firmly wrought,
Not to the use of old decayed Time,
Who with their gilded shows are good for naught,
But like to stony walls not made with lime,
The Brytaines went not proudly armoured,
But strong, as scorning to be conquered.
In Calis he his colors does advance,
Who all for fear do entertain this Prince,
And passes through the regiment of France,
And does with puissance the French convince:
Still marching up to Paris and to Roane,
Bringing that Country in subjection.
And having got his Title and his Name,
A Title got with famous victory,
He marches forward to enlarge his Fame,
Leaving fair France in his authority,
By sword and clemency he conquered Island,
And won by famous war the land of Gothland.
Now more and more his army does increase,
And mighty Kings do offer him their aid,
So in the country they might live in peace,
His warlike followers so their minds dismayed*
The name of Arthur King of Britanie,
Has feared the Romish force from Italy.
At last he comes to meet his enemy,
High-harted Lucius that his letters sent,
To great Carleon with such Majesty,
That stiff^ly did demand a base intent:
But now he wished King Arthur were away,
For fear he lost the Honor of the day.
The Britains valor was so admirable,
As when a Lion meets with his Pray;
King Arthurs courage so inestimable,
That nere a Roman durst his strength assay:
But like the dust with wind did take their flight,
Yielding by War what they demand by Might.
Here lay a heap of Romans slaughtered,
Trod under foot by proud victorious Steedes,
And here one Friend another murdered,
Not able for to help him in his need:
Here bruised Soldiers that alowd did cry,
Brave Arthur help us in our misery.
And after he had won so great a Field,
And overthrew the Roman Lucius,
He pardoned those that graciously would yield,
And leave their Leader proud Tiberius:
Who left his men for fear, and would not fight,
But hid himself in darkness of the Night.
This base retraite and glorious Victory,
To Arthurs honors and Tiberius shame,
Was spread through Rome, through France, through Italy,
An extollation to the Bry^ish name:
Who forraged about, yet all did fly,
Till Arthur took them to his pitying mercy*
Forward toward Rome these Britains make their way,
Sounding Defiance as they pass along,
Their conquering Ensigns still they do display,
In Arms and hautie courage passing strong:
All Cities offer peace, all Towns submit
To Arthurs greatness, as a thing most fit.
But as they pass huge Mirmedons do strive,
Surnamed Giants, for to stop this King*
And vow by Paganism (by which they thrive,)
His body in Oceanus to fling:
And daunt his followers, who as Fame has said,
Of great big monstrous men were not afraid.
At last they march upon a large broad plain,
When first these hautie Giants he does spy,
The Britains scorn for to retire again,
But either win the honor, or else die:
Courage quoth Arthur, better die with fame,
Then yield or turn to our immortal shame.
At length they meet, and meeting cope together,
As when two savage Boares are full of i^e,
The Victory as yet inclined to neither,
But from their Creasts and Shields did sparckle fire:
Inkindled Wrath from Arthurs breast has sprung,
That he made passage through the thickest throng.
The King of Giants Arthur meets withal,
And copes with him: for in his strength did stand
His Kingdoms great advancement, or his fall,
His Subjects peace, his quietness of land:
But this renown to Britain does remain,
The Giant, Arthur hand to hand has slain.
When he was down the rest did faint for fear,
Which when the British army had espied,
Their true-borne valor did they not forbear,
But all the green grass with their blood they died:
And made such slaughter of these monstrous men,
That after-time has registered again.
After this Conquest is King Arthur minded,
With all his royal power to march to Rome*
And with his Lords he has determined,
This gallant Resolution, and this Doom:
To crown himself by war their Emperor,
And over all a mighty Governor.
And had not Fortune and Rebellion,
Stirred up his Cousin Mordreds hautie mind,
At home to make civil invasion,
Who sought King Arthurs glory for to blind,
With honor had he re-inkindled fire,
To burn the walls of Rome to his desire.
But O false Mordred, thou deceitful Kinsman,
(Begot of Treasons heir) thus to rebel,
Against thy noble Nephew, who has won
Cities and peopled Towns that did excel:
And all he did was for to glorify
His Royal kindred and his Noble country.
But thou some base-borne Haggard make a wing,
Against the Princely Eagle in his flight,
And like a hissing Serpent seek'st to sting
The Lion that did shield thee from despite:
But now being wakened by his Countries wrong,
With war he means to visit you ere long.
The news of this proud Rebel in his Land,
Was like deep piercing arrows at his heart,
Intemperate Rage did make them understand
King Arthurs fury, and fond Mordreds smart,
Who vowed reuengement most unnatural,
On him that sought to bring his friends to thrall*
He sounds Retrait^ with heart-swolne heaviness,
That he must leave fair Rome unconquered,
And marches through the Land in quietness,
To be revenged on the Usurper Mordred:
At this sweet news of his departing thence*
The Romans praise the Rebels excellence.
King Arthur heard at his return toward Brytaine,
How Mordred had proclaimed himself there King,
Those that resisted, he by force has slain,
Unto their Countries ground a gentle offering,
And to the Saxon Cheldricke is allide,
Who landing to their lawful King denide.
By force they ^riue King Arthur from the shore,
And like rebellious Monsters kill his men,
Which when he viewes, he strives more and more,
And his great p^issant strength renewes again,
And maugre all the power they withstand,
At Sandwich Noble Arthur takes Land:
And joining battle with his enem^es,
The traytrous Rebels are discomfited,
And Mordred all in have away he flies,
By treasons bloody Train and murder led,
To gather Power to renew the fight,
Urged forward by the Saxon Cheldricks spite
The Noble Arthur in this conflict lost
Some of his followers whom he loved too dear;
The death of gentle Gawen grieved him most,
As by his outward sorrow did appear:
This Gawen was proud Mordreds lawful brothe^,
Legitimate by father and by mother.
O mirror of true borne gentiliti^,
Fair map of Honor in his gentle blood,
That rather chose to love his noble coun^rie,
And seek the means to do his life Liege good,
Then to defend his kindred by that war,
That made the Son and most kind Father jar.
Kind Gawen, trusty worthy Gentleman,
Beloved of Arthur, as deservedly*
Recording Time thy faithfulness shall scan,
And loyal Truth wrapped up in memory:
Shall say in thy Kings quarrel being just,
At last thou di^dst, not in thy Brothers trust.
Thy gentle King prepa^d thy Funeral,
And laid thy body in a S^pulchre,
Inthine own country richly done and royal,
At Rosse whose auncestrie shall still endure:
And like a Nephew, mourned and wept for thee,
Grieuing to loose Brytish Nobility.
But to proceed in this unlucky fight,
King Angusel was slain whom Arthur loved,
A man in whom his country took delight,
That never with homebred Treachery was moved,
In false-faith'd Scotland was his bones interd,
To which before King Arthur him pre^erd,
That unjust Mordred* Mischiefs nourisher,
Times ^ad infamer, Traitor to the State*
Of his whole Country bounds the chief perturber*
Whose name to this day mong^t them grows in hate,
Fled from the battle* getting ships he saild
Westward toward Cornwail, when his force was quaild.
But when King Arthur heard of his departure,
Causing the refuse Rebels for to fly,
To make the way of his defense more sure,
With speed he re-inforst his royal army,
With new supply of hardy men at Arms,
Whose Resolution feared no following harms.
With his whole force he marches after him,
Where all the Kentish men rejoice to see
King Arthurs Colors, whose rich pride does dim
The faire-fac'd Sun in all his Majesty:
Not resting till he came unto the place,
Where Mordred was encamped for a space.
By Winchester a City of renown,
The Traitorous army of this Mordred lay,
On whose proud gathered troop the Sun did frown,
Fore-shewing to his men a blacke-fac't day*
And so it proved before the selfsame night;
Mordred and his best friends were slain in fight.
At Camblane was this bloody battle ended,
Where fame-a^thieuing Arthur sore was wounded,
With gallant Britain Lords being attended,
Whose sword (called Pridwin) many had confounded*
Yet Fortunes unseen immortality*
Sometime cuts down sprigs of a Monarchy.
At this days doleful stroke of Arthurs death,
The glorious shining Sun looked pale and wanne,
And when this Monarch losed forth his breath,
The Britains being amazed about him ran:
And with their nails did tear their flesh asunder*
That they had lost their King the worlds great Wonder.
Over this little Island he had reigned,
The full just term of six and twenty years,
When twelve most famous battles he obtained,
As in our ancient Chronicles appears,
And in the Churchyard of fair Glastenburie*
They held King Arthurs woeful obsequie.
And in the time of second Henry's days,
Between two pillars was his body found,
That in his life deseru's immortal praise,
Laid sixteen foot deep underneath the ground;
Because his Saxon foes whom he did chase,
Should not with swords his liuelesse corpse deface.
In the last year of Henry's royalty,
More then six hundred after his burial,
By the Abbot of the house of Glastenburie,
At last they found King Arthurs funeral*
Henry de Bloys the Abbots name they gave,
Who by the Kings command did find the grave.
The principal and chief occasion
That moved King Henry for to seek the place,
Was that a Bardth in Welsh division,
Recorded Arthurs acts unto his Grace:
And in the foresaid Churchyard he did sing,
That they should find the body of the King.
And those that dig'd to find his body there,
After they enterd seven foot deep in ground,
A mighty broad stone to them did appear,
With a great leaden Cross thereto bound,
And downwards toward the corpse the Cross did lie,
Containing this inscripted poesy.
Hic iacet sepultus inclytus Rex,
Arthurus in Insula Aualoniae.
His body whose great acts the world recorded,
When vital limitation gave him life,
And Fames shrill golden Trump abroad had sounded,
What Wars he ended, what Debate, what Strife,
What Honor to his country, what great Love,
Amongst his faithful subjects he did prove.
Was not interd in sumptuous royalty,
With funeral pomp of kindred and of friends,
Nor closde in marble stone wrought curiously,
Nor none in mourning black his King attends,
But in a hollow tree made for the ^once,
They do enter King Arthurs princely bones.
Their outward habit did not show their mind,
For many millions of sad weeping eyes,
In every street and corner you might find,
Some beating their bare breast, and some with outcries,
Cursing and Banning that proud Mordreds soul,
That did by war his princely life control.
The Kings that were attendant on his train,
Forgot their kingdoms, and their royal crowns,
Their high proud hautie hearts with grief were slain,
Struck in amaze with Fortunes deadly frowns:
For they had lost their Scepter, Seat, and all,
By princely Arthurs most unhappy fall.
The trunk being opened, at the last they found
The bones of Arthur King of Brytanie,
Whose shin-bone being set upon the ground,
(As may appear by ancient Memory)
Reached to the middle thigh within a spanne,
Of a tall proper well set big lim'd Man.
And furthermore they found King Arthurs skull,
Of such great largeness that betwixt his eyes,
His foreheads space a spanne broad was at full,
That no true Historiographer denies:
The forenam'd Abbot living in those days,
Saw what is written now to Arthurs praise.
The print of ten wounds in his head appeared,
All grown together except only one,
Of which it seems this worthy Brytaine died:
A true Memorial to his loving Nation;
But that was greater far then all the rest,
Had it been lesser Brytaine had been blessed.
In opening of the Tomb they found his wife,
Queen Guiniuere interred with the King,
The Tresses of her hair as in her life,
Were finely platted whole and glistering:
The color like the most pure refined gold,
Which being touched straight turned into mould,
Henry de Bloyes at the length translated
The bones of Arthur and his lovely Queen,
Into the great Church where they were interred,
Within a Marble toombe, as often was seen:
Of whom a worthy Poet does rehearse,
This Epitaph in sweet Heroicke Verse.
Hic iacet Arthurus flos regum, gloria regni,
Quem mores, probit as commendant laud perenni.
Iohannis Leylandij antiquarij E^comion funerale, in
vitam, facta, mortemque Regis Arthuri inclitissi^i.
SAxonicas toties qui fudit mart cruento
Turmas, and peperit spolijs sibi nomen opimis,
Fulmineo toties Pictos qui contudit ense,
Im^osuitque iugum Scoti ceruicibus ingens,
Qui tumidos Gallos, Germanos quique feroces
Pertulit, and Dacos bello confregit aperto:
Denique Mordredum e medio qui sustulit illud
Monstrum, horrendum ingens, dirum seuumque tyrannum,
Hoc iacet extinctus monumento Arthurius alto,
Militiae clarum decus, and virtutis alumnus,
Gloria nunc cuius terram circumuolat omnem,
Aetherijque petit, sublimia tecta tonantis.
Vosigitur gentis Proles generosa Britannae
Induperatoriter magno assurgite vosiro:
Et tumulo s^cro Roseas inferte Corollas,
Officij testes redolentia muncra vestri,
Thus Englished.

He that so often the Saxon Troops did foil,
And got a name of worth with richest spoil:
He that with brandisht sword the Picts destroyed,
And yoked the Scots, their stubborn necks annoyd:
He that the lofty French and Germans fierce did (...),
And Dacians force with War did vanquish quite:
He lastly which cut off that monster Mordreds life,
A cruel Tyrant, horrible, mighty, full of strife:
Arthur lies buried in this Monument,
Wars chiefest garland, Virtues sole intent;
Whose Glory through the world still swiftly flies,
And mounts with Fames wings up to the thundering skies.
You gentle Off spring of the Britains blood,
Unto this puissant Emperor do honors good*
And on his Tomb lay Garlands of sweet Roses,
Sweet gifts of Duty, and sweet loving posies.
Finis Epitaphij. No. Arth.
The true Pedigree of that famous VVorthie King Arthur, collected out of many
learned Authors.
Twelve men in number entered the vale of Aualon:
Joseph of Arimathea was the chiefest we confess,
Iosue the son of Joseph his father did attend on,
With other ten, these Glaston did possess,
Hilarious the Nephew of Joseph first begat
Iosue the Wise: Iosue Aminadab,
Aminadab Castellors had by fate:
Castellors got Manael that lovely Lad,
And Manael by his wife had faire-fac'd Lambard*
With another dear son surnamed Vrlard;
And Lambard at the length begot a son,
That had I^rene bo^ne of his wife,
Of this Igrene, Vter the great P^ndragon
Begot King Arthur famous in his life*
Where by the truth this Pedigree does end,
Arthur from Joseph's loins did first descend.
Peter Cousin to Joseph of Arimathea,
Being sometimes King of great Arcadia,
Begat Erlan that famous worthy Prince,
And Erlan gat Melianus, that did convince
His neighbor foes, Melianus, did beget
Edor, and Edor Lothos name did set,
That took to wife the sister of King Arthur*
A Virgin fair, chaste, lovely, and most pure,
Of whom this Lotho had four lovely boys,
Their fath^rs comfort and their mothers joys*
Walwanus, Agranaius, Garelus and Guerelise,
That in their country much did soueragnize:
All which were men of great authority*
And famous in the land of Britain.
Here ends the Birth, Life, Death, and Pedigree of King Arthur of Britanie,
and now, to where we left.
Phoenix. O Nature tell me one thing ere we part,
What famous town and situated Seat,
Is that huge Building that is made by Art,
Against whose walls the crystal streams do beat,
As if the flowing tide the stones would eat:
That lies upon my left hand built so hie,
That the huge top-made Steeple dares the Sky?

Nature. That is the Britains town old Troynouant,
The which the wandering- Troyans Son did frame,
When after ship wrack he a place did want,
For to revive his Honor-splitted Name,
And raisd again the cinders of his Fame,
When from Sydonian Dido they did steal,
To rear the Pillars of a Commonweal.
Since when to come more nearer to our time,
Lud the great King did with his wealth enlarge,
The famous builded City of this Clime,
And Ludstone to be called he gave in charge,
And London now that Town is grown at large:
The flowing River Thamasis is named,
Whose Sea-ensuing Tide can near be tamed.

Phoenix. O London I have heard thee honored,
And thy names Glory raised to good intent,
Laws Council chamber in thy walls is bred,
The school^ of Knowledge and Experiment:
Wise Senators to govern thee is lent.
All things to beautify a Royal Throne,
Where Scarsitie and Dea^th did never groan*

Nature. Leave off thy Praises till we have more leisure,
And to beguile the weary lingering Day,
Whose long-drawne Hours do tire us out of measure:
Our cunning in Loue-songs let us assay,
And paint our Pleasure as some good Array*
I will begin my cunning for to taste*
And your Experience we will try at last.

Here Nature sings to this dittie following.

WHat is Love but a toy
To beguile men's Senses?
What is Cupid but a boy,
Boy to cause expenses,
A toy that brings to fools oppressed thrall,
A boy whose folly makes a number fall.
What is Love but a child,
Child of little substance,
Making Apes to be wild,
And their pride to advance,
A child that loves with guegawes to be toying,
And with thin shadows always to be playing.
Love is sweet, wherein sweet?
In fading pleasures, wanton toys,
Love a Lord, and yet meet,
To cross men's humors with annoyes:
A bitter pleasure, pleasing for a while,
A Lord is Love that does man's thoughts beguile.
O sing no more, you do forget your Theme,
And have profaned the sacred name of Love,
You dip your tongue in an unwholesome Stream,
And from the golden Truth your notes remove,
In my harsh Dittie I will all reprove:
And vnaccustom'd I will try my skill,
To pleasure you, and to confute your will*

The Phoenix her Song to the Dittie before.

O Holy Love, religious Saint,
Man's only hony-tasting Pleasure,
Thy glory, learning cannot paint,
For thou art all our wordly Treasure*
Thou art the Treasure, Treasure of the soul,
That great celestial powers do control*
What greater bliss then to embrace
The perfect pattern of Delight,
Whose heart-enchaunting Eye does chase
A^l storms of sorrow from man's sight:
Pleasure, Delight, Wealth, and earth-ioyes do lie
In Venus bosom, bosom of pure beauty.
That mind that tastes perfect Love,
Is far remoted from annoy:
Cupid that God does sit above,
That tips his Arrows all with joy:
And this makes Poets in their Verse to sing
Love is a holy, holy, holy thing.

Nature. O voice Angelical, O heavenly song,
The golden praise of Love that thou have made,
Deliuerd from thy sweet smoothd honied tongue,
Commands Love self to lie within a shade,
And yield thee all the Pleasures may be had:
Thy sweet melodious voice has beautifide
And gilded Loves rich amors in her pride.

Phoenix. Enough, enough, Love is a holy thing,
A power divine, divine, maiesticall:
In shallow witted brains as you did sing,
It cares not for the force material,
And low-borne Swains it naught respects at all:
She builds her Bower in none but noble minds,
And there due adoration still she finds.

Nature. Stay Phoenix stay, the evening Star draws nie,
And Phoebus he is parted from our sight,
And with this Wagon mounted in the Sky,
Affoording passage to the gloomie night,
That does the way-fa^ing Passenger affright:
And we are set on foot near to that I Will,
In whose deep bottom plains Delight does smile.

Pho^^ix. O what a muskie sent the air does cast,
As if the Gods perfumed it with sweet Myrthe*
O how my bloud's inspired and does taste,
An alteration in my joints to stir,
As if the good did with the bad confer:
The air does move my Spirits, purge my Sense,
And in my body does new war commence.
Look round about, behold you fruitful Plain,
Behold their meadow plots and pasture ground,
Behold their crystal Rivers run amain,
Into the vaste huge Seas devouring sound,
And in her bowels all her filth is found:
It vomiteth by virtue all corruption,
Into that wa^rie plain of desolation.
And while the day gives light unto our eyes,
Be thou attentive, and I will relate,
The glory of the plains that thou descri'st,
Whose fertile bounds far does extenuate,
Where Mars and Venus arm in arm have sat:
Of plants of herbs, and of high springing trees,
Of sweet delicious sauors, and of Bees.
In this delightsome country there does grow,
The Mandrake called in Greek Mandragora^,
Some of his virtues if you look to know,
The juice that freshly from the root does pass,
Purges all fleame like black Helleborus:
It Is good for pain engendered in the eyes;
By wine made of the root does sleep arise.
There Is Yellow Crowbels and the Daphadill,
Good Harry, herb Robert, and white Cotula,
Adders grass, Eglantine, and Aphodill,
Agnus Castus, and Acatia,
The Black Arke-angell, Coloquintida,
Sweet Sugar Canes, Sinkefoile and boys Mercury,
Goosefoote, Goldsnap, and good Gratia Dei.
Moss of the Sea, and yellow Succorie,
Sweet Trefoile, Weedwind, the wholesome Wormwood,
Muskmealons, Moustaile, and Mercury,
The dead Arkeangell that for wennes is good,
The Soldiers perrow, and great Southernewood:
Stone hearts tongue, Blessed thistle, and Sea Trifoly,
Our Ladies cushion, and Spaines Pellitorie.

(...). No doubt this Clymate where as these remain,
The women and the men are famed for fair,
Here need they not of aches to complain,
For Phisickes skill grows here without compare:
All herbs and plants within this Region are,
But by the way sweet Nature as you go,
Of Agnus Castus speak a word or two.

Nature* That shall I briefly; it is the very handmaid
To Vesta, or to perfect Chastity,
The hot inflamed spirit is allaid
By this sweet herb that bends to Luxury,
It dries up the seed of Venerie:
The leaves being laid upon the sleepers bed,
With chastnesse, cleanness, pureness he is fed.
Burn me the leaves, and straw then on the ground,
Whereas foul venomous Serpents use to haunt:
And by this virtue here they are not found,
Their operation does such creatures daunt,
It causes them from thence for to auant:
If thou be stung with Serpents great or less,
Drink but the seed, and thou shall find redress.
But to proceed, here is Clary or Cleare-eie,
Calves snout, Cukoe flowers, and the Cuckoes meat,
Calathian Violets, Dandelion, and the Dewberrie,
Leopards foot, and g^eene Spinach which we use to eat,
And the hot Indian Sun procuring heat:
Great wild Valerian, and the Withie wind,
The water Cresses, or ague-curing Woodbind.
There Is Foxgloue, Forget me not, and Coliander,
Galingal, Goldcups, and Buprestis,
Small honesties, Eyebright, and Coculus Panter,
Double tongue, Moly, and the bright Anthillis,
Smelling Clauer, and Aethiopis:
Floramore, Euphorbium, and Esula,
White Bulbus violet, and Cassia fistula.

Phoenix. But by the way sweet Nature tell me this,
Is this the Moly that is excellent,
For strong enchauntments and the Adders hiss?
Is this the Moly that Mercurius sent
To wise Ulysses, when he did prevent
The witchcraft, and foul Circes damned charms,
That would have compast him with twenty harms?

Nature. This is the Moly growing in this land,
That was revealed by cunning Mercury
To great Ulysses, making him withstand
The hand of Circes fatal sorcerie,
That would have laden him with misery:
And ere we pass I Will show some excellence*
Of other herbs in Phisickes noble Science.
There Mugwort, Sena and Tithimailes,
Oak of Jerusalem, and Lyryconfaucie,
Larkes spur* Larkes claw and Lentiles,
Garden Nigella, Mill, and Pionie,
Woody Nightshade, Mints, and Sentorie,
Sowbread, Dragons, and Goats oregan,
Pelemeum, Hellebore, and Osmond the Waterman*
First of this Mugwort it did take the name,
Of Artemesia wife to Mansoleus,
Whose sunne-bred beauty did his heart inflame,
When she was Queen of Helicarnassus,
Diana gave the herb this name to us:
Because this virtue to us it has lent,
For women's matters it is excellent.
And he that shall this herb about him bear,
Is freed from hurt or danger any way,
No poisned Toade nor Serpent shall him f^are,
As he does travel in the Sunshine day,
No weariness his limbs shall ought assay:
And if he wear this Mugwort at his breast,
Being traveling, he nere shall covet rest.
There is black Hellebore called Melampodium,
Because an Arcadian shepherd first did find
This wholesome herb Melampus named of some,
Which the rich Proetus daughters wits did bind,
When she to extreme madness was inclind:
It cured and revived her memory,
That was possessed with a continual frenzy.
There Centrie in Greek Centaurion,
That from the Centaure Chiron took the name,
In Spain it was called Cintoria long agone,
And this much honor must we give the same,
Wild Tigers with the leaves a man may ^ame:
It Is good for sinewed aches, and gives light
To the black mistie dimnesse of the sight.
Fames golden glory spreads this report,
Upon a day that Chiron was a guest,
To arme-strong Hercules, and did resort
Unto his house to a most sumptuous feast,
And welcome was the Centaure among the rest.
But see his luck, he on his foot let fall,
Great Hercul's shaft, and hurt himself withal.
A mighty arrow not for him to weeld,
The wound being deep, and with a venomed point,
To Deaths arestment he began to yield,
And there with sundry Balmes they did anoint,
His wounded foot being stricken through the joint:
All would ^ot serve till that an old man brought,
This ^entaurie that ^ase to him has wrought,
There Is Osmond balepate, Plebane, and Oculus Christi,
Sleeping nightshade, Salomons seal, and Sampire,
Sage of Jerusalem, and sweet Rosemarie,
Great Pilosella, Sengreene, and Alexander,
Knights Milfoile, Masticke, and Stock gillofer,
Hearts ease, herb twopence, and Hermodactill,
Narcissus, and the red flower Pimpernell.

Phoenix. That word Narcissus is of force to steal,
Cold running water from a stony rock:
Alas poor boy thy beauty could not heal
The wound that thou thy self too deep did lock^;
Thy shadowed eyes thy perfect eyes did mock.
False beauty fed true beauty from the deep,
When in the glassie water thou did peep.
O Love thou art imperious full of might,
And do revenge the cry disdaining lover
His looks to Ladies eyes did give a light,
But pride of beauty, did his beauty smother,
Like him for fair you could not find another*
Ah had he loved, and not on Ladies lower,
He near had been transformed to a flower.

Nature. This is an Embleame for those painted faces,
Where divine beauty rests her for a while,
Filling their brows with storms and great disgraces,
That on the pained soul yields not a smile,
But puts true love into perpetual exile:
Hard hearted Soul, such fortune light on thee,
That thou may be tranform'd as well as he.

Ah had the boy been pliable to be won,
And not abusde his morn excelling face,
He might have lived as beauteous as the Sun,
And to his beauty Ladies would give place,
But O proud Boy, thou wroughtst thine own disgrace:
Thou love thy self, and by the self same love,
Did thy deuinesse to a flower remove.
But to proceed, there is Christioculus,
The seed of this Horminum drunk with wine,
Does stir a procurations heat in us,
And to Libidenous lusts makes men incline,
And men's unable bodies does refine:
It brings increase by operation,
And multiplies our generation.
There Is Carrets, Cheruile, and the Cucumer,
Red Patiens, Purslane, and Gingidium,
Ox eye, sheep killing Penygrasses, and the golden flower
Cuckoepintell, our Ladies seal, and Sagapinum,
Theophrastus violet, and Vincetoxicum:
Saint Peter's wort, and lovely Venus hair,
And Squilla, that keeps men from foul despair.
O this word Carrets, if a number knew
The virtue of thy rare excelling root,
And what good help to men there does ensue,
They would their lands, and their lives sell to boot,
But thy sweet operation they would view:
Sad dreaming Lovers slumbring in the night,
Would in thy honey working take delight.
The Thracian Orpheus whose admired skill
Infernal Pluto once has ravished,
Causing high Trees to dance against their will,
And untamed Beast with Musicks Harp has fed,
And Fishes to the shore has often led,
By his experience oftentimes did prove,
This Root procured in Maids a perfect love.
Purslane does comfort the inflamed heart,
And heals the exulcerated kidneys:
It stops all defluxions falling smart,
And when we sleep expels dreams and fancies:
It drives Imaginations from our eyes,
The juice of Purslane hinders that desire,
When men to Venus games would feign aspire.
There Is Rocket, Jack by the hedge, and Love in idleness,
Knights water Sengreene, and Silver maidenheare,
Paris Na^ews, Tornesol, and town Cresses,
Star thistle that for many things is dear,
And Seia that in Italy Corn does bear:
Wake-robbins, Hyacinth, and Hartichocke,
Letuce, that men's sense asleep does rock.
Phoenix. O poor boy Hyacinthus thy fair face
Of which Apollo was enamored,
Brought thy life's Lord too timely to that place,
Where playing with thee thou wast murdered,
And with thy blood the grass was sprinkled:
Thy body was transformed in that hour,
Into a red white mingled Gilli-flower.

Nature. But yet Apollo wept when he was slain,
For playing with him, clean against his will
He made him breathless, this procured his pain:
True love does seldom seek true love to kill;
O Love thou many actions do fulfill!
Search, seek, and learn what things there may be shown,
Then say that Loves sweet secrets are unknown.
And as a token of Apolloes sorrow,
A silver colored Lilly did appear,
The leaves his perfect sighs and tears did borrow,
Which have continued still from year to year;
Which shows him loving, not to be severe,
(...) is written as a mourning Dittie,
Upon this flower which shows Apolloes pity.
O Schoole-boyes I will teach you such a shift,
As will be worth a Kingdom when you know it,
An herb that has a secret hidden drift,
To none but Treauants do I mean to show it,
And all deep read Phisitio^s will allow it:
O how you play the wags, and feign would hear
Some secret matter to allay your ^eare.
There Is garden Rocket, take me but the seed,
When in your Masters brow your faults remain,
And when to save your selves there is great need,
Being whipped or beaten you shall feel no pain,
Although the blood your buttocks seem to stain:
It hardneth so the flesh and tender skin,
That what is seen without comes not within.
The Father that desires to have a boy,
That may be Heir unto his land and living,
Let his espoused Love drink day by day,
Good Artichocks, who buds in August bring,
Sod in clear running water of the spring;
Wives natural Conception it does strengthen,
And their declining life by force does lengthen.
In Summer time, when sluggish idleness
Does haunt the body of a healthful man,
In Winter time when a cold heavy slownesse
Does tame a woman's strength, do what she can,
Making her look both bloudlesse, pale and wan,
The virtue of this Artichocke is such,
It stirs them up to labor very much.
There Is Sowbread, Stanwort, and Star of Hierusal^^^,
Base or flat Veruine, and the wholesome Tansie,
Go to bed at noone, and Titimalem,
Hundred headed thistle, and tree-clasping Iuie,
Storks bill, great Stonecrop, and seed of Canary,
Dwarf gentian, Snakeweed and summer Sauory,
Bell rags, prickly Box, and Raspis of Couentry.
This Sowbread is an herb that is perilous,
For howsoever this same Root be used,
For women grown with child it is dangerous,
And therefore it is good to be refused:
Unless too much they seek to be misused,
O have a care how this you do apply,
Either in inward things or outwardly.
Those that about them carry this same Sowbread,
Or plant it in their gardens in the Spring,
If that they only over it do tread*
Twill kill the issue they about them bring,
When Mother Lullabie with joy should sing:
Yet wanton scaping Maids perhaps will taste,
This unkind herb, and snatch it up in have.
Yet let me give a warning to you all,
Do not presume too much in dalliance,
Be not short-heeld with every wind to fall:
The Eye of heaven perhaps will not dispense
With your rash fault, but plague your foul offense,
And take away the working and the virtue,
Because to him you broke your promised duty.
There Is Iuie, that does cling about the tree,
And with her leauie arms does round embrace
The rotten hollow withered trunk we see,
That from the maiden Cissus took that place,
Grape-crowned Bacchus did this damzell grace:
Loue-piercing windows dazeled so her eye,
That in Loves ouer-kindnesse she did dye.
A rich-wrought sumptuous Banquet was prepared,
Unto the which the Gods were all invited:
Amongst them all this Cissus was ensnared,
And in the sight of Bacchus much delighted:
In her fair^ bo^ome was true Love united,
She daunc't and often kissed him with such mirth,
That sudden joy did stop her vital breath.
As Soon as that the Nourisher of things,
O^r Grandam Earth had tasted of her blood,
From forth her body a fresh Plant there springs,
And then an I^y-climing Herb there stood,
That for the ^l^xe Dissenterie is good:
For the remembrance of the God of wine,
It therefore always claspes about the Vine.
There is Angellica or Dwarf Gentian,
Whose (...) being dride in the hot shining Sun,
From de^^h it does preserve the poisoned man,
Whose extreme torment makes his life half gone,
That from deaths mixed potion could not shun:
No Pestilence nor no infectious air,
Shall do him hurt, or cause him to despair.
There Is Carduus benedictu^ called the Blessed thistle,
Neswort, Peniroyall, and Astrolochia,
Yellow Wolfs-bane, and Rose-smelling Bramble,
Our Ladies Bedstraw, Brookelime, and Lunaria,
Cinque foil, Cats tail, and Cresse Scia^ica,
Hollihockes, Mouseare, and Pety Morrell,
Sage, Scorpiades, and the garden Sorrel.
First of the Nesewort, it does drive away,
And poysoneth troublesome Mice and long-tail'd Rats,
And being sod in milk, it does destroy
Bees, Waspes, or Flies, and little ^^inging Gnats:
It kills Dogs, and rest disturbing Cats,
Boiled with vinegar it does assuage
The ach proceeding from the tooths hot rage.
Sage is an herb for health preservative,
It does expel from women barrenness:
Aetius says, it makes the child to live,
Whose new-knit joints are full of feebleness,
And comfort the mothers weariness:
Adding a li^ely spirit, that does good
Unto the painful laboring wives sick blood.
In Egypt when a great mortality,
And killing Pestilence did infect the Land,
Making the people die innumerablie,
The plague being ceast, the women out of hand
Did drink of juice of Sage continually,
That made them to increase and multiply,
And bring forth store of children presently.
This herb Lunaria, if a horse do grase
Within a meadow where the same does grow,
And over it does come with gentle pace,
Having a horslocke at his foot below,
As many have, that sauegard we do know,
It opens the Lock, and makes it fall,
Despite the bar that it is locked withal.
There Is Standergras, Hares ballockes, or great Orchis,
Provoke Venus, and procures sport,
It helps the weakened body that is amiss,
And falls away in a consumptuous sort,
It heales the Hectique fever by report:
But the dried shriueld root being withered,
Hinders the virtue we have uttered.
If Man of the great springing roots does eat,
Being in matrimonial copulation,
Male children of his wife he shall beget,
This special virtue has the operation,
If Women make the withered roots their meat,
Fair lovely Daughters, affable, and wise,
From their fresh springing loins there shall arise.
There Is Rosemarie, the Arabians justify,
(Physicians of exceeding perfect skill,)
It comfort the brain and Memory,
And to the inward sense gives strength at will,
The head with noble knowledge it does fill.
Conserues thereof restores the speech being lost,
And makes a perfect Tongue with little cost.
There Is Dwale or Nightshade, it is a fatal plant,
It brings men into a deadly sleep,
Then Rage and Anger does their senses haunt,
And like mad Ajax they a coile do keep,
Till leane-fac'd Death into their heart does creep,
In Almaine grave experience has us tought,
This wicked herb for many things is naught.
Oak of Jerusalem being thoroughly dried,
And laid in presses where your clothes do lie,
No Mothes or venom among them shall abide,
It makes them smell so odorifero^sly,
That it does kill them all immediately:
It helps the breast that is stopped with corruption,
And gives man's breath fit operation.

(...). Blessed be our mother Earth that nourishes,
In her rich womb the seed of Times increase,
And by her virtue all things flourishes,
When from her bosom she does them release,
But are their Plants and Trees in this fair I Will,
Where Floras sweet spread garden seems to smile?

Nature. As plentiful unto these Ilanders,
Are the fruit-bearing Trees, as be the Flowers:
And to the chiefest Lords that are command^rs,
They serve as pleasant ouer-shading bowers,
To banquet in the day, and sport being late,
And most of them I mean to nominate.
There Is the great sturdie Oak and spreading Vine,
Under whose branches Bacchus vsd' to sleep,
The Rose-tree and the lofty bearing Pine,
That seems (being touched with wind) full often to weep^,
The Hawthorne, Christs-thorne and the Rosemary,
The Tamariske, Willow, and the Almond-tree.
The most chaste tree, that Chastnesse does betoken,
The Hollyholme, the Cork and Gooseberrie,
That never with tempestuous storms is shooken,
The Olive, Philbert, and the Barberie,
The Masticke tree whose liquid gum being dride.
Is good for them that Rheum has terrified.
There Is Judas tree, so called because that Jew,
That did betray the innocent Lamb of God,
The^e first of all his sorrows to renew,
Did hang himself, plagued with a heavy rod,
A just reward for such an unjust slave,
That would betray his Master to the grave.
There Is Ash-tree, Maple, and the Sycamore,
Pomegranate, Aprico^kes and Iunipere:
The Turpentine that sweet juice does deplore,
The Quince, the Peare-tree, and the young man's Medlar,
The Fig Tree, Orange, and the sweet moist Lemmon,
The Nutmeg, Plum-tree, and the lovely Cytron.
Now for the Myrtle tree, it bears the name,
Being once the gods Pallas best beloved,
Of Mersin the young fair Athenian Dame,
Because in act^uenesse she much excelled:
The lusty young men of Athenia,
She still was honored of the wise Minerua.
Who willing her at Tilt and Tournament,
At running, vaulting, and Actiuitie,
And other exercise of government,
Not to be absent from her Deity:
Because that she as Judge might give the Crown,
And garland to the Victors great renown.
But no forepassed age was free from Envy,
That spiteful honor-crazing enemy:
For on a time giving the equal glory
To him that wan it most deservedly,
The vanquisher in fury much displeased,
Slew Mersin whom the Goddess favored.
Pallas offended with their cruelty,
Did gratefully revenge her Maidens death,
Transforming her into a Myrtle tree,
Sweetly to flourish in the lower earth:
The berries are a means for to redress
(Being decocted) swolne-fac'd Drunkenness.
The stormy Winters green remaining Bay
Was Daphne, Ladon and the Earths fair daughter,
Whom wise Apollo haunted in the day,
Till at the length by chance alas he caught her:
O if such faults were in the Gods above,
Blame not poor silly men if they do love.
But she not able (almost out of breath)
For to resist the wise Gods humble suit,
Made her petition to her mother Earth,
That she would succor her, and make her mute:
The Earth being glad to ease her misery,
Did swallow her, and turned her to a Bay tree.
Apollo being amazed at this sight,
Named it Daphne for his Daphnes honor,
Twisting a Garland to his hearts delight,
And on his head did wear it as a favor:
And to this day the Bay trees memory,
Remains as token of true Prophecy.
Some of the heathen, men of opinion,
Suppose the greene-leau'd Bay tree can resist
Inchauntments, spirits, and illusion,
And make them seem as shadows in a mist,
This tree is dedicate only to the Sun,
Because her virtue from his vice begone.
The Mose tree has such great large spreading leaves,
That you may wrap a child of twelve months old
In one of them, unless the truth deceaues,
For so our Herborists have truly told:
By that great City Aleph in Assyria,
This tree was found hard by Venetia.
The fruit hereof (the Greeks and Christians)
That do remain in that large-spreading City,
The misbeleeuing ^ewes and Persians,
Hold this opinion for a certainty:
Adam did eat in lively Paradise,
That wrapped man's freeborn souls in miseri^s.

(...). These trees, these plants, and this description,
Of their sweet liquid gums that are distilling,
Are to be held in estimation,
For fai^e-fac'd Tellus glory is excelling*
But what white siluer'd rich resembling plain,
Is that where wooddie moving trees remain?

(...). That is the watery kingdom of Neptunus,
Where his high wood-made Towers daily flote,
Bearing the title of Occanus,
As hony-speaking Po^ts often do quote:
And as the branches spreading from the tree,
So do the Rivers grace this lovely Country.
Wherein is bread for man's sweet nourishment,
Fishes of sundry sorts and diverse natures,
That the inhabitants does much content,
As a relieuement to all mortal creatures,
But for to make you perfect what they be,
I will relate them to you orderly.
There swimmes the gentle Prawne and Pickerell,
A great deuourer of small little fish,
The Puffin, Sole, and Summer loving Mackrell,
In season held for a high Ladies dish:
The big bon'd Whale, of whom the skillful Mariner,
Sometimes God knows stands in a mighty terror.
The musicke-louing Dolphin here does swim,
That brought Arion on his back to shore,
And stayed a long while at the Seas deep brimme,
To hear him play* in nature did deplore,
As being loath to leave him, but at last
Headlong himself into the Sea he cast.
Here swimmes the Ray, the Sea-calfe and the Porpoise*
That does betoken rain or storms of weather,
The Seahorse, Sea-hound, and the wide-mouthed Plaice,
A Spitchcoke, Stocke-fish, and the little Pilcher,
Whose only moisture pressed by cunning Art,
Is good for those troubled with Aches smart.
Here swimmes the Shad, the Spi^sish, and the Spurling*
The Thornebacke, Turbut, and the Perewincle,
The Twine, the Trout, the Scallop and the Whiting,
The Scate, the Roch, the Tench and pretty Wrincle:
The Purple-fis^, whose liquor usually,
A violet color on the cloth does die.
Here swimmes the Perch, the Cuttle and the Stocke-fish,
That with a wooden staff is often beaten,
The Crab, the Perch, which poor men always wish,
The Ruff, the Piper good for to be eaten:
The Barbell that three times in every year,
Her natural young ones to the waves does bear.

Phoenix. His great divine Omnipotence is mighty,
That rides upon the Heavens axeltree,
That by increase amongst us sends such plenty,
I^ to his Mightiness grateful we will be:
But stubburne necked Jews do him provoke,
Till he do load them with a heavy yoke.

Nature. Truth have you said; but I will here express
The richesse of the Earths hid secrecy,
The salt Sea^ unseen, unknown worthiness,
That yields us precious stones innumerably,
The rareness of their virtue fit for Kings,
And such this country climate often brings.
Herein is found the Amatist, and Abestone,
The Topaze, Turches, and Gelatia,
The Adamant, Dionise, and Calcedon,
The Berill, Marble, and Elutropia,
The Ruby, Sapphire, and Asterites,
The Iacinth, Sardonix, and Argirites.
The Smaragd, Carbuncle, and Alablaster,
Cornellis, Crusopasse, and Corrall:
The sparkling Diamond, and the lovely Jasper,
The Margarite, Lodestone, and the bright-^y'd Crystal,
Ligurius, Onix, Nitrum, and Gagates,
Absistos, Amatites, and the good Achates.
Here in this Island are there mines of Gold,
Mines of Silver, Iron, Tin and Lead,
That by the laboring workman we behold:
And mines of Brass, that in the Earth is fed,
The stone Lipparia, Galactites, and Pant^ron,
Enidros, Iris, Dracontites, and Astrion.
The Adamant, a hard obdurate stone,
Invincible, and not for to be broken,
Being placed near a great big bar of Iron,
This virtue has it, as a special token,
The Lodestone has no power to draw away
The Iron bar, but in one place does stay.
Yet with a Goats warm, fresh and lively blood,
This Adaman^ does break and riue in sunder,
That many mighty, huge strokes has withstood:
But I will tell you of a greater wonder,
It reconciles the woman's love being lost,
And gives proof of Chastnesse without cost.
The purple colored Amati^t does prevail
Against the wit-oppressing Drunkenness,
If evil Cogitations do assail
Thy sleepie thoughts wrapped up in heaviness,
It soon will drive them from thy minds disturbing,
And temporize thy brain that is offending.
The white-veind enterlin'd stone Achates,
Bespotted here and there with spots like blood,
Makes a man gracious in the peoples eyes,
And for to clear the sight is passing good:
It remedieth the place that is venomous,
And in the fire smells odoriferous.
The Gemme Amatites has this quality,
Let a man touch his vesture with the same,
And it resists fire mightily:
The virtue does the force of burning ^ame,
And afterward cast in the fires light,
Burns not at all, but then it seems most bright.
The fair stone Berrill is so precious,
That mighty men do hold it very rare:
It frees a man from actions perilous,
If of his life's dear blood he have a care,
And now and then being put into the Eyes,
Defends a man from all his enemies.
The stone Ceranicum spotted ore with blue,
Being safe and chastely borne within the hand,
Thunders hot raging cracks that do ensue
It does expel, and Lightnings does withstand,
Defending of the house that many keep,
And is effectual to bring men asleep.
The Diamond the worlds reflecting eye,
The Diamond the heavens bright shining star,
The Diamond the earths most purest glory:
And with the Diamond no Stone ^^n compare;
She teaches men to speak, and men to love,
If all her rarest virtues you will prove.
The Diamond taught Music first his cunning,
The Diamond taught Poetry her skill,
The Diamond gave Lawyers first their learning,
Arithmeticke the Diamond taught at will:
She teaches all Arts: for within her eye,
The knowledge of the world does safely lie.
Dradocos is a stone that is pale and wan,
It brings to some men thoughts fantastical:
It being laid upon a cold dead Man,
Loses the virtue it is graced withal;
Wherefore it is called the most holy stone:
For* whereas Death frequenteth it is gone.
Achites is in color violet,
Found on the Banks of this delightsome place,
Both male and female in this Land we get:
Whose virtue does the Princely Eagle grace;
For being borne by her into her nest,
She brings forth her young ones with much rest.
This stone being bound fast to a woman's side,
Within whose purest womb her child is lying,
Does hasten childbirth, and does make her bide
But little pain, her humors is releasing.
If any one be guilty of Deceit,
This stone will cause him to forsake his meat.
Enidros is the stone that^s always sweating,
Distilling liquid drops continually:
And yet for all his daily moisture melting,
It keeps the self same bigness steadfastly:
It never lesseneth, nor does fall away,
But in one steadfast perfectness does stay.
Perpetui fletus lachrymas distillat Enidros,
Qui velut ex pleni fontis scaturigine manat.
Gagates smelling like to Frankensence,
Being left whereas the poisnous Serpents breed,
Drives them away, and does his force commence,
Making this beast on barren plains to feed,
And there to starve and pine away for meat,
Because being there he finds no food to eat.
This stone being put in a fair woman's drink,
Will testify her pure Virginity,
A most rare thing that some men never think,
Yet you shall give your iugdement easily,
For if she make her water presently,
Then has this Woman lost her honesty.
The lacinth is a neighbor to the Sapphire,
That does transform it self to sundry sights,
Sometimes it is black and cloudie, sometimes el^
And from the mutable air borrowes lights:
It gives strength and vigor in his kind,
And fair sweet quiet sleep brings to the n
Rabiates being clearly colored,
Borne about one does make him eloquent,
And in great honor to be favored,
If he do use it to a good intent,
Foul venomous Serpents it does bring in awe,
And cures pain and grief about the ^awe.
The iron-drawing Lode-stone if you set
Within a vessel, either Gold or Brass,
And place a piece of Iron under it,
Of some indifferent size or smallest compass,
The Lodestone on the top will cause it move,
And by his virtue meet with it above.
The Meade stone colored like the grassie green,
Much gentle ease unto the Gout has done,
And helps those being troubled with the Spleen,
Mingled with Woman's milk bearing a Son:
It remedi^h the wit-assailing Frenzy,
And purges the sad mind of Melancholy.
The stone Orites spotted ore with white,
Being worn, or hung about a woman's neck,
Prohibiteth Conception and Delight,
And the childbearing womb by force does check:
Or else it hast'neth her delivery,
And makes the birth imperfect and untimely.
Sky colored Sapphire Kings and Princes wear,
Being held most precious in their judging sight:
The ve^ie touch of this does thoroughly cure
The Carbuncles enraging hateful spite:
It does delight and recreate the Eyes,
And all base grossness it does quite despise.
If in a box you put an inuenomd Spider,
Whose poisonous operation is annoying,
And on the boxes top lay the true Sapphire,
The virtue of his power shows us his cunning,
He vanquisheth the Spider, leaves him dead,
And to Apollo now is consecrated.
The fresh green colored Smaragd does excel
All Trees, Boughs, Plants, and new fresh springing Leaves:
The hot reflecting Sun can never quell
His virtue, that no eyesight ere deceiues,
But ore fair Phoebus glory it triumphs,
And the dim duskie Eyes it polisheth.
The valiant Caesar took his chief delight,
By looking on the (...) excellence,
To see his Roman soldiers how they fight,
And view what wards they had for their defense,
And who excelled in perfect chivalry,
And noblest bore himself in victory.
This Stone does serve to Divination,
To tell of things to come, and things being past,
And among us held in estimation,
Giving the sick man's meat a gentle taste:
If things shall be, it keeps in the Mind,
If not, forgetfulness our Eyes does blind.
The Turches being worn in a Ring,
If any Gentleman have cause to ride,
Supports, and does sustain him from all falling*
Or hurting of him self what ere betide:
And ere he suffer any fearful danger,
Will fall it self, and break, and burst a sunder.

(...). These wondrous things of Nature to men's eare^
Will almost prove (sweet Nature) incredible,
But by Times ancient record it appears,
These hidden secrets to be memorable:
For his diuinesse that has wrought this wonder,
Rules men and beasts, the lightning and the thunder.

(...). For the worlds blindness and opinion,
I care not Phoenix, they are misbeleeuing,
And if their eyes try not conclusion,
They will not trust a strangers true reporting.
With Beasts and Birds I will conclude my story,
And to that All-in-all yield perfect glory.
In yonder woodie grove and fertile plain,
Remains the Leopard and the watrie Badger,
The Bugle or wild Ox does there remain,
The Onocentaure and the cruel Tiger,
The Dromidu^y and the princely Lion,
The Bore, the Elephant, and the poisnous Dragon.
The strong neck'd Bull that never f^lt the yoke,
The Cat, the Dog, the Wolf, and cruel Viper,
The lurking Hare that pretty sport prouokes,
The Goatebucke, Hedgehogge and the swift foot P^nther,
The Horse, Cameleopard and strong pawd Bear,
The Ape, the Ass* and the most fearful Dear.
The Mouse, the Mule, the Sow and Salamander,
That from the burning fire cannot live,
The Weasell, Cammell and the hunted Beauer,
That in pursuit away his stones does give:
The Stellio, Camelion and Unicorn,
That does expel hot poison with his Hor^e.
The cruel Bear in her conception,
Brings forth at first a thing that is indigest,
A lump of flesh without all fashion,
Which she by often licking brings to rest*
Making a formal body good and sound,
Which often in this Island we have found.
Hic format lingua foetum, quem protulit Vrsa.
The great wild Bore of nature terrible,
With two strong Tushes for his Armorie,
Sometimes assailes the Bear most horrible,
And twixt them is a fight both fierce and deadly:
He hunteth after Marioram and Organie,
Which as a whetstone does his need supply.
The Bugle or wild Ox is never tamed,
But with an iron ring put through his snout,
That of some perfect strength must needs be framed,
Then may you lead him all the world about:
The Huntsmen find him hung within a tree,
Fast by the horns and then thy use no pity.
The Camel is of nature flexible,
For when a burden on his back is bound,
To ease the labourer, he is known most gentle,
For why he kneeleth down upon the ground:
Suffering the man to put it off or on,
As it seems best in his discretion.
They live some fifty or some hundred years,
And can remain from water full four days,
And most delight to drink when there appears,
A muddie spring that is troubled many ways:
Between them is a natural honest care,
If one conioyneth with his Damme, it is ra^e.
The Dragon is a poisnous venomed beast,
With whom the Elephant is at enmity,
And in contention they do never rest,
Till one has slain the other cruelly:
The Dragon with the Elephant tries a fall,
And being under he is slain withal.
The bunch-backt, big-bon'd, swift-foote Dromidary
Of Dromas the Greek word borrowing the nam^,
For his quick flying speedy property:
Which easily these country men do tame,
Hel'go a hundredth miles within one day,
And never seek in any place to stay.
The Dog a natural, kind, and loving thing,
As witnesses our Histories of old:
Their master dead, the poor fool with lamenting
Does kill himself before accounted bold:
And would defend his master if he might,
When cruelly his foe begins to fight.
The Elephant with tushes Iuorie*
Is a great friend to man as he does travel:
The Dragon hating man most spitefully,
The Elephant does with the Dragon quarrel:
And twixt them two is a most deadly strife,
Till that the man be past, and saved his life.
The Elephant seen in Astronomy,
Will every month play the Physician:
Taking delight his cunning for to try,
Giving himself a sweet purgation*
And to the running springs himself address,
And in the same wash off his filthiness.
The Gote-bucke is a beast lascivious,
And given much to filthy venerie;
Apt and prone to be contentious,
Seeking by craft to kill his enemy:
His blood being warm suppleth the Adamant,
That neither fire or force could ever daunt.
The Hedghogge has a sharp quick thorned garment,
That on his back does serve him for defense:
He can presage the winds incontinent,
And has good knowledge in the di^ference
Between the Southern and the Northren wind,
These virtues are allotted him by kind.
Wher^on in Constantinople that great City,
A merchant in his garden gave one nourishment:
By which he knew the windstrue certainty,
Because the Hedgehogge gave him just presagement:
Apples, or pears, or grapes, such is his meat,
Which on his back he caries for to ^ate.
The spotted Linx in face much like a Lion,
His urine is of such a quality,
In time it turns to a precious stone,
Called Ligari^s for his property:
He hates man so much, that he does hide
His urine in the earth, not to be spide.
The princely Lion King of forrest-Kings,
And chief Commander of the Wilderness,
At whose fair feet all Beasts lay down their offerings,
Yielding allegiance to his worthiness:
His strength remains most within his head,
His virtue in his heart is compassed.
He never wrongs a man, nor hurts his pray,
If they will yield submissiue at his feet,
He knows when the Lioness plays false play,
If in all kindness he his love do meet:
He does defend the poor and innocent,
And those that cruel-hearted Beasts have rent.
Then is it not pity that the crafty Fox,
The ravenous Wolf, the Tiger, and the Bear,
The slow-past-dull-brain'd heavy Ox,
Should strive so good a state to ouerweare?
The Lion sleeps and laughes to see them strive,
But in the end leaves not a beast alive.
The Onocentaur is a monstrous beast;
Supposed half a man and half an ass,
That never shuts his eyes in quiet rest,
Till he his foes dear life has round encompast,
Such were the Centaures in their tyranny,
That lived by humane flesh and villainy.
The Stellio is a beast that takes his breath,
And lives by the deaw that's heavenly,
Taking his Food and Spirit of the earth,
And so maintains his life in chastity,
He takes delight to counterfeit all colors,
And yet for all this he is ve^mous.

(...). It Is strange to hear such perfect difference,
In all things that his M^ght^ (...) has ^ram'd
It Is strange to hear their (...) of d^^enc^,
Amongst all creatures that my Nurse has named:
Are there no Worms nor Serpents to be found
In this sweet smelling I Will and f^uitfull ground?

Nature. Within a little corner toward the Fa^t,
A moo^^sh plot of earth and dampish place,
Some creeping Worms and Serpents vs^ to rest,
And in a manner does this bad ground grace:
It is unpeopled and uninhabited,
For there with poisonous air they are ^ed.
H^re lives the Worm, the Gnat and Grasshopper,
Rinatrix, Li^ard and the fruitful Be,
The Mothe, Chelidras, and the Bloodsucker,
That from the flesh su^kes blood most speedily:
Cerastis, Aspis and the Crocadile,
That does the wayfaring passenger beguile.
The laboring Ant, and the bespeckled Adder,
The ^rogge, the Tode, and S^mmer-hau^ting ^lie,
The pretty Silkeworme, and the poisnous ^ iper,
That with his teeth does wound most cruel^y:
The Hornet and the poisonous Cockat^ice,
That kills all birds by a most s^e device.
The Aspis is a kind of deadly Snake,
He hurts most perilous with venomed sting,
And in pursuit does near his foe forsake,
But slaies a Man with poysnous venoming:
Between the male and female is such love,
As is betwixt the most kind Turtle dove.
This is the Snake that Cleopatra used,
The Egyptian Queen beloved of Anthony,
That with her breasts dear blood was nourished,
Making her die (fair soul) most patiently,
Rather then Caesar's great victorious hand,
Should triumph ore the Queen of such a land.
The Lizard is a kind of loving creature,
Especially to man he is a friend:
This prope^ty is given him by nature,
From dangerous beasts poor Man he does defend:
For being sleepy he all sense forsakes,
The Lizard bites him till the Man awaketh.
The Ant or Emote is a laboring thing,
And have amongst them all a public weal,
In summer time their meat they are providing,
And secrets among themselves they do conceal:
The monstrous huge big Bear being sickly,
Eating of these, is cured presently.
The fruitful pretty Be lives in the hiue,
Which unto him is like a peopled City,
And by their daily labor there they thrive,
Bringing home honied wax continually:
They are reputed civil, and have kings,
And guides for to direct them in proceedings.
When that their Emperor or King is present,
They live in peaceful sort and quietness,
But if their officer or king be absent,
They fly and swarm abroad in companies:
If any happen casuall-wise to dye,
They mourn and bury him right solemnly.
The Crocadile a saffron colored Snake,
Sometimes upon the earth is conversant,
And other times lives in a filthy lake,
Being oppressed with foul needy want:
The skin upon his back as hard as stone,
Resists violent strokes of steel or iron.
Rinatrix is a poysenous enuenom'd Serpent,
That does infect the rivers and the fountains,
Bringing to cattle hurt and det^iment:
When thirsty they forsake the steepy mountains,
Rinatrix violator Aquae, and infects the earth,
With his most noisome stinking filthy breath.
The Scorpion has a deadly stinging tail,
Bewitching some with his fair smiling face,
But presently with force he does assail
His captived pray, and brings him to disgrace:
Wherefore it is called of some the flattering worm,
That subtly his foe does ouerturne.
Orion made his boast the earth should bring
O^ yield no serpent forth but he would kill it,
W^ere presently the Scorpion up did spring,
For so the only powers above did will it:
Where in the peoples presence they did see,
Orion stung to death most cruelly.
Of Worms are diverse sorts and diverse names,
Some feeding on hard timber some on trees,
Some in the earth a secret cabbine frames,
Some ^ue on tops of Ashes, some on O^iues;
Some of a red watrish color, some of green,
And some within the night like Fire are seen.
The Silkworme by whose Web our Silks are made,
For she does daily labor with her weauing,
A Worm that is rich and precious in her trade,
That whilst poor soul she toyleth in her spinning,
Leaves not^ing in her belly but empty air,
And toyling too much falls to despair.
Here lives the Caddes and the long legged Crane,
With whom the Pigmies are at mortal (...),
The Lark and Lapwing that with nets are taken,
And so poor silly souls do end their life:
The Nightingale wronged by Adultery,
The Night^row, Goshawke, and the chattring Pi^.
The Pheasant Storke, and the high towering Faulcon*
The Swanne that in the (...) takes delight,
The (...), Blackebird, and the big neck'd Heron,
The skreeching Owl that loves the ^uskie night,
The Partridge, Griffon, and the li^ely Peacocke,
The Linnet, Bulsinch, Snipe, and ravening Puttocke*
The Robin Red^re^st that in Winter ^i^gs,
The Pelican, the ^ay, and the chirping Sparrow,
The little Wr^n that many young ones brings,
Her^in, Ibis, and the swift wingd Swallow:
The princely Eagle and Caladrius,
The Cuckoo that to some is prosperous.
The snow-like colored bird Caladrius,
Has this inestimable natural pro^peritie,
If any man in sickness dangerous,
Hopes of his health to have recovery,
This bird will always look with cheerful glance,
If otherwise, sad is his countenance.
The Crane directed by the leaders voice,
Flies ore the seas, to countries far unknown,
And in the secret night they do rejoice,
To make a watch among them of their own;
The watchman in his claws holds fast a stone,
Which letting fall the rest are waked anon.
The Spring-delighting bird we call the Cuckoo*
Which comes to tell of wonders in this age,
Her pretty one note to the world does show
Some men their destiny, and does presage
The woman's pleasure and the man's disgrace,
Which she sits singing in a secret place.
The Winters envious blast she never tastes,
Yet in all countries does the Cuckoe sing,
And oftentimes to peopled towns she hastes,
There for to tell the pleasures of the Spring:
Great Courtiers hear her voice, but let her fly,
Knowing that she presageth Destiny.
This pretty bird sometimes upon the steeple,
Sings Cuckoe, Cuckoe, to the parish Priest,
Sometimes again she flies amongst the people,
And on their Cross no man can her res^st,
But there she sings, yet some disdaining Dames,
Do charm her hoarse, lest she should hit their names.
She scorns to labor or make up a nest,
But creepes by stealth into some others room,
And with the Larkes dear young, her yong-ones rest,
Being by sub^ile dealing overcome:
The young birds are restoratiue to eat,
And held amongst us as a Princes meat.
The Princely Eagle of all Birds the King,
For none but she can gaze against the Sun,
Her eyesight is so clear, that in her flying
She spies the smallest beast that ever run,
As swift as gunshot using no delay,
So swif^ly does she fly to catch her pray.
She brings her birds being young into the air,
And sets them for to look on Phoebus light,
But if their eyes with gazing chance to water,
Those she accounts bastards, leaves them quight,
But those that have true perfect constant eyes,
She cherishes, the rest she does despise.
The Griffon is a bird rich feathered,
His head is like a Lion, and his flight
Is like the Eagles, much for to be feared,
For why he kills men in the ugly night:
Some say he keeps the Smaragd and the Jasper,
And in pursuit of Man is monstrous eager.
The gentle birds called the fair Hircinie,
Taking the name of that place where they breed,
Within the night they shine so gloriously,
That man's astonished senses they do feed:
For in the dark being cast within the way,
Gives light unto the man that goes astray.
Ibis the bird flies to Nilus flood,
And drinking of the water purges clean:
Unto the land of Egypt he does good,
For he to rid their Serpents is a mean;
He feeds on their eggs, and does destroy
The Serpents nests that would their Clime annoy.
The Lapwing has a piteous mournful cry,
And sings a sorrowful and heavy song,
But yet she is full of craft and subtilty,
And weepeth most being farthest from her young:
In elder age she served for Southsayers,
And was a Prophetess to the Augurers.
The birds of Egypt or M^mnodides,
Of Me^non that was slain in rescuing Troy,
Are said to fly away in compani^s,
To Priams palace, and there twice a day
They fight about the turrets of the dead,
And the third day in battle are confounded.
The Nightingale the nights true Chorister,
Musickes chief lo^er in the pleasant Spring,
Tunes Hunts-vp to the Sun that does delight her,
And to Arions harp aloud will sing:
And as a Bridegroom that to church is coming,
So he salutes the Sun when he is rising.
The Roman Caesar's, happy Empero^rs,
Especially those of the youngest sort,
Have kept the Nightingale within their towers,
To play, to da^ly, and to make them sport,
And oftentimes in Greek and Latin tongue,
They taught those birds to sing a pleasant song.
This bird as Histories make mention,
S^ng in the infant mouth of Stesichor^s,
Which did foretell due commendation,
In all his actions to be prosperous:
So Bees when Plato in his bed did lie,
Swarmed round about his mouth, leaving their honey.
The sl^ggish slothful and the dastard Owl,
Hating the day, and loving of the night,
About old sepulchers does daily ^owle,
Frequenting barnes and houses without light,
And hides him often in an Iuy tree,
Least with small chattring birds wronged he should be.
Foedaque sic volucris venturi nuntia luctus,
Ignauus Bubo, dirum mortalibus omen.
The filthy messenger of ill to come
The sluggish Owl is, and to danger some.
This ill be dooming Owl sat on the spear,
Of warlike Pirrhus marching to the field,
When to the Grecian army he drew near,
Determining to make his foes to yield,
Which did foreshew sinister happiness,
And balefull fortune in his business.
The Parrat called the counterfeiting bird,
Decked with all colors that fair Flora yields,
That after one will speak you word for word:
Living in wooddie groves near fertile fields,
They have been known to give great Emperors wine,
And therefore some men hold them for divine.
The proud sun-brauing Peacocke with his feathers,
Walks all along, thinking himself a King,
And with his voice prognosticates all weathers,
Although God knows but badly he does sing:
But when he looks down to his base black Feet,
He droopes, and is ashamed of things unmeet.
The mighty Macedonian Alexander,
Marching in lovely triumph to his foes,
Being accounted the worlds conqueror,
In Indie spies a Peacocke as he goes,
And maruelling to see so rich a sight,
Charged all men not to kill his sweet delight.
The Pelican the wonder of our age,
(As Jerome says) reuiues her tender young,
And with her purest blood, she does assuage
Her young ones thirst, with poisonous Adder stong,
And those that were supposed three days dead.
She gives them life once more being nourished.
The unsatiate Sparrow does prognosticate,
And is held good for divination,
For flying here and there, from gate to gate,
Foretls true things by animaduertion:
A flight of Sparrowes flying in the day,
Did prophecy the fall and sack of Troy.
The artificial nest-composing Swallow,
That eats his meat ^lying along the way,
Whose swiftness in our eysight does allow,
That no imperial Bird makes her his pray:
His young ones being hurt within the eyes,
His helps them with the he^be Calcedonies.
Cecinna and the great Volateran,
Being Pomp^is warlike and approved knights,
Sent letters by these Birds without a man,
To many of their friends and chief delights,
And all their letters to their feet did ti^,
Which with great speed did bring them hastily.
The sweet recording Swanne Apolloes joy,
And fiery scorched Phaetons delight,
In footed verse sings out his deep annoy,
And to the silver rivers takes his flight,
Prognosticates to Sailers on the seas,
Fortunes prosperity and perfect ^ase.
Cignus in auspicijs semper laetissimus ales,
Hoc optant nautae, quia se non mergit in vndis.

Phoenix. But what sad-mournefull drooping soul is this,
Within whose watery eyes sits Discontent,
Whose snaile-pac'd gate tells someting is amiss:
From whom is banished sporti^g Meriment:
Whose feathers mowt off, falling as he goes,
The perfect picture of heart pining woes?

Nature. This is the careful bird the Turtle Dove,
Whose heavy croking note does show his grief,
And thus he wanders seeking of his love,
Refusing all things that may yield relief:
All motions of good turns, all Mirth and Joy,
Are bad, fled, gone, and fa^ne into decay.

Phoenix. Is this the true example of the Heart?
Is this the Tutor of fair Constancy?
Is this Loves treasure, and Loves pining smart?
Is this the substance of all honesty?
And comes he thus attired, alas poor soul,
That Destinies foul wrath should thee control.
See Nourse, he stares and looks me in the face,
And now he mournes, worse then he did before,
He has forgot his dull slow heavy pace,
But with swift gate he eyes us more and more:
O shall I welcome him, and let me borrow
Some of his grief to mingle with my sorrow.

Nature. Far^well fair bird, I Will leave you both alone,
This is the Dove you longed so much to see,
And this will prove companion of your moan,
An Vmpire of all true humility:
Then note my Phoenix, what there may ensue,
And so I kiss my bird. Adue, Adue.

Phoenix. Mother farewell; and now within his eyes,
Sits sorrow clothed in a sea of tears,
And more and more the billows do arise:
Pale Grief half pined upon his brow appears,
His feathers fade away, and make him look,
As if his name were writ in Deaths pale book.

Turtl^. O stay poor Turtle, whereat have thou gazed,
At the eye-dazling Sun, whose sweet reflection,
The round encompast heavenly world amazed?
O no, a child of Natures true complexion,
The perfect Phoenix of rariety,
For wit, for virtue, and excelling beauty.

(...) Hail map of sorrow: Tur. Welcome Cupids child.
Let me wipe off those tears upon thy cheeks,
That stained thy beauties pride, and have defiled
Nature it self, that so usurping seeks
To sit upon thy face, for I Will be partener,
Of thy hearts wrapped sorrow more hereafter.

T^rt^e. Natures fair darling, let me kneel to thee,
And offer up my true obedience,
And sacredly in all humility,
Crave pardon for presumptions foul offense:
Thy lawne-snow-colour'd hand shall not come near
My impure face, to wipe away one tear.
My tears are for my Turtle that is dead,
My sorrow springs from her want that is gone,
My heavy note sounds for the soul that is fled,
And I will dye for him left all alone:
I am not living, though I seem to go,
Already buried in the grave of woe.

Phoenix. Why I have left Arabia for thy sake,
Because those fires have no working substance,
And for to find thee out did undertake:
Where on the mountain top we may advance
Our fiery alter; let me tell thee this,
Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.
Come poor lamenting soul, come sit by me,
We are all one, thy sorrow shall be mine,
Fall thou a tear, and thou shall plainly see,
Mine eyes shall answer tear for tear of thine:
Sigh thou, I Will sigh, and if thou give a groan,
I shall be dead in answering of thy moan.

Turtle. Loves honorable Friend, one groan of yours,
Will rend my sicke-loue-pining heart asunder,
One sigh brings tears from me like April showers,
Procured by Summers hot loud cracking thunder:
Be you as merry as sweet mirth may be,
I Will groan and sigh, both for your self and me.

Phoenix. Thou shall not gentle Turtle, I will bear
Half of the burdenous yoke thou do sustain,
Two bodies may with greater ease outweare
A troublesome labor, then I Will brook some pain,
But tell me gentle Turtle, tell me truly
The difference betwixt false Love and true Sincerity.

Turtle. That shall I briefly, if you will give me leave,
False love is full of Envy and Deceit,
With cunning shifts our humors to deceive,
Laying down poison for a sugared bait,
Always in constant, false, and variable,
Delighting in fond change and mutable.
True love, is loving pure, not to be broken,
But with an honest eye, she eyes her lover,
Not changing variable, nor never shoken
With fond Suspicion, secrets to discover,
True love will tell no lies, nor never dissemble,
But with a bashful modest fear will tremble.
False love puts on a Mask to shade her folly,
True love goes naked wishing to be seen,
False love will counterfeite perpetually,
True love is Troths sweet emperizing Queene^
This is the difference, true Love is a jewel,
False love, hearts tyrant, inhumane, and cruel.

Phoenix. What may we wonder at? O where is learning?
Where is all difference twixt the good and bad?
Where is Apelles art? where is true cunning?
Nay where is all the virtue may be had?
Within my Turtles bosom, she refines,
More then some loving perfect true deuines.
Thou shall not be no more the Turtle-Doue,
Thou shall no more go weeping al alone,
For thou shall be my self, my perfect Love,
Thy grief is mine, thy sorrow is my moan,
Come kiss me sweetest sweet, O I do bless
This gracious luckie Sunshine happiness.

Turtl^. How may I in all gratefulness requite,
This gracious favor offered to thy servant?
The time affords heaviness not delight,
And to the times appoint we will be obseruant:
Command, O do command, what ere thou will,
My hearts blood for thy sake shall straight be spilt.

Phoenix. Then I command thee on thy tender care,
And chief obedience that thou owst to me,
That thou especially (dear Bird) beware
Of impure thoughts, or unclean chastity:
For we must wast together in that fire,
That will not burn but by true Loves desire.

Turtle. A spot of that foul monster near did stain,
These drooping feathers, nor I never knew
In what base filthy clymate does remain
That spright incarnate; and to tell you true,
I am as spotless as the purest whight,
Clear without stain, of envy, or despite.

Ph^^^ix. Then to yon next adjoining grove we will ^lye,
And gather sweet wood for to make our flame,
And in a manner sacrificingly,
Burn both our bodies to revive one name:
And in all humbleness we will entreat,
The hot earth parching Sun to lend his heat.

Turtle. Why now my heart is light, this very doom
Has banished sorrow from my pensive breast:
And in my bosom there is left no room,
To set black melancholy, or let him rest;
I Will fetch sweet mirrhe to burn, and licorice,
Sweet Juniper, and straw them ore with spice.

Pho^nix. Pile up the wood, and let us invoke
His great name that does ride within his chariot,
And guides the days bright eye, let us nominate
Some of his blessings, that he well may wot,
Our faithful service and humility,
Offered unto his highest Deiety.
Great God Apollo, for the tender love,
Thou once did bear to wilful Phaeton,
That did desire thy chariots rule above,
Which thou did grieve in heart to think upon:
Send thy hot kindling light into this wood,
That shall receive the Sacrifice of blood.

^^rtle. For thy sweet Daphnes sake thy best beloved,
And for the Harp received of Mercury,
And for the Muses of thee favored,
Whose gift of wit excels all exellency:
Send thy hot kindling fire into this wood,
That shall receive the Sacrifice of blood.

(...) For thy sweet fathers sake great Jupiter,
That with his thunderbolts commands the earth,
And for Latonas sake thy gentle mother,
That first gave Phoebus glories lively breath:
Send thy hot kindling light into this wood,
That shall receive the Sacrifice of blood.
Stay, stay, poor Turtle, o we are betrayed,
Behind yon little bush there sits a spy,
That makes me blush with anger, half afraid,
That in our motions secrecly would pry:
I will go chide with him, and drive him thence,
And plague him for presumptions foul offense.

Turtl^* Be not afraid, it is the Pelican,
Look how her yong-ones make her breast to bleed,
And draws the blood forth, do the best she can,
And with the same their hungry fancies feed,
Let her alone to view our Tragedy,
And then report our Love that she did see.
See beauteous Phoenix it begins to burn,
O blessed Phoebus, happy, happy light,
Now will I recompense thy great good turn,
And first (dear bird) I Will vanish in thy sight,
And thou shall see with what a quick desire,
I Will leap into the middle of the fire.

Phoenix* Stay Turtle stay, for I will first prepare;
Of my bones must the Princely Phoenix rise,
And ift be possible thy blood well spare,
For none but for my sake, do thou despise
This frailty of thy life, o live thou still,
And teach the base deceitful world Loves will.

^urtle. Have I come hither drooping through the woods,
And left the springing groves to seek for thee?
Have I forsook to bath me in the floods,
And pined away in careful misery?
Do not deny me Phoenix I must be
A partner in this happy Tragedy.

Ph^^^ix. O holy, sacred, and pure perfect fire,
More pure then that ore which fair Dido mones,
More sacred in my loving kind desire,
Then that which burnt old Esons aged bones,
Accept into your ever hallowed flame,
Two bodies, from the which may spring one name.

^urtle. O sweet perfumed flame, made of those trees,
Under the which the Muses nine have song
The praise of virtuous maids in mysteries,
To whom the fair faced Nymphs did often throng;
Accept my body as a Sacrifice
Into your flame, of whom one name may rise.

Phoenix. O wilfulness, see how with smiling cheer,
My poor dear heart has flong himself to thrall,
Look what a mirthfull countenance he does bear,
Spreading his wings abroad, and joys withal:
Learn thou corrupted world, learn, hear, and see,
Friendships unspotted true sincerity.
I come sweet Turtle, and with my bright wings,
I will embrace thy burnt bones as they lie,
I hope of these another Creature springs,
That shall possess both our authority:
I stay to long, o take me to your glory,
And thus I end the Turtle Doves true story.

Finis. R. C.
Pelican.
What wondrous hart-grieuing spectacle,
Have thou beheld the worlds true miracle?
With what a spirit did the Turtle fly
Into the fire, and cheerfully did dye?
He looked more pleasant in his countenance
Within the flame, then when he did advance,
His pleasant wings upon the natural ground,
True perfect love had so his poor heart bound,
The Phoenix Natures dear adopted child,
With a pale heavy countenance, wan and mild,
Grieved for to see him first possess the place,
That was allotted her, her self to grace,
And follows cheerfully her second turn,
And both together in that fire do burn.
O if the rarest creatures of the earth,
Because but one at once did ere take breath
Within the world, should with a second he,
A perfect form of love and amity
Burn both together, what should there arise,
And be presented to our mortal eyes,
Out of the fire, but a more perfect creature?
Because that two in one is put by Nature,
The one has given the child inchaunting beauty,
The other gives it love and chastity:
The one has given it wits rarietie,
The other guides the wit most charily:
The one for virtue does excel the rest,
The other in true constancy is blessed.
If that the Phoenix had been separated,
And from the gentle Turtle had been parted,
Love had been murdered in the infancy,
Without these two no love at all can be.
Let the love wandering wits but learn of these,
To die together, so their grief to ease:
But lovers now adays do love to change,
And here and there their wanton eyes do range*
Not pleased with one choice, but seeking many,
And in the end scarce is content with any:
Love now adays is like a shadowed sight,
That shows it self in Pho^hus golden light,
But if in kindness you do strive to take it,
Fades clean away, and you must needs for sake it.
Lovers are like the leaves with Winter shoken,
Brittle like glass, that with one fall is broken.
O fond corrupted age, when birds shall show
The world their duty, and to let men know
That no sinister chance should hinder love,
Though as these two did, deaths arrest they prove.
I can but mourn with sadness and with grief,
Not able for to yield the world relief,
To see these two consumed in the fire,
Whom Love did copulate with true desire:
But in the worlds wide ear I mean to ring
The fame of this days wondrous offering,
That they may sing in notes of Chastity,
The Turtle and the Phoenix amity.
Conclusion.
GEntle conceiuers of true meaning Wit,
Let good Experience judge what I have writ,
For the Satyricall fond applauded veins,
Whose bitter worme-wood spirit in some strains,
Bite like the Curres of Egypt those that love them,
Let me alone, I will be loath to move them,
For why, when mighty men their wit do prove,
How shall I least of all expect their love?
Yet to those men I gratulate some pain,
Because they touch those that in art do feign*
But those that have the spirit to do good,
Their whips will will never draw one drop of blood:
To all and all in all that view my labor,
Of every judging sight I crave some favor
At least to read, and if you reading find,
A lame legged staff, it is lamenesse of the mind
That had no better skill: yet let it pass,
For burdnous lodes are set upon an Ass.
From the sweet fire of perfumed wood,
Another princely Phoenix upright stood:
Whose feathers purified did yield more light,
Then her late burned mother out of sight,
And in her heart restes a perpetual love,
Sprung from the bosom of the Turtle-Doue.
Long may the new vprising bird increase,
Some humors and some motions to release,
And thus to all I offer my devotion,
Hoping that gentle minds accept my motion.
Finis. R. C.
Cantoes Alphabet-wise to fair Phoenix made by the Paphian Dove.
A. 1.
A Hill, a hill, a Phoenix seeks a Hill;
A promontorie top, a stately Mountain,
A River, where poor soul she dippes her bill,
And that sweet silver stream is Natures fountain,
Accomplishing all pleasures at her will:
Ah, be my Phoenix, I will be thy Dove,
And thou and I in secrecy will love.
B. 2.
Blaze not my love, thou Herald of the day,
Bless not the mountain tops with my sweet shine,
Beloved more I am then thou can say,
Blessed and blessed be that Saint of mine,
Balm, honey sweet, and honor of this Clime:
Blotted by things unseen, beloved of many,
But Loves true motion dares not give to any.
C. 3.
Chastnesse farewell, farewell the bed of Glory,
Constraint adieu, thou art loves Enemy,
Come true Report, make of my Love a Story,
Cast lots for my poor heart, so thou enjoy me,
Come come sweet Phoenix, I at length do claim thee,
Chaste bird, too chaste, to hinder what is willing,
Come in mine arms and well not sit a billing.
D. 4.
Devout obedience on my knees I profer,
Delight matched with delight, if thou do crave it,
Deny not gentle Phoenix my sweet offer,
Despair not in my love, for thou shall have it,
Damn not the soul to woe if thou can save it:
Doves pray devoutly, O let me request,
Delicious love to build within thy nest.
E. 5.
Envy is banished, do not thou despair,
Evil motions tempt thee sooner then the good:
Enrich thy beauty that art famed for fair,
Every thing's silent to conioyne thy blood,
Esteem the thing that cannot be withstood:
Esteem of me, and I will lend thee fire,
Even of mine own to fit thy sweet desire.
F. 6.
Faint hearted soul, why do thou die thy cheeks,
Fearf^ll of that which will revive thy sense,
Faith and obedience thy sweet mercy seeks,
Friends plighted war with thee I will commence,
Fear not at all, it is but sweet Loves offense,
Fit to be done, so doing it is not seen,
Fetched from the ancient records of a Queen.
G. 7.
Gold beautifying Phoenix, I must praise thee,
Granut gracious heavens a delightsome Muse,
Give me old Homers spirit, and I Will raise thee,
Gracious in thought do not my Love refuse,
Great map of beauty make thou no excuse,
Against my true loving spirit do not carpe,
Grant me to play my Sonnet on thy Harp.
H. 8.
Health to thy virtues, health to all thy beauty,
Honor attend thy steps when thou art going,
High heavens force the birds to owe thee duty;
Hart-groning care to thee still stands a woing,
Have pity on him Phoenix for so doing:
Help his disease, and cure his malady,
Hide not thy secret glory least he die.
I. 9.
I Love, o Love how thou abusest me,
I see the fire, and warm me with the flame,
I note the errors of thy deity:
In Vestas honor, Venus lusts to tame,
I in my humors yield thee not a name,
I count thee foolish, (...) Adultrous boy,
I touch the sweet, but cannot taste the joy.
K. 10.
Kisses are true loves pledges, kiss thy dear Turtle,
Keep not from him the secrets of thy youth:
Knowledge he will teach thee under a green spread Myrtle*
Kend shall thou be of no man, of my truth,
Know first the motion, when the life ensues:
Knock at my hearts door, I will be thy porter,
So thou will let me enter in thy dorter.
L. 11.
Love is my great Aduotrix, at thy shrine
Love pleads for me, and from my tongue does say,
Lie where thou will, my heart shall sleep with thine,
Lamenting of thy beauty fresh as May,
Look Phoenix to thy self do not decay:
Let me but water thy dead saplesse flower,
Love gives me hope it will flourish in an hour.
M. 12.
Make not a Jewel of nice Chastity,
Muster and summon all thy wits in one,
My heart to thee swears perfect constancy:
Motions of zeal are to be thought upon,
Mark how thy time is ouerspent, and gone,
Misled by folly, and a kind of fear,
Mark not thy beauty so my dearest dear.
N. 13.
Note but the fresh bloomed Rose within her pride,
(No Rose to be compared unto thee)
Nothing so soon unto the ground will slide,
Not being gathered in her chiefest beauty,
Neglecting time it dies with infamy:
Never be coy, lest whilst thy leaves are spread,
None gather thee, and then thy grace is dead.
O. 14.
O look upon me, and within my brow,
Officious motions of my heart appears,
Opening the book of Love, wherein I vow,
Over thy shrine to shed continual tears:
O no, I see my Phoenix has no Ears,
Or if she have Ears, yet no Eyes to see*
O all disgraced with continual folly.
P. 15.
Proud Chastity, why do thou seek to wrong
Phoenix my Love, with l^ssons too precise?
Pray thou for me, and I will make a song,
Pend in thine honor, none shall equalize,
Possess not her, whose beauty charms mine eyes,
Plead, sue, and seek, or I will banish thee,
Her body is my Castle and my fee.
Q. 16.
Question not Phoenix why I do adore thee,
Quite captiuate and prisner at thy call,
Quit me with Love again, do not abhor me,
Queld down with hope as subiugate to thrall,
Quaild will I never be despite of all;
Quaking I stand before thee, still expecting
Thine own consent, our joys to be effecting.
R. 17.
Remember how thy beauty is abused,
Ract on the tenter-hookes of foul disgrace,
Rivers are dry, and must be needs refused,
Restore new water in that dead founts place,
Refresh thy feathers, beautify thy face:
Read on my book, and there thou shall behold
Rich loving letters printed in fine gold.
S. 18.
Shame is ashamed to see thee obstinate,
Smiling at thy womanish conceit,
Swearing that honor never thee begat,
Sucking in poison for a sugared bait,
Singing thy pride of beauty in her height:
Sit by my side, and I will sing to thee
Sweet ditties of a new framed harmony.
T. 19.
Thou art a Turtle wanting of thy mate,
Thou crok'st about the groves to find thy Lover,
Thou fly'st to woods, and fertile plains do hate:
Thou in oblivion do true virtue smother,
To thy sweet self thou can not find another:
Turn up my bosom, and in my pure heart,
Thou shall behold the Turtle of thy smart.
V. 20.
Upon a day I sought to scale a Fort,
United with a Tower of sure defense;
Uncomfortable trees did mar my sport,
Unlucky Fortune with my woes expense,
Venus with Mars would not sweet war commence,
Upon an Alter would I offer Love,
And Sacrifice my soul poor Turtle Dove.
W. 21.
Weep not my Phoenix, though I daily weep,
Woe is the Herald that declares my tale,
Worthy thou art in Venus lap to sleep,
Wantonly covered with God Cupids vale,
With which he does all mortal sense ^^hale:
Wash not thy cheeks, vnles^e I sit by thee,
To dry them with my sighs immediately.
X. 22.
Xantha fair Nymph; resemble not in Nature,
Xantippe Love to patient Socrates,
Xantha my Love is a more milder creature,
And of a Nature better for to please:
Xantippe thought her true Love to disease,
But my rare Phoenix is at last well pleased,
To cure my passions, passions seldom eased.
Y. 23.
If thou have pity, pity my complaining,
Yt is a badge of Virtue in thy sex,
If thou do kill me with thy coy disdaining,
Yt will at length thy self-will anguish vex,
And with continual sighs thy self perplexe:
I Will help to bring thee wood to make thy fire,
If thou will give me kisses for my hire.
Z. 24.
Zenobia at thy feet I bend my knee,
For thou art Queen and Empress of my heart,
All blessed hap and true felicity,
All pleasures that the wide world may impart,
Befall thee for thy gracious go^d desert:
Accept my meaning as it fits my turn,
For I with thee to ashes mean to burn.
Cantoes Verbally written.
1.
Pity me that dies for thee.
Pity
Pity my plainings thou true nurse of pity,
me
Me has thy piercing looks enioynd to sighing,
that
That cannot be redressed, for thy beauty
dies
Dies my sad heart, sad heart that is drowned with weeping:
for
For what so ere I think, or what I do,
thee.
Thee with mine eyes, my thoughts, my heart, I woe.
2.
My life you save, if you I have.
My
My eyes, my hand, my heart seek to maintain
life
Life for thy love, therefore be gracious,
you
You with your kindness have my true heart slain,
save,
Save my poor life, and be not tyrannous,
if
If any grace do in thy breast remain,
you
You women have been counted amorous;
I
I pine in sadness, all proceeds from thee,
have.
Have me in liking through thy clemency.
3.
Do thou by me, as I by thee.
Do
Do not exchange thy love, le^t in exchanging,
thou
Thou bear the burd'nous blot of foul disgrace,
by
By that bad fault are many faults containing,
me,
Me still assuring nothing is so base,
as
As in the worlds eye always to be ranging:
I
I swear sweet Phoenix in this holy case,
by
By all the sacred relics of true love,
thee.
Thee to adore whom I still constant prove.
4.
Voutsafe to think how I do pine,
In loving thee that art not mine.
Voutsafe
Voutsafe with splendour of thy gracious look,
to
To grace my passions, passions still increasing:
think
Think with thy self how I thy absence brook,
how
How day by day, my plaints are never ceasing,
I
I have for thee all companies forsook;
do
Do thou rejoice, and in rejoicing say,
pine,
Pine nere so much I Will take thy grief away.
In
In that great gracing word shall thou be counted
loving
Loving to him, that is thy true sworn lover,
thee
Thee on the stage of honor have I mounted,
that
That no base mistie cloud shall ever cover:
art
Art thou not fair? thy beauty do not smother;
not
Not in thy flouring youth, but still suppose
mine.
Mine own to be, my never dying Rose.
5.
My destiny to thee is known,
Cure thou my smart, I am thine own.
My
My time in loves blind idleness is spent,
destiny
Destiny and Fates do will it so,
to
To Circes charming tongue mine ear I lent,
thee
Thee loving that do wish my overthrow:
is
Is not this world wrapped in inconstancy,
known.
Known to most men as hels misery?
Cure
Cure of my wound is past all Phisickes skill,
thou
Thou may be gracious, at thy very look
my
My wounds will close, that would my body kill,
smart
Smart will b^ easde that could no plasters brook;
I
I of my Phoenix being quite forsook,
am
Am like a man that nothing can fulfill:
thine
Thine euer-piercing eye of force will make me,
own.
Own heart, own love, that never will forsake thee.
6.
Ore my heart your eyes do idolatrize.
Ore
Ore the wide world my loue-layes I Will be sending,
my
My loue-layes in my Loves praise always written,
heart
Heart-comfortable motions still attending,
your
Your beauty and your virtuous zeal commending,
eyes
Eyes that no frosts-cold-rage has ever bitten:
do
Do you then think that I in Loves hot fire,
idolatrize.
Idolatrize and surphet in desire.
7.
I had rather love though in vain that face,
Then have of any other grace.
I
I being forced to carry Venus shield,
had
Had rather bear a Phoenix for my crest,
rather
Rather then any bird within the field,
love
Love tells me that her beauty is the best:
though
Though some desire fair Vestas Turtle-doue,
in
In my Birds bosom rests perfect love.
Vain
Vain is that blind unskillful herauldrie,
that
That will not cause my bird that is so rare,
face,
Face all the world for her rarietie,
then
Then who with her for honor may compare?
have
Have we one like her for her pride of beauty,
of
Of all the feathered Quier in the air?
any
Any but unto her do owe their duty:
other
Other may blaze, but I will always say,
grace.
Grace whom thou list, she bears the palm away.
8.
What ever fall, I am at call.
What
What thunder storms of envy shall arise,
ever
Ever to thee my heart is durable,
fall,
Fall fortunes wheel on me to tyrrannize,
I
I will be always found inexorable:
am
Am I not then to thee most stable?
at
At morn, midnight, and at mid-dayes sun,
call.
Call when thou will, my dear, to thee I Will run.
9.
I had rather love, though in vain that face,
Then have of any other grace,
I
I now do wish my love should be relieved,
had
Had I my thoughts in compass of my will,
rather
Rather then live and surfeit being grieved,
love
Love in my breast does wondrous things fulfill,
though
Though loves unkindness many men do kill,
in
In her I trust, that is my true sworn lover,
vain
Vain he does write that does her virtues smother.
that
That she is fair, Nature her self allows,
face,
Face full of beauty, eyes resembling fire,
then
Then my pure heart to love thy heart still voweth,
have
Have me in favor for my good desire,
of
Of holy love, Loves Temple to aspire;
any
An^ but thee my thoughts will here require,
other
Other sweet motions now I will conceal
grace.
Grace these rude lines that my hearts thoughts reveal,
10.
Disgrace not me, in loving thee.
Disgrace
Disgrace be banished from thy heavenly brow,
not
Not entertained of thy piercing eye,
me
Me thy sweet lips, a sweet touch will allow,
in
In thy fair bosom would I always lie,
loving
Loving in such a downe-bed to be placed,
thee.
Thee for to please, my self for ever graced.
11.
I had rather love though in vain that face,
Then have of any other grace.
I
I live enricht with gi^ts of great content,
had
Had my desires the guerdon of good will,
rather
Rather then taste of Fortunes fickle bent,
love
Love bids me die, and scorn her witless skill,
though
Though Love command, Despair does still attend,
in
I^ hazard proves often times but doubtful end.
vain
Vain is the love encountered with denayes,
that
That yields but grief, where grace should rather grow,
face,
Face full of fury, void of courteous praise:
then
Then since all love consists of weal and woe,
have
Have still in mind, that love deserves the best,
of
Of hea^ts the touchstone, inward motions loving,
any
Any that yields the fruit of true-loues rest,
other
Other I love unworthy of commending,
grace.
Graced with bare beauty, beauty most offending.
12.
My self and mine, are always thine.
My
My care to have my blooming Rose not wither,
self
Selfe-louing Envy shall it not deny,
and
And that base weed thy growth does seek to hinder,
mine
Mine hands shall pull him up immediately,
are
Are they not envious monsters in thine eye,
always
Always with vain occasions to enclose
thine
Thine ever growing beauty, like the Rose?
13.
The darting of your eyes, may heal or wound,
Let not empiring looks my heart confound.
The
The ey-bals in your head are Cupids fire,
darting
Darting such hot sparkles at my breast,
of
Of force I am enthrald, and do desire
your
Your gracious love, to make me happy blessed:
^yes
Eyes, lips, and tongue have caused my unrest,
may
May I unto the height of grace aspire,
heal
Heal my sick heart with loves great grief oppressed,
^r
Or if to fire thou will not yield such fuel,
wound.
Wound me to death, and so be counted cruel.
Let
Let the wide ope-mouth'd world slander the guilty,
not
Not my dead Phoenix, that does scorn such shame,
empiring
Empiring honor blots such infamy,
looks
Looks dart away the blemish of that name;
my
My thoughts prognosticate thy Ladies pity:
heart
Hearts-ease to thee, this counsel will I give,
confound
Confound thy foes, but let true lovers live.
14.
You are my joy, be not so coy.
You
You best beloved, you honor of delight,
are
Are the bright shining Star that I adore,
my
My eyes like Watchmen gaze within the night,
joy
Joy fills my heart when you do shine before,
be not
Be not disgrasiue to thy friend therefore:
too
Too glorious are thy looks to entertain
coy.
Coy thoughts, fell peevish deeds, our base disdain.
15.
For you I die, being absent from mine eye.
For
For all the holy rites that Venus uses,
you
You I conjure to true obedience:
I
I offer faith, which no kind heart refuses,
die,
Die perjured Envy for thy late offense,
being
Being enamored of rich Beauties pride,
absent
Absent, I freeze in Winters pining cold,
from
From thee I sit, as if thou had denide,
my
My loue-sicke passions twenty times retold:
eye.
Eye-dazling Mistress, with a look of pity,
Grace my sad Song, and my hearts pining Dittie.
16.
Send me your heart, to ease my smart.
Send
Send but a glaunce of amors from thine eye,
me
Me will it ravish with exceeding pleasure,
your
Your eye-bals do enwrap my destiny,
heart
Heart sick with sorrow, sorrow out of measure,
to
To think upon my loves continual ^olly:
ease
Ease thou my pain from pitties golden treasure;
my
My grief proceeds from thee, and I suppose
smart.
Smart of my smart, will my life's blood enclose.
17.
Seeing you have mine, let me have thine.
Seeing
Seeing my passions are so penetrable,
you
You of all other should be pitiful,
have
Have mind of me, and you will be favorable,
mine
Mine heart does tell me you are merciful,
let
Let my hearts love be always violable,
me
Me have you found in all things dutiful,
have
Have me in favor, and thy self shall see,
thine.
Thine and none others, will I all ways be.
18.
Within thy breast, my heart does rest.
Within
Within the cir^uit of a Crystal sphere,
thy
Thy eyes are plast, and underneath those eyes,
breast,
Breast of hard flint, ears that do scorn to hear
my
My days sad gronings, and night waking cries,
heart
Heart sore sick passions, and Loves agonies,
does
Does it become thy beauty? no, a stain
rest.
Rests on thy bright brow wrinckled with disdain.
19.
O let me hear, from thee my dear.
O
O tongue thou have blasphemed thy holy Goddess,
let
Let me do penance for offending thee,
me
Me do thou blame for my forgetfulness:
hear,
Hear my submission, thou will succor me:
from
From thy hearts closet comes gentleness,
thee
Thee has the world admired for clemency,
my
My heart is sorry, and I Will bite my tongue,
dear.
Dear that to thee, to thee I offered wrong.
20.
My Phoenix rare, is all my care.
My
My life, my heart, my thoughts, I dedicate,
Phoenix Phoenix
to thee, Phoenix of all beauty,
rare,
Rare things in heart of thee I meditate,
is
Is it not time, I come to show my duty?
all
All favors unto thee I consecrate,
my
My goods, my lands, my self, and all is thine,
care
Care those that list, so thou fair bird be mine.
21.
I would I might, be thy delight.
I
I wish for things, would they might take effect,
would
Would they might end, and we enjoy our pleasure,
I
I vow I would not proffred time neglect,
might,
Might I but gather such unlooked for treasure,
be
Be all things envious I would the respect,
thy
Thy favors in my heart I do enroule,
delight.
Delight matched with delight, does me control.
22.
If I you have, none else I crave.
If
If adoration ever were created,
I
I am a Master of that holy Art,
you
You my aduotrix, whom I have admired,
have,
Have of my true devotion bore a part:
none
None but your self may here be nominated,
else
Else would my tongue my true obedience thwart:
I
I cannot flatter, Love will not allow it,
crave.
Crave thou my heart, on thee I will bestow it.
23.
Be you to me, as I to thee.
Be
Be the poor Be, suck honey from the flower,
you
You have a spacious odoriferous field,
to
To taste all moisture, where in sweet Floras bower*
me,
Me shall you find submissiuely to yield,
as
As a poor Captive looking for the hour;
I
I may have gracious looks, else am I killed,
to
To dye by you were l^fe, and yet thy shame,
thee.
Thee would the wide world hate* ^y ^olly blame.
24.
You are the first, in whom I trust.
You
You in your bosom having placed a light,
are
Are the chief admiral unto my Fleet,
the
The Lantern for to guide me in the night,
first,
First to the shore, where I may set my feet
in
In safeguard, void of Dangers cruel spite,
whom
Whom in disgrace Love and fell Envy meet,
I
I muster up my spirits, and they fly;
trust.
Trust of thy faith controules mine enemy.
25.
You are the last my love shall taste.
You
You standing on the tower of hope and fear,
are
Are timorous of self-will foolishness,
the
The only Viper that does loue-laies tear*
last,
Last can it not, it is woman's peevishness,
my
My kind affections can it not forbear,
love
Love tells me that it is bred in idleness,
shall
Shall such occasion hinder thee or me?
taste.
Taste first the fruit, and then commend the tree.
26.
If you I had, I should be glad.
If
If the Sun shine, the harvest man is glad,
you
You are my Sun, my days delight some Queen,
I
I am your harvest laborer almost mad,
had,
Had I not my glorious commet seen,
I
I wish that I might sit within thy shade,
should
Should I be welcome ere thy beauty fade:
be
Be not Narcissus, but be always kind,
glad.
Glad to obtain the thing thou near could find.
27.
Though place be far, my heart is nar.
Though
Though thou my Dove from me be separated,
plac^
Place, nor the distance shall not hinder me,
be
Be constant for a while, thou may be thwarted,
far,
Far am I not, I Will come to succor thee.
my
My heart and thine, my sweet shall nere be parted,
heart
Heart made of love, and true simplicity:
is
Is not Love lawless, full of powerful might?
nar.
Nar to my heart that still with Love does fight.
28.
My thoughts are dead, cause thou art sped.
My
My inward Muse can sing of naught but Love,
thoughts
Thoughts are his Heralds, flying to my breast
are
Are entertained, if they thence remove,
dead,
Dead shall their master be, and in unrest;
cause
Cause all the world thy hatred to reprove,
thou
Thou art that All-in-all that I love best:
art
Art thou then cruel? no thou can not be
sped.
Sped with so foul a fi^nd as Cruelty.
29.
I send my heart to thee, where gladly I would be.
I
I of all other am fair Venus thrall,
send
Send me but pleasant glances of thine eye,
my
My soul will leap with joy and dance withal,
heart
Heart of my heart, and souls felicity:
to
To beauties Queen my heart is sanctified,
thee.
Thee above all things have I deified.
Where
Where is Affections? fled to Enuies cau^?
gladly
Gladly my Thoughts would bear her company,
I
I from ^oul^ bondage will my Phoenix save,
would
Would she in love require my courtesy,
be.
Be loving as thou art fair, else shall I sing,
Thy beauty a poisnous bitter thing.
30.
If you me just have known,
Then take me for your own.
If
If you be fair, why should you be unkind?
you
You have no perfect reason for the s^^e,
me
Me thinks it were your glory for to find
just
Just measure at my hands, but you to blame,
have
Have from the deepest closet of your heart,
known,
Known my pure thoughts, and yet I pine in smart.
Then
Then in the deepest measure of pure love,
take
Take pity on the sad sick pining soul,
me
Me may you count your unknown Turtle-Doue,
for
For in my bosoms chamber, I enroule
your
Your deep loue-darting eye, and still will be
own.
Own of your own, despite extremity.
31.
My heart I send, to be your friend.
My
My dear souls comfort, and my hopes true solace,
heart
Heart of my heart, and my lives secret joy,
I
I in conceit do thy sweet self embrace,
send,
Send cloudie exhalations clean away
to
To the blind mistie North, there for to stay:
be
Be thou my arbor and my dwelling place,
your
Your arms the circling folds that shall enclose me,
friend.
Friend me with this, and thou shall never lose me.
32.
I have no love, but you my Dove.
I
I pine in sadness, and in sad songs singing
have
Have spent my time, my ditties harsh and ill,
no
No sight but thy fair sight would I be seeing:
love
Love in my bosom keeps his castle still,
but
But being disseuered I sit always pining,
you
You do procure me Niobes cup to fill,
my
My duty yet remembered I dare prove,
dove.
Doves have no power for to exchange their Love,
34.
I will not change, though some be strange.
I
I cannot stir one foot from Venus gate,
will
Will you come sit, and bear me company?
not
Not one but you can make me fortunate:
change
Change when thou will, it is but cruelty,
though
Though unto women it is given by fate,
some
Some gentle minds these ranging thoughts do hates
be
Be thou of that mind, else I will conclude,
strange.
Strange have thou altered Love, to be so rude.
Thoughts keep me waking.
Thoughts
Thoughts like the ayrie puffing of the wind,
keep
Keep a sweet faining in my Loue-sicke breast,
me
Me still assuring that thou art most kind,
waking.
Waking in pleasure, sleeping sure in rest:
That no sleeps dreamings, nor no waking cries,
To our sweet loving thoughts, sweet rest denies.
Seeing that my heart made choice of thee,
Then frame thy self to comfort me.
Seeing
Seeing Love is pleased with Loves enamored joys,
that
That Fortune cannot cross sweet Cupids will,
my
My Loves content, not with fond wanton toys:
heart
Heart of my heart does Loves unkindness kill,
made
Made by fond tongues vpbraiding hurtful skill:
choice
Choice now is framed to further all annoyes:
of
Of all sweet thoughts, of all sweet happy rest,
thee,
Thee have I chose, to make me three times blessed.
Then
Then let our holy true aspiring love,
frame
Frame us the sweetest music of Desire:
thy
Thy words shall make true concord, and remove
self
Self-will it self, for Venus does require
to
To be acquainted with thy beauties fire:
comfort
Comfort my heart, for comfort tells me this,
me.
Me have thou chose of all to be thy bliss.
My heart is bound to favor thee,
Then yield in time to pity me.
My
My Phoenix has two starre-resembling Eyes,
heart
Heart full of pity, and her smiling look,
is
Is of the Suns complexion, and replies,
bound
Bound for performance by fair Venus book
to
To faithfulness, which from her nurse she took:
favor
Favor in her does spring, in virtuous praise,
thee,
Thee Eloquence it self shall seek to raise.
Then
Then in performance of this gracious right,
yield
Yield up that piteous heart to be my Lover,
in
In recompense how I have loved thy sight,
time
Time shall from time to time to thee disco^er:
to
To thee is given the power of Cupids might,
pity
Pity is writ in gold upon thy heart,
me.
Me promising to cure a curelesse smart.
I joy to find a constant mind.
I
I am encompast round about with joy,
joy
Joy to enjoy my sweet, for she protests
to
To comfort me that languish in annoy,
find
Find ease if any sorrow me molesteth,
a
A happy man that such a love possesses:
constant
Constant in words, and always vows to love me,
mind.
Mind me she will, but yet she dares not prove me.
My heart by hope does live,
Desire no joy does give.
My
My love and dearest life to thee I consecrate,
heart
Heart of my hearts dear treasure, for I strive
by
By thy deuinenesse too divine to nominate,
hope
Hope of approved faith in me must thrive:
does
Does not the God of Love that is most divine,
live.
Live in thy bosoms closet and in mine?
Desire
Desire to that unspeakable delight,
no
No sharp conceited wit can nere set down,
joy
Joy in the world to worldly men's ey-sight,
does
Does but ignoble thy imperial crown:
give.
Give thou the onset and the foe will fly,
Amazed at thy great commanding beauty.
Death shall take my life away,
Before my friendship shall decay.
Death
Death that heart-wounding Lord, sweet lovers foe,
shall
Shall lay his Ebone darts at thy fair feet,
take
Take them into thy hand and work my woe,
my
My woe that thy minds anguish will regreet:
life
Life, heart, joy, greeting and all my pleasure,
away.
Away are gone and fled from my dear treasure.
Before
Before one stain shall blot thy scarlet die,
my
My blood shall like a fountain wash the place,
friendship
Friendship it self knit with mortality,
shall
Shall thy immortal blemish quite disgrace:
decay.
Decay shall all the world, my Love in thee
Shall live unstained, untouched perpetually.
Let truth report what heart I bear,
To her that is my dearest dear.
Let
Let not foul pale-faced Envy be my foe,
truth
Truth must declare my spotless loyalty,
report
Report unto the world shall plainly show
what
What heart dear Love I always bore to thee,
heart
Heart framed of perfect Loves sincerity:
I
I cannot flatter, this I plainly say,
bear,
Bear with false words, i will bear the blame away.
To
To change in love is a base simple thing,
her
Her name will be ore stained with periu^y,
that
That does delight in nothing but dissembling?
is
Is it not shame so for to wrong fair beauty,
my
My true approved tongue must answer I
dearest
Dearest beware of this, and learn of me,
dear.
Dear is that Love combined with Chastity.
Seen has the eye, chosen has the heart:
Firm is the faith, and loath to depart.
Seen
Seen in all learned arts is my beloved,
has
Has any one so fair a Love as I?
the
The stony-hearted savage has she moved,
eye,
Eye for her eye tempts blushing chastity,
chosen
Chosen to make their nine a perfect ten,
has
Has the sweet Muses honored her again.
The
The bright-ey'd wandering world does always seek,
heart,
Heart-curing comfort does proceed from thee,
firm
Firm trust, pure thoughts, a mind that is always meek,
is
Is the true Badge of my loves Sovereignty:
the
The honor of our age, the only fair,
faith,
Faiths mistress, and Truths dear adopted heir.
And
And those that do behold thy heavenly beauty,
loath
Loath to forsake thee, spoil themselves with gazing,
to
To thee all humane knees proffer their duty,
depart.
Depart they will not but with sad amazing:
To dim their ey-sight looking against the sun,
Whose hot reflecting beams will near be done.
No woe so great in love, not being heard,
No plague so great in love, being long deferd.
N^
No tongue can tell the world my hearts deep anguish,
woe
Woe, and the minds great perturbation
so
So trouble me, that day and night I languish,
great
Great cares in love seek my destruction:
in
In all things gracious, saving only this,
love.
Love is my foe, that I account my bliss.
Not
Not all the world could profer me disgrace,
being
Being maintained fairest fair by thee,
hard,
Hard-fortune shall thy servant nere outface,
nor
No storms of Discord should discomfort me:
plague
Plague all the world with frowns my Turtle-do^^,
so
So that thou smile on me and be my love.
great
Great Mistress, matchless in thy sovereignty,
in
In lue and recompense of my affection,
love
Love me again, this do I beg of thee,
being
Being bound by Cupids kind direction:
long
Long have I su'd for grace, yet still I find,
deferd.
Deferd I am by her that is most unkind.
And if my love shall be releeu'd by thee,
My heart is thine, and so account of me.
And
And yet a steadfast hope maintains my heart,
if
If any favor favorably proceed
my
My dear from thee, the curer of my smart,
love
Love that eases minds oppressed with need,
shall be
Shall be the true Physician of my grief,
releeu'd
Releeu'd alone by thee that yeeld'st r^liefe.
by
By all the holy rites that Love adoreth,
thee,
Thee have I loved above the love of any,
My
My heart in truth thee always favors,
heart
Heart freed from any one, then freed from many:
is
Is it not base to change? yea so they say,
thine
Thine own confession love denies delay.
and
And by the high imperial seat of Iou^,
so
So am I forced by Cupid for to swear,
account
Account I must of thee my Turtl^-do^e,
of
Of thee that Times long memory shall outwe^re:
me.
Me by thy steadfast truth and faith denying,
To promise any hope on thee relying.
My passions are a hell and death to me,
Unless you feel remorce and pity me.
My
My sweetest thoughts sweet love to thee I send,
passions
Passions deeply ingrafted, vnremouable
are
Are my affections, and I must commend
a
A steadfast trust in thee most admirable:
hell
Hell round enwraps my body by disdain,
and
And then a heaven if thou love again.
death
Death haunts me at the heels, yet is afraid,
to
To touch my bosom, knowing thou love me,
me,
Me sometimes terrifying by him b^traid,
unless
Unless sweet helpful succor come from thee:
you
You well I know, the honor of mine eye,
feel
Feel some remorcefull help in misery.
remorce
Remorce sits on thy brow triumphantly,
and
And smiles upon my face with gentle cheer;
pitti^
Pity, loves gracious mother dw^ls in thee,
me.
Me favoring, abandoning base fear,
Death is amazed, viewing of thy beauty,
Thinking thy self perfect eternity.
My purest love does none but thee adore,
My beartie thoughts ar^' thine, I love no more.
My
My comfortable sweet approved Mistress,
porest
Purest of all the pure that nature framed,
love
Love in the height of all our happiness,
does
Does tell me that thy virtues are not named:
none
None can give forth thy constancy approved,
but
But I that tried thy faith, my best beloved.
Thee
Thee in the temple of fair Venus shrine
adore,
Adore I must, and kneel upon my knee,
my
My fortunes tell me plain that thou art mine,
hearty
Hearty in kindness, yielding unto me:
thoughts
Thoughts the much-great disturbers of our rest
are
Are fled, and lodge in some unquiet breast.
Thine
Thine ever vnremou'd and still kept word,
I
I pondred oftentimes within my mind:
love
Love told me that thou never would afford,
none
None other grace but that which I did find,
more.
More comfortable did this sound in mine ear,
Then sweet releasement to a man in fear.
I do resolve to love no love but thee,
Therefore be kind, and favor none but me.
I
I sometime sitting by my self alone,
do
Do meditate of things that are ensuing,
resolve
Resolve I do that thou must end my moan,
to
To strengthen Love if love should be declining.
love
Love in thy bosom dwells, and tells me still,
no
No envious storms shall thwart affections will.
Love
Love has amazed the world, placed in thy brow,
but
But yet slavish disdain seeks for to cross
thee
Thee and my self, that have combined our vow,
therefore
Therefore that monster cannot work our loss:
be
Be all the winds of Anger bent to rage,
kind.
Kind shall thou find me, thus my heart I gage.
and
And from my faith that is unremovable,
favor
Favor be seated in thy maiden eye,
none
None can receive it love more acceptable
but
But I my self, waiting thy pitying mercy:
me.
Me have thou made the substance of delight,
By thy fair sunne-resembling heavenly sight.
Ah quoth she, but where is true Love?
Where quoth he? where you and I love.
I quoth she, were thine like my love.
Why quoth he, as you love I love.
Ah
Ah thou imperious high commaun^ing Lord,
quoth
(Quoth he) to Cupid gentle god of Love,
he,
He that I honor most will not accord,
but
But strives against thy Justice from above,
where
Where I have promised faith, my plighted word
is
Is quite refused with a base reprove:
true
True loving honor this I only will thee,
love?
Love thy true love, or else false love will kill me.
Where
Where shall I find a heart that is free from guile?
quoth
Quoth Faithfulness, within my lovers breast*
he,
He at these pleasing words began to smile,
where
Where Anguish wrapped his thoughts in much unrest:
you
You did with pretty tales the time beguile,
and
And made him in conceited pleasure blessed,
I
I graced the words spoke with so sweet a tongue,
love,
Love being the holy burden of your song.
I
I graced your song of Love, but by the way*
quoth
(Quoth true Experience,) sit and you shall see,
she
She will enchaunt you with her heavenly lay:
were
Were you framed all of heavenly Policy,
thine
Thine ears should drink the poison of Delay,
like
Like as I said, so did it prove to be,
my
My Mistress beauty graced my Mistress song,
love.
Love pleased more with her Eyes then with her Tongue.
Why
Why then in deepenesse of sweet Loves delight,
quoth
Quoth she, the perfect Mistress of Desire,
he
He that I honor most bard from my sight,
as
As a bright Lamp kindles Affections fire:
you
You Magic operations work your spite,
love
Love to the mountain top of will aspires:
I
I challenge all in all, and this I sing,
love.
Love is a holy Saint, a Lord, a King.
Ah Love, where is thy faith in sweet love?
Why love where hearts conioyne in true love:
Why then my heart hopes of thy Loves love,
Else let my heart be plagued with false love.
Why art thou strange to me my Dear?
Not strange when as I love my dear:
But thou esteem'st not of thy dear.
Yes when I know my dearest dear.
Why is my Love so false to me?
My love is thine if thou love me:
Thee I love, else none contents me.
If thou love me, it not repents me.
Ah quoth he, where is faith in sweet love?
Why quoth she, conioynd in true love.
Ah quoth he, I hope of thy love:
Else quoth she, I Will die a false love.
Ah my Dear, why do thou kill me?
No my dear, Love does not will me.
Then in thine arme^ thou shall enfould me.
I, my dear, there thou shall hold me:
And holding me between thine arms,
I shall embrace sweet Lovers Charms.
Though death from life my body part,
Yet near the less keep thou my heart.
Though
Though some men are inconstant, fond, and ^ickle,
death
Deaths as^ie countenance shall not alter me:
from
From glass they take their substance being brittle*
life
Life, Heart, and Hand shall awaies favor thee,
my
My Pen shall write thy virtues registrie,
body
Body conioyn'd with body, free from strife,
part,
Part not in sunder till we part our life.
Yet
Yet my souls life to my dear life's concluding,
nere
Nere let Absurdity that villain, thief,
the
The monster of our time, men's praise deriding,
less
Less in perseverance, of small knowledge chief,
keep
Keep the base Gate to things that are excelling,
thou
Thou by fair virtues praise may yield relief,
my
My lines are thine, then tell Absurdity,
heart.
Heart of my dear, shall blot his villainy.
Where hearts agree, no strife can be.
Where
Where faithfulness unites it self with love,
hearts
Hearts pined with sorrow cannot disagree:
agree,
Agree they must of force, for from above
no
No wind oppressing mischief may we see:
strife
Strife is quite banished from our company.
can
Can I be sad? no, Pleasure bids me sing,
be.
Be blessed, for sweet Love's a happy thing.
Thy vows my love and heart has won,
Till thy untruth has it undone.
Thy
Thy true unspeakable fidelity.
vows
Vows made to Cupid and his faire-fac'd mother,
my
My thoughts have won to virtuous chastity:
love
Love thee alone I will, and love none other,
and
And if thou find not my loves secrecy,
heart
Heart fa^oting thee, then do thou Fancy smother.
has
Has all the world such a true Bird as I,
won,
Won to this favor by my constancy?
Till
Till that lean fleshles cripple, pale-faced Death,
thy
Thy lovely Dove shall pierce with his fell dart,
untruth
Untruth in my fair bosom nere takes breath:
has
Has any love such a firm constant heart?
it
It is thine own, unless thou keep it still
undone.
Undone shall I be, clean against my will.
Time shall tell thee, how well I love thee,
Time
Time the true proportioner of things,
shall
Shall in the end show my affection,
tell
Tell thee from whence all these my passions spring*
thee,
Thee honoring that of love have made election:
how
How often I have made my offerings,
well
Well known to Venus and her lovely son,
I
I to the wide world shall my passions run:
love
Love is a Lord of hearts, a great Commander,
thee.
Thee chalenging to be my chief defender.
Most divine and sacred,
Have I found your love unspotted.
Most
Most reverend Mistress honor of mine eye,
divine
Divine, most holy in religious love,
and
And Lord it self of my hearts emperi^,
sacred
Sacred in thoughts admitted from above,
have
Have in remembrance what affection wills:
I
I it reuiues the mind, and the mind kills.
found
Found have I written in your skie-like brow,
your
Your never ceasing kind humility,
love
Love for your sake to me has made a vow,
unspotted
Unspotted shall I find your constancy,
And without stain, to thy pure stainlesse beauty,
Shall my hearts bosom offer up his duty.
The want of thee is death to me.
The
The day shall be all night, and night all day,
want
Want of the Sun and Moon to give us light,
of
Of a black darkness, before thy love will stay
thee
Thee from thy pleasure of thy hearts delight.
is
Is not Affection nurse to long Delay?
death
Deaths Messenger, that bars me from thy sight?
to
To be in absence, is to burn in fire,
me.
Me round enwrapping with hot Loves desire.
I love to be beloved.
I
I do acknowledge of all constant pure,
love
Love is my true thoughts herrald, and I Will sing
to
To be of thy thoughts closet, firm and sure,
be
Be the world still thy virtues deifying:
beloved.
Beloved of the most, yet most of many,
Affirm my dear, thou art beloved of any.
I scorn if I be scorned.
I
I being not beloved by my affection,
scorn
Scorn within my thoughts such bad disgrace,
if
If thou of me do make thy firm election,
I
I to none other love will give my place:
be
Be thou my Saint, my bosoms Lord to prove,
scorned.
Scorned of all, I Will be thy truest love.
The heart's in pain, that loves in vain.
The
The grief poor lovers feel being not beloved,
heart's
Hearts anguish, and sad looks may testify:
^n
In night they sleep not, and in day perplexed,
pain,
Pain of this sorrow makes them melancholy,
that
That in disdain their silly minds are vexed,
loves
Loves terror is so sharp, so strong, so mighty,
in
In all things irresistable, being alive,
vain.
Vain he resists that against loves force does strive.
What greater joy can be then this,
Where love enioyes each lovers wish?
What
What may we count the world if love were dead?
greater
Greater in woe, then woe it self can be,
joy
Joy from man's secret bosom being fled,
can
Cannot but kill the heart immediately,
be
Because by joy the heart is nourished:
then
Then entertain sweet love within thy breast,
this,
This motion in the end will make thee blessed.
Where
Where two hearts are united all in one,
love
Love like a King, a Lord, a Sovereign,
enioyes
Enioyes the throne of bliss to sit upon,
each
Each sad heart craving aid, by Cupid slain:
lovers
Lovers be merry, Love being dignified,
wish.
Wish what you will, it shall not be denied.
Finis. quoth R. Chester.
HEREAFTER FOLLOVV DIVERSE Poetical Essaies on the former Subject; viz: the
Turtle and Phoenix. Done by the best and chiefest of our modern writers, with
their names subscribed to their particular works: never before extant. And
(now first) consecrated by them all generally, to the love and merit of the
true-noble Knight, Sir John Salisburie.

Dignum laud virum Musavetat mori. MDCI.

INVOCATIO, Ad Apollinem and Pierides.
GOod Fate, fair Thespian Deities,
And thou bright God, whose golden Eyes,
Serve as a Mirror to the silver Morn,
When (in the height of Grace) she does adorn
Her Crystal presence, and inuites
The euer-youthfull Bromius to delights,
Sprinckling his suit of V^rt with Pearl,
And (like a loose enamored Girl)
Ingles his cheek; which (waxing red with shame)
Instincts the senseless Grapes to do the same,
Till by his sweet reflection fed,
They gather spirit, and grow discolored.
To your high influence we commend
Our following Labors, and sustend
Our mutual palms, prepared to gratulate
An honorable friend: then propagate
With your illustrate faculties
Our mental powers; Instruct us how to rise
In weighty Numbers, well pursued,
And varied from the Multitude:
Be lavish once, and plenteously profuse
Your holy waters, to our thirsty Muse,
That we may give a Round to him
In a Castalian boule, crowned to the brim.
Vatum Chorus.
To the worthily honored Knight Sir John Salisburie.
NOblest of minds, here do the Muses bring
Unto your safer judgments taste,
Pure juice that flowed from the Pierian springs,
Not filch'd, nor borrowed, but exhaust
By the flame-hair'd Apollos hand:
And at his well-obseru'd command,
For you infusde in our retentiue brain,
^s now distild thence, through our quilles again.
Value our verse, as you approve the worth;
And think of what they are create,
No Mercenarie hope did bring them forth,
They tread not in that servile Gate;
But a true Zeal, borne in our spirits,
Responsible to your high Merits,
And an Invention, freer then the Times,
These were the Parents to our several Rimes,
Wherein Kind, Learned, Envious, al may view,
That we have writ worthy our selves and you.
Vatum Chorus.
The first.
THe silver Vault of heaven, has but one Eye,
And that is the Sun: the foule-maskt-Ladie, Night
(Which blots the Clouds, the white Book of the Sky,)
But one sick Phoebe, feuer-shaking Light:
The heart, one string: so, thus in single turns,
The world one Phoenix, till another burns.
The burning.
SVppose here burns this wonder of a breath,
In righteous flames, and holy-heated fires:
(Like Music which does rapt it self to death,
Sweet'ning the inward room of man's Desires;)
So she wast's both her wings in p^teous strife;
" The flame that eats her, seeds the others life:
Her rare-dead ashes, fill a rare-liue vrne:
"One Phoenix borne, another Phoenix burn.
Ignoto.

LEt the bird of low dest lay,
On the sole Arabian tree,
Herald sad and trumpet be:
To whose sound chaste wings obey.
But thou shriking harbinger,
Foul precurrer of the fiend,
Augour of the fevers end,
To this troop come thou not near.
From this Session interdict
Every foul of tyrant wing,
Save the Eagle feath'red King,
Keep the obsequie so strict.
Let the Priest in Surples white,
That defunctiue Music can,
Be the death-deuining Swan,
Lest the Requiem lack his right.
And thou treble dated Crow,
That thy sable gender make,
With the breath thou give and take,
Among our mourners shall thou go.
Here the Antheme does commence,
Love and Constancy is dead,
Phoenix and the Turtle fled,
In a mutual flame from hence.
So they loved as love in twain,
Had the essence but in one,
Two distincts, Division none,
Number there in love was slain.
Hearts remote, yet not asunder;
Distance and no space was seen,
Twixt this Turtle and his Queen;
But in them it were a wonder.
So between them Love did shine,
That the Turtle saw his right,
Flaming in the Phoenix sight;
Either was the others mine.
Property was thus appalled,
That the self was not the same:
Single Natures double name,
Neither two nor one was called.
Reason in it self confounded,
Saw Division grow together,
To themselves yet either neither,
Simple were so well compounded*
That it cried, how true a twain,
Seems this concordant one,
Love has Reason, Reason none,
If what parts, can so remain.
Whereupon it made this Thren^,
To the Phoenix and the Dove,
Co-supremes and stars of Love,
As Chorus to their Tragique Scene.
Threnos.
Beauty, Truth, and Raritie,
Grace in all simplicity,
Here enclosde, in cinders lie.
Death is now the Phoenix nest,
And the Turtles loyal breast,
To eternity does rest.
Leaving no posterity,
It Was not their infirmity,
It was married Chastity.
Truth may seem, but cannot be,
Beauty brag, but it is not she,
Truth and Beauty buried be.
To this vrne let those repair,
That are either true or fair,
For these dead Birds, sigh a prayer.
William Shake-speare.

A narration and description of a most exact wondrous creature, arising out of
the Phoenix and Turtle Doves ashes.
O It Was a moving Epicedium!
Can Fire? can Time? can blackest Fate consume
So rare creation? No; it is thwart to sense,
Corruption quakes to touch such excellence,
Nature exclaimes for Justice, Justice Fate,
Ought into naught can never remigrate.
Then look; for see what glorious issue (brighter
Then clearest fire, and beyond faith far whiter
Then Dians tier) now springs from yonder flame?
Let me stand numbed with wonder, never came
So ^^rong amazement on astonished eye
As this, this measur^lesse pure Ra^itie.
Lo now; th'^cracture of deuinest Essence*
The Soul of heavens labored Quintessence,
(Peans to Phoebus) from dear Louer's death,
Takes sweet creation and all blessing breath.
What strangeness is it that from the Turtles ashes
Assumes such form? (whose splendour clearer flashes,
Then mounted Delius) tell me genuine Muse.
Now yield your aides, you spirits that infuse
A sacred rapture, light my weaker eye:
Raise my invention on swift Fantasy,
That whilst of this same Metaphisicall
God, Man, nor Woman, but elix'd of all
My laboring thoughts, with strained ardor sing,
My Muse may mount with an uncommon wing.
The description of this Perfection.
DAres then thy too audacious sense
Presume, define that boundless Ens,
That amplest thought t^anscendeth?
O yet vouchsafe my Muse, to greet
That wondrous rareness, in whose sweet
All praise begins and ends.
Diuinest Beauty? that was slightest,
That adorned this wondrous Brightest,
Which had naught to be corrupted.
In this, Perfection had no mean
To this, Earths purest was unclean
Which virtue even instructed.
By it all Beings decked and stained,
Ideas that are idly fained
Only here subsist invested.
Dread not to give strained praise at all,
No speech is Hyperbolicall,
To this perfection blessed.
Thus close my Rimes, this all that can be said*
This wonder never can be flattered.
To Perfection.
A Sonnet.
Often have I gazed with astonished eye,
At monstrous issues of ill shaped birth,
When I have seen the Midwife to old earth,
Nature produce most strange deformity*
So have I marueld to observe of late,
Hard favored Feminines so scant of fair,
That Maskes so choicely, sheltred of the air,
As if their beauties were not theirs by fate.
But who so weak of observation,
Has not discerned long since how virtues wanted,
How parcimoniously the heavens have scanted,
Our chiefest part of adornation?
But now I cease to wonder, now I find
The cause of all our monstrous penny-showes:
Now I conceit from whence wits scarc'^ie grows,
Hard favored features, and defects of mind.
Nature long time has stored up virtue, fairness,
Shaping the rest as foiles unto this Rareness.
Perfectioni Hymnus.
WHat should I call this creature,
Which now is grown unto maturitie*
How should I blase this feature
As firm and constant as Eternity?
Call it Perfection? Fie!
It Is perfecter the^ brightest names can light it:
Call it Heavens mirror? I.
Alas, best attributes can never right it.
Beauties resistlesse thunder?
All nomination is too straight of sense:
Deep Contemplations wonder?
That appellation give this excellence*
Within all best confined,
(Now feebler Genius end thy slighter riming)
No Suburbs Differentia Deorum and hominum (apud Senecam) sic habet nostri
melior pars animus in illis nulla p^rs extra animum.
all is Mind
As far from spot, as possible defining.
John Marston.

Peristeros: or the male Turtle.
NOt like that loose and partie-liuer'd Sect
Of idle Lovers, that (as different Lights,
On colored subjects, different hewes reflect;)
Change their Affections with their Mistress Sight^,
That with her Praise, or Dispraise, drown, or flote,
And must be fed with fresh Conceits, and Fashions;
Never wax cold, but die* love not, but dote:
" (Loves fires, staid Judgments blow, not humo^ous Passions,
Whose Loves upon their Lovers pomp depend,
And quench as fast as her Eyes sparkle twinkles,
" (Naught lasts that does to outward worth contend,
" Al Love in smooth brows born is tomb'd in wrinkles.)
But like the consecrated The Turtle.
Bird of love,
Whose whole life's ^ap to his The Phoenix.
sole-mate alluded,
Whom no proud flocks of other Fowls could move,
But in her self all company concluded.
She was to him the Analisde World of pleasure,
Her firmness clothed him in variety;
Excess of all things, he ioyd in her ^^easure,
Mourned when she mourned, and di^th when she dies*
Like him I bound th'instinct of all my powers,
In her that bounds the Empire of desert,
And Time nor Change (that all things else deuoures,
But truth (...) in a constant heart)
Can change me more from her, then her (...),
That is my form* and gives my being, spirit.
George Chapman.

Praeludium.
WE must sing too? what Subject shall we choose?
Or whose great Name in Poets Heaven use*
For the more Countenance to our Active Muse?
Hercules? alas his bones are yet sore,
With his old earthly Labors; to exact more
Of his dull Godhead, were Sin: Lets implore
Phoebus? No: Tend thy Cart still. Envious Day
Shall not give out, that we have made thee stay,
And foundred thy hot Teame, to tune our Lay.
Nor will we beg of thee, Lord of the Vine,
To raise our spirits with thy coniuring Wine,
In the green circle of thy Iuy twine.
Pallas, nor thee we call on, Mankind Maid,
That (at thy birth) made the poor Smith afraid,
Who with his Axe thy Fathers Midwife plaide.
Go, crampe dull Mars, light Ven^s, when he snorts,
Or with thy Tribade Trine, invent new sports,
Thou, nor their looseness, with our Making sorts.
Let the old Boy your son ply his old Task,
Turn the stale Prologue to some painted Mask,
His Absence in our Verse is all we ask.
Hermes the cheater, cannot mix with us,
Though he would steal his sisters Pegasus,
And rifle him; or pawn his Petasus.
Nor all the Ladies of the Thespian Lake,
(Though they were crushed into one form) could make
A Beauty of that Merit, that should take
Our Muse up by Commission: No, we bring
Our own true Fire; Now our Thought takes wing,
And now an Epode to deep ears we sing.
Epos.
" NOt to know Vice at all, and keep true state,
" Is Virtue; and not Fate:
" Next to that Virtue, is, to know Vice well,
" And her black spite expel.
Which to effect (since no breast is so sure,
Or safe, but she will procure
Some way of entrance) we must plant a guard
Of Thoughts, to watch and ward
At the Eye and Ear, (the Ports unto the Mind;)
That no strange or unkind
Object arrive there, but the Heart (our spy)
Give knowledge instantly.
To wakefull Reason, our Affections King*
Who (in th'examining)
Will quickly taste the Treason, and commit
Close, the close cause of it.
" It Is the securest Policy we have,
" To make our Sense our Slave.
But this fair course is not embraced by many;
By many? scarce by any:
For either our Affections do rebel,
Or else the Sentinel,
(That shall ring larum to the Heart) does sleep,
Or some great Thought does keep
Back the Intelligence, and falsely swears
They Are base, and idle Fears,
Whereof the loyal Conscience so complains.
Thus by these subtle trains,
Do several Passions still invade the Mind,
And strike our Reason blind:
Of which usurping rank, some have thought Love
The first; as prone to move
Most frequent Tumults, Horrors, and Vnrests,
In our enflamed breasts.
But this does from their cloud of Error grow,
Which thus we ouerblow.
The thing they here call Love, is blind Desire,
Armed with Bow, Shafts, and Fire*
Inconstant like the Sea, of whence it is borne,
Rough, swelling, like a Storm:
With whom who sails, rides on the surge of Fear*
And boiles as if he were
In a continual Tempest. Now true Lou^
No such effects does prove:
That is an Essence most gentile, and fine.
Pure, perfect; nay divine:
It is a golden Chain let down from Heaven,
Whose linkes are bright, and even
That falls like Sleep on Lovers; and combines
The soft and sweetest Minds
In equal knots: This bears no Brands nor Darts
To murder different hearts,
B^t in a calm and God-like unity,
Preserues Community.
O who is he that (in this peace) enioyes
The Elixir of all joys?
(A Form more fresh then are the Eden bowers,
And lasting as her flowers:
Richer then Time, and as Times Virtue, ^are,
Sober, as saddest Care,
A fixed Thought, an Eye untaught to glance;)
Who (blessed with such high chance)
Would at suggestion of a steep Desire,
Cast himself from the spire
Of all his Happiness? But soft: I hear
Some vicious Fool draw near,
That cries we dream; and swears, there is no such thing
As this chaste Love we sing.
Peace Luxury, thou art like one of those
Who (being at sea) suppose
Because they move, the Continent does so:
No (Vice) we let thee know,
Though thy wild Thoughts with Sparrowes wings do fly,
" Turtles can chastely die;
And yet (in this to express our self more clear)
We do not number here
Such Spirits as are only continent,
Because Lusts means are spent:
Or those, who doubt the common mouth of Fame,
And for their Place, or Name,
Cannot so safely sin; Their Chastity
Is mere Necessity,
Nor mean we those, whom Vows and Conscience
Have filled with Abstinence:
(Though we acknowledge who can so abstain,
Makes a most blessed gain:
" He that for love of goodness hates ill,
" Is more Crowne-worthy still,
" Then he which for sins Penalty forbeares,
" His Heart sins, though he fears.)
But we propose a person like our Dove,
Graced with a Phoenix love:
A beauty of that clear and sparkling Light,
Would make a Day of Night,
And turn the blackest sorrows to bright joys:
Whose Odorous breath destroys
All taste of Bitterness, and makes the Air
As sweet, as she is fair:
A Body so harmoniously composde,
As if Nature disclosde
All her best Symmetrie in that one Feature:
O, so divine a Creature
Who could be false too? chiefly when he knows
How only she bestows
The wealthy treasure of her Love in him;
Making his Fortunes swim
In the full flood of her admired perfection?
What savage, brute Affection,
Would not be fearful to offend a Dame
Of this excelling frame?
Much more a noble and right ge^erous Mind,
(To virtuous moodes inclined)
That knows the weight of Guilt: He will refrain
From thoughts of such a strain*
And to his Sense object this Sentence ever,
" Man may securely sin, but safely never.
Ben: Johnson.

The Phoenix Analysde.
NOw, after all, let no man
Receive it (...) Fable,
If a Bird so amiable,
Do turn into a Woman.
Or (by our Turtles Augure)
That Natures fairest Creature,
Prove of his Mistress Feature,
But a bare Type and Figure.
Ode (...).
Splendour! O more then mortal,
For other forms come short all
Of her illustrate brigh^nesse,
As far as Sinne's from lightness.
Her wit as quick, and sprightfull
As fire; and more delightful
Then the stolen sports of Lovers,
When night their (...)
Judgment (adornd with Learning)
Does shine in her discerning,
Clear as a naked vestall
Closde in an orb of Crystal.
Her breath for sweet exceeding
The Phoenix place of breeding,
But mixed with sound, transcending
All Nature of commending.
Alas: then whither wade I,
In thought to praise this Lady,
When seeking her renowning,
My self am so near drowning?
Retire, and say; Her Graces
Are deeper then their Faces:
Yet she is nor nice to show them,
Nor takes she p^ide to know them.
Ben: Johnson.

FINIS.

