THE STRAIT GATE AND NARROW WAY TO LIFE, OPENED AND POINted out upon Luke 13,
23, 24.

BY EDWARD CHETWIND, D. D. and Deane of BRISTOW.

The second Edition, corrected and revised

IEREM. 6.26. Stand in the ways, and behold and ask among the old ways,
which is the good way, and walk therein: and ye shall find rest for your
souls. LONDON, Printed by John Beale. 1632.

Errata.
Page 96. line 19. ^ead true converted. page 106. l. 18. r. ^ loved. p. 109. l.
1. r. is it not. p. 17^. l. 2. r. obedience. p. 18 l. 4. r. mediation. p. 250.
l. 15. r. in his travail.

In the Epistle to the Reader. a 2. l. 4- for lament^ on, read damnation.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GEORGE, by Gods providence, Archbishop of
Canterbury, primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one of his Majesty's
most Honorable P^^^^ Council.
MAy it please your Grace to remember, how almost twenty years now passed, I
presumed to present you, with this lock of goats hair (as then I termed it)
offered for the use of the Lords tabernacle; Exo. 35.23
glad thereby to testify mine unfeigned joy; for your Lordships happy
advancement unto that eminent place, which now for so many years since, your
Grace has (through Gods mercy) with honor held; for the singular good of this
our Church and state.

The motives inviting and emboldening me thereunto were; first, in your
Lordship the singular love you had ever showed to the pains of preaching,
having been your self therein forward, and exemplary in the several places,
both of University and City, through which you had passed laboring; secondly,
more concerning my self, that duty of thankfulness, wherein I stood obliged
for the favorable respect which it had pleased you, even from the time of my
first coming unto the University to vouchsafe unto me. Besides a third
incitement was a respect unto my kindred and country men, over whom your
Lordship having been first (for a while) Bishop, I was willing the rather
under your acceptable name and gracious patronage, in a more especial manner
to recommend unto them this (as I conceived, for the times and age) useful
treatise.

And now being again set forward, to revise, and revive these labors which
(chiefly through mine own backwardness) have been so long buried in the dust
of silence; and (not by any addition of materials, or change of method, but
by a partition (as has been desired) of the whole into chapters with contents
prefixed) to give some small light thereunto and encouragement thereby unto the
Reader.

I rejoice once more humbly to present and offer the same unto your Grace, with
an acknowledgement of a yet further debt of thankfulness, for your well
wishing and (I may say truly) furthering of me unto that place and preferment
in the Church, which it pleased his late Royal and renowned Majesty at the
alone mediation of his dearest consort, my most gracious and much honored Lady
and Mistress, Queen Anne of ever glorious and happy memory, fourteen years
full now passed, graciously to confer upon me.

Which, being in the place where for diverse years from my first leaving the
University, I had labored, not without some hopeful fruit (through Gods
blessing) and good acceptance, I rest therewith, heartily thanking God, well
content, without travail to look higher; desiring (as he who knows the
heart, can witness) ability rather, Mat. 20, 11.
to do more work, then any way envying those, who entering on the wo^ke later
have received a more plentiful reward.

But God I trust will accept the willing mind, 2. Cor. 8.12
and that measure of strength which himself bestows. And if your Grace shall
be pleased again in these your elder years, to accept this same which was
presented you in the times of fresher strength; your Lordship shall obliege me
the more, as to praise God, for (which formerly has been begged) your
prosperous continuance so long in that so high and honorable watchtower, in
which himself has set you; so to redouble my vows and suites unto the same
gracious Lord, that yet, (through his bounteous goodness) years many, and happy
may be added to your days, that like to that old and honorable Iehoiada, 2
Chapter 24.16
you may still do good in Israel both toward God and toward his house: Psa.
92.12
flourishing as the palme-tre^ planted in Gods courts, and bringing forth fruit
in old age, still more, and the best, last: until having run your race and
held fast the (orthodoxe) faith once given 2 Timothy 4.7.
to the Saints, Jude 3.
and having finished all the work which God has appointed for you here; you
be brought with honor in a full age to the grave, as a shocke of corn is
gathered in, Job 5.26.
in his (ripe and due) season. And even so craving pardon for this boldness, I
will remain,

Your Graces in all dutiful observance at command, EDWARD CHETWIND.

TO THE CHRIstian Readers, and in special to my welbeloved and respected, the
inhabitants of the City of Bristoll; those of my charge at Barkley in
Gloucestershire, and my dear Kindred and Contrymen in Staffordshire.
THe dangerous security, and irreligious impiety of these last and perilous
times, which every unpartiall eye discerns, and every true Christian heart
deploreth and abhors; as it first occasioned me to make choice of the
Scripture opened in this Treatise, for a Text: so has the farther
consideration hereof, at length made me not unwilling, to publish for more
general use, what at first was by preaching hereupon more privately delivered,
to the end to discover such malignant humors, and withal to awaken and rouse
up such careless sleepers from out of their golden dream (not unlike that of
the hungry man in the Prophet) of secured safety. Isai. 29.8.


2 In which endeavor, as my witness is in heaven, and my record on high, Job
16.19.
that mine aim is wholly, to attribute righteousness unto my maker, and
withal, Job 36.3.
as an Interpreter to declare unto man his righteousness, Job 33.23.
directing from our Saviors mouth, how to attain to endless happiness: so
have I been stirred up, and encouraged, by a twofold powerful motive: viz.
the consideration of the necessity, and hope of profit.

3. For the former: That I may take leave (in silence of my betters) to set
down what mine experience (being in comparison but of yesterday) has
observed, Job 8.9.
touching the humors of the world in this main point of the pursuit of
happiness: it seems to me, that even the whole christian name, and nation, may
justly fall under one of these two heads: viz. either such as willingly feed
on ashes, suffering their own seduced hearts to deceive them, Isai 44.20.
being not able to deliver their souls, or to say, is there not a ly in our
right hand? or else such as by the example and multitude of the forenamed, are
dangerously disheartened in their safe and sincere course.

4 For why alas? (to dispose the former band of seduced souls, into two
companies:) first, some there are, who entertain not so much as any show of
desire or care of entering into life, nay as if they had made a covenant with
death and hell, Isai. 28.15
or rather with their seduced souls, to believe that Article of Atheism, that
there is neither heaven nor hell: how may they be seen running a loose and
licentious race, of most abominable profaneness, wallowing in whoredoms,
blasphemies, drunkenness, and what not defiling wickedness; refusing to be
taught or told of the ways of God, yea in effect, as those in Job, Job 21.14.
bidding the Almighty depart from them, being such who desire not the
knowledge of his ways: or if they be threatened with the coming and terrors
of the Lord, like those mockers in Peter, ask, 2 Pet, 3.2.
where is the promise of his coming? and drawing in the same yoke, and with
the same cords, with those in Isa. challenge and dare the highest Majesty with,
let him make speed: let him hasten his work, Isai. 5.19.
that we may see it; etc. or if happily their conscience at any time tell them
by secret gripes, that they must expect a judge and judgment: yet how is their
resolution made careless and desperate, by their damnable abuse of the
doctrine of Gods predestination, that all must be as God has determined: what
need they then to take further care, seeing they can neither alter, nor (as
they think) farther what God has foreordained.

5. But besides these monsters, whom more then hellish unbelief, has made in
this particular worse then the very Devils themselves, who believe and tremble:
Iam. 2.19.
alas, how many are there, of a second order, not so desperate, who professing
some desire and hope of life, may yet be observed, miserably to err and
wander, in the ways of death?

6. For why? some flatter themselves in wickedness, accounting the gate of
heaven to be wide and open, and the passage obvious and easy to enter, when
they will, as if, Christ dyed for all, or as if the bare name of Christ were a
gate to let in all, Papists, Anabaptists, Familists, or any sect of Religion,
unto life; and whereat by faith only (which they count no such great matter)
or at the hardest, by an after repentance, they may come to enter, whenever
they list, though it be at the very last.

7. Others stay without, willing to enter, but loath to adventure. Why? but
because they are as Moab settled o^ their lees: Ier. 48.11. Zeph. 1.12.
or as those in Zephany, frozen on their dregs: resolved before hand,
whatsoever the Lord voice be, to go down into Egypt, Ier 42.14.
to enjoy, as yet, the pleasures, profits, and credit o^ this present world,
and therefore account they him their enemy that shall by telling them truth,
Ga^ 4.6.
forwarn the^ to flee with speed from the wrath to come: or if they will be
persuaded to yield any thing, it is but with Agrippa to become almost
Christians: Act. 26, 28.
or if you would have them absolute, you must persuade others to be so also, at
least to suffer them to be vnderided in their forwardness. Pro. 21.2^
So does the desire of the slothful slay them, whiles their hands refuse to
work; wishing to be happy, but not regarding to be holy: willing to be saved,
but loath to be restrained of their fleshly liberty: content to hear of dying
well, but fearing if in their life they refrain from iniquity, to be made a
prey: Isa 59.15.
or at least a butte for the arrows of reprochful tongs; which difficulties
rather then they will undergo, they suffer themselves with the multitude, to
fall down the stream, into undoubted lamentation.

8 And yet a third sort there is in greater danger, whiles they think
themselves secure and out of danger; as being conceited that they are entered
already within the gate, and walking in the ways of life when as indeed, they
are but groping (as the blind Sodomites) in the dark, (Gen 19.11.)
not having found the door. Such as like the lukewarm Church of Laodicea,
think themselves rich and wanting nothing, Rev. 3.17.
when they are but poor. Who, howsoever, for making some profession, and
holding some outward correspondency with God and his word, so as withal they
may keep peace and friendship with the world: they are so conceited of their
own perfection, that they are ready with him in the Gospel, who thought he had
done all, to ask what more is wanting to them? Mat. 19.20
yet it is lamentably apparent, how they deceive themselves, with a show of
godliness, and deny the power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5
taking on them the profession, but yet not entertaining the love of the truth
that they may be saved. 2 Th. 2.10.
As a just punishment whereof, how many do we see given over to strong
delusions to believe lies? 1 Kin. 28.21
either to halt as Neuters, between two opinions? or to embrace with earnest
eagern^sse a false Religion? because (which in the Prophet heartned the
Idolatrous Jews in their abominations) their forefathers have therein trodde
before them? Ier 44.17.
or because, these wa^es of superstition, seem some of them strict and narrow,
and therefore likely to be the ways of life? yea, how many whilome made good
show, and seemed to shine bright, as stars in the firmament of heaven, who
are by the Dragons tail smitten to the earth? Rev. 12.4.
by their fall making manifest how they were but comets at the best; whiles
relapsed and having lost their first love, they are as water once made hot,
grown colder for the heating, and become scoffers and deriders, Ismael-like,
or as Michol, if not worse, of any that shall in sincerity set themselves
reioycingly to walk in the ways of God.

9 Finally (for conclusion of th^s complaint, discovering the great necessity,
as I conceived it, of dealing in this argument) whiles thus the greater number
of those that are styled with the name of Christians, despise, or neglect, Luk
7.30 Heb. 2.3.
the counsel of God, and this great salvation, how do they not only sin
against their own souls, judging themselves unworthy of everlasting life?
Act. 13.46
but also (which is more to be lamented) by their opposite multitude, and
example, dangerously daunt and dismay the hearts both of Gods faithful
Ministers in their painful labors, and generally, of true hearted Christians,
in their holy conversation. Those, whiles they see so little fruit of the
travail of their souls, if not happily open defiance, if they shall once
proceed unto particulars, Luk ^.19.
as John Baptist did with Herod; These, while they find so little countenance
or acceptance of their endeavors after sincerity, if not rather, a sway of
times and manners, to hinder them from cleaving without separation unto the
Lord.

10 A remedy, and as it were counterpoison, against all which dangerous
infections, as our Savior shall seem to give, in that his counsel to his
followers, to strive with vehement earnestness, to enter in at the strait
gate, and to walk in the narrow way leading to life: so have I apprehended as
a second motive, for encouragement to this work, the hope conceived hereby of
profit, if the Lord shall vouchsafe to afford his blessing from above, whiles
in the opening and applying of our Saviors answer touching these two maine
points of truth, that the number to be saved is but small: and the manner
difficult: we shall aptly meet with every kind of the forementioned humors.

11 As first with the first sort of despisers, by way of commination, (and
confutation withal, of their cursed blasphemies, and reasonings against the
Lord) whiles, to appale (if it may be) their obdurate spirits, they be charged
as guilty of murdering their own souls, and threatened as scorners alone to
suffer, to be swept away with the besome of destruction, and cast into the
burning lake: Gods justice, in rejecting them, standing mean while clear, and
their condemnation proved just, as wholly by themselves deserved, who never so
much as entertained, the desire of grace, or regarded the counsel of God in
his word, that they might be saved.

12 Farther, with the other sort, that neglect this great salvation, whiles,
either they think it easy to be had hereafter, or are loath for it to leave
the world, or think they have already interested themselves therein: our
dealing shall be found to be, by instruction, correction, and faithful
counsel.

13 For first, our labor is by way of doctrine, to instruct and confirm them
in the truth, here by our blessed Savior propounded both touching the number of
them that shall be saved, that, viz. howsoever they be many in themselves, yet
are they in comparison with them that perish, but as S. Aug. or rather the Lord
(not I) resolving this point, makes the similitude) as the wheat corns in
comparison with the chafe, a tithing* or a gleaning, or a remnant, few of
many, a little flock: as also touching the manner of attaining unto salvation,
that it is difficult and not so easy. Since howsoever Christ Jesus, the gate
and way of life, and so all the porches and paths compris^d under him, be in
themselves fair and spacious; yet ^o seem they not (neither inde^d are) to
the carnal sluggards, who choose rather to wander in the many by ways of
death, then to walk constantly and conscionably in this one only way of life.
Strait indeed and narrow: not in regard of it self, but alas, because men
are by nature, either blin^ ^^d cannot find the gate, or stiffenecked and
stuffed with worldly pelf, that they brook not to stoop, or strip
themselves, that they may get in: or delighting to rove, they endure not to be
bounded, no not within the pales of the law of liberty: or finally, they fear
if they should be forward, to be encombred with the briers and bushes lying in
the path. In which respects by man's own corruption the gate and way of life is
made strait to enter, and narrow to walk in, except with violence and earnest
strife.

14 And hence therefore, is our just correction in the second place inferred to
discover their ^olly, who conceiting it a small matter to enter into life, or
being loath to leave the world, stay wandering without, whiles racking Gods
mercy without his leave, they forslow the time, deferring to set out upon their
journey, until the evening of their age, thinking then fittest to begin an
endeavor after life, when their hoare hairs call them to think on death. When
as alas poor souls, they wot not how suddenly ere they mistrust their
state, the pits mouth may be shut upon them, neither consider how their
conclusion must necessarily follow, as the premises were framed, and their
death answer the tenor of their life; which whiles they neglect to reform,
foolishly preferring earth to heaven, and the winning of the world, to the
assuring of their precious souls: little comfort may they have, in the
frequent company that pass along with them as beasts in herds unto the
shambles, toward destruction.

15 To recall whom, and warn all, to look unto their ways, our counsel may
be found to be thirdly, this same of our Savior in the Text, to all that long
after life, to strive with earnestness to enter in at the strait gate: not to
walk after the fashions of the world: nor to awarrant themselves to do what
they see many do. No, but rather to try themselves, whether they be entered
within the gate, and walking in the ways of life: that is, in faith,
repentance, obedience, patience, which in Christ lead to life: Wherein whiles many
only with a formality of outward profession, miserably deceive themselves,
boasting of what they have not received; or misled and drawn aside by the
(...) of the wicked, fall from that stedfastnes which they once professed: our
care you shall find to be, both to put in caution, against the false ways
seeming strait, and withal to yield direction with advice how to find, and
enter the true ways of life; yea further, how to examine and try our estate,
for both entrance and continuance, in every of the forementioned, that none be
misled or fall away that belong to God So may our dealing be found to be, with
the several sorts of such as are seduced.

16 And accordingly also, with the other sort, of such as are in danger to
faint, and be disheartened in this course our dealing will be found, fitting
their condition by way of comfort and encouragement.

17 First, to the faithful Minister, not to faint though he be found fault
with, for delivering the truth, neither to be discouraged, if he be not able to
win all to embrace the truth but rather to rejoice in God, for the gain of
any though some few; yea, or if not any, yet in the saving of his own soul,
by approving of his faithfulness unto the Lord; with whom howsoever the success
be, his judgment shall be favorable, and his reward assured.

18 Secondly, to the true believers, who though but few, yet if truly
faithful, and of the little flock, need not to fear or be discouraged, since
for them a Kingdom is prepared, whereto, whiles by the renewing of their
hearts, and remembrance of their former evil ways: by their zeal to draw
others with them unto God: and hearty love unto the Saints and servants of God:
(sure notes where they be sincere, of a right faith in Christ) they can find
themselves to walk: how can they but rejoice with joy unspeakeable and
glorious, in the riches unconceiveable of Gods free love unto them; who has
severed them from the refuse of the world, reserving them as vessels of mercy
unto himself. Wherefore to encourage them, howsoever maligned by the world, and
by their separation from the world in danger to be made a prey; our labor
finally will be found, to discover how these gates and ways, that seem to the
carnal man so strait and troublesome, are yet in themselves, and unto them
that once are entered into them, pleasant and of delight. The other sort that
walk in the broad way, being indeed those that endure the most wretched slavery
under hard masters (worse far then Pharaohs taske-masters) sin and satan:
when as they though walking solitarily, are the only blessed and happy brood of
travailers, whose leader is Christ Jesus, whose guard the holy Angels, whose
footsteps are directed by Gods blessed Spirit of truth, their glory, though as
of the Kings daughter inward, yet surpassing, being Christ's beauty put upon
them: finally their rejoicing in this life, though by others unconceiveable,
and their end assured peace.

19 These things (according to the measure of my poor talent) as I have
endeavored with perspicuous plainnes to set before the eyes of my Christian
and indifferent Readers; so for farther light of understanding and help of
memory, I have thought good to draw them summarily into a brief table,
containing the method and disposition of the treatise following; which having
been first delivered in diverse sermons; and since connected in one entire
discourse without distinction, is now for the Readers refreshing divided into
chapters, where in yet there is (as the table referring to the several
chapters, shows) a coherence and continuation of the whole: The curious
question being only touched; for discovery of the Atheism and curiosity of
worldlings, so as to make way to our Saviors gracious answer: affording us the
two maine notes of doctrine (then which I know not any more needful to be
urged, or which are more hardly digested by the carnal and irreligious heart;
which has made me the more to labor to confirm, and make them plain.) The
former, touching the number of them that shall be saved, that -- they are in
comparison but few -- and the later, touching the manner of attaining to
salvation, that -- it is to flesh and blood no easy matter -- which therefone
all had need to look diligently after, that would attain to life, Since this
is certain, God cannot endure that man should seek to find out or prescribe
unto himself any other way to life, or yet refuse to walk in that, which his
wisdom has prescribed and sanctified in his word of truth, and wherein the
faithful in all ages have passed unto glory.

20 Now the fruit of these my labour^, as Christian charity together with my
special calling, binds me unfainedly, to wish to all Christian hearts, who
shall take pains to read them; so do particular reasons of important respect
persuade me in especial manner to recommend them, with most hearty wish of
profit to those, who are before by name mentioned; viz. my beloved hearers of
the City of Bristoll, together with those who are now of my more special
charge in the Lord, not without an affectionate remembrance of, and respect
unto those, that are my kindred and countrymen according to the flesh.

21 As for the first of those, who were ear witnesses of the deliverie of this
truth; my desire is (God having been pleased, since that time, to call me
(howsoever not altogether from them, yet) from the ordinary exercise of my
ministry among them) to leave this tract as a standing remembrance unto them,
Act. 20.31. 2 Pet. 1.15.
both of what they have been taught in this most necessary point, and also of
my most unfeigned love to their souls; heartily wishing and seriously warning
them so to look to themselves, 2 Ioh. 8.
that those good affections to the narrow way; which my self have much
rejoiced heretofore to observe in them, may not now decay or die within them,
God having still continued, and yet continuing amongst them, so powerful a
ministry for the preserving, and (if themselves be not in fault) improving of
those his graces in them.

22 Secondly for those whom God has pleased (in mercy I trust both unto them
and my self) to make my great and special charge, as I cannot but rejoice
with that good man Barnabas, Act. 11.23.
to see the grace of God, by others labors before hopefully begun in some of
them; so would I exhort all of them, that with purpose of heart they would
join themselves, and even cleave inseparably unto the Lord, willing, by
inserting here this mention and remembrance of them, to testify mine
affection, and how as God can bear me record, Phil. 1.8.
I unfainedly long after them, 2 Cor. 11.2 3 Ioh. 4.
and am even jealous over them, rejoicing in nothing more, then to see any of
them walking in the truth: neither desiring any thing more, then to be able in
the last day to yield up for them mine accounts with joy, Heb. 13.17.
yea to have them as my joy and crown of rejoicing in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming, 1 These. 2.19.
which how may I hope sooner then by aiming to set before them in the whole
course of my ministry what in this treatise is opened and pointed out unto
them, even the strait gate and narrow way of life: wherein whiles they shall
endeavor carefully to walk, they shall with one labor, become their
Ministers glory, and themselves also attain to glory, which God grant.

23 Finally, for the third sort, of my dear kindred and countrymen, since it
has pleased the Lord (who appoints to every one of his servants, both his
portion and his place of service) to call and send me, as he did Jonah unto
Niniveh, Iona 3.2, 3 Act. 16.10. Luc. 4.16.
or as Paul into Macedonia, that I cannot as our Saviors manner was stand up
in the Synagogue of Nazareth; to instruct them of mine own Tribe and Family,
Ver: 23.
in the ways of God, nor be as an home-borne Physician, to apply Gods balm
for healing of the sores of the daughter of mine own people: yet God forbid
that natural affection toward mine own bowels, and native soil, should be
so far extinguished as that I should not (with the Prophet and holy people in
the Psalm) importune the Lord, to arise and have mercy thereon; Psalm. 102.13.
and in the mean time delight in the stones, and have pity on the dust
thereof. Verse 14.
For whose peace, and special prosperity, as, for my brethren and kindred
sake I am bound to pray; Psalm 122.8.
mine hearts desire being for them, as Saint Paul's was for his nation of the
Hebrews, Romans 10.1.
that they may have the means and grace of life: so do I desire in this
absence, to send and recommend this as a present pledge and pawn of my
respectfull love and due remembrance of them. Who being of a disposition
ingenious, and not averse from the best things, want nothing so much as
remembrancers, Isa. 62.6.
to make them see and shun all relics of superstition, and with Gods
blessing, to make them ready as a people prepared for the Lord. Luc 1.17.
For whom though I cannot say in that height of the Apostles superabundant
zeal, that I would be separated from Christ, Romans 9.3:
or with Moses, Exo 3^.32
be blotted out of the book of life, yet shall I desire with the same Apostle
for his beloved Ephesians continually to bow my knees unto the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Ephesians 3.14, 15. etc.
(of whom is named the whole family in heaven and in earth) that he may grant
them according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened by his spirit in
the inner man, that Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith.

24 And even so recommending these my labors to Gods blessing, who alone is
all in all, giving the increase, and them, and all those, whose Christian
hearts shall in sincerity of truth desire the knowledge of the Lord, 1 Cor.
3.7.
to life eternal, unto God and the word of his grace, who is able to build
farther, Ephesians. 3.20.
and to give them an inheritance among al them that are sanctified: as being
able to do exceeding abundantly, above all that we ask or think according to
the power that works in us. I take leave.

From Bristoll, January 20. Yours in the Lord Jesus, EDWARD CHETWIND.

The Contents.
THE Text resolved; and the first general part, viz the question considered.
Page 1. A discovery of Atheistical scoffers, and envious questionists. page
10. The second maine part, our Saviors answer, and first what is therein
employed, that but few are to be s^ved. 22 A doubt proposed, cleared by Saint
Augustine touching the many, and yet few that shall be saved. 27 This truth
confirmed by testimony of the Prophets, Gods proceedings, and our Saviors
parable. 33 Contrary errors refuted, with objections answered. 47 That men
ought to endeavor to be of the lesser number, and not to follow multitudes. 63
Comfort of Gods faithful Ministers in regard of their unsuccessefull labors.
73 What thankful rejoicing they ought to have in God, that are freely chosen
to be of that lesser number. 85 Four especial notes for the trial of our
right to that estate. 95 No disheartening to such for the worlds maligning, or
their old friends forsaking. 107 The second point in our Saviors answer,
chiefly intended and fully expressed that -- it is no easy matter to attain
salvation. 114 The ground of that difficulty with the removing of a doubt, how
Christ being the gate and the way, can be said to be strait. 121 Four paths
comprehended under Christ, viz. that of faith, repentance, obedience, and
patience: not strait in themselves, but so to flesh and blood. 130 Two reasons
of that straitnes, viz. first because the way is but one: and secondly, because
it is, or seems strait to carnal reason; and that in four respects 136 The
two first respects, viz. in regard first of the finding, and secondly of the
entering. 141 The two latter respects, viz. in regard of the proceeding on, and
of the persevering in, 153 How needful it is for a Christian to try, whether
ever he entered, or continues in this way? and that in the four particular
paths. 164 Trial of Faith by four rules, viz. two for entrance, and two for
continuance. 173 Trial of repentance by four rules, viz. two for entrance,
and two for continuance. 185 Trial of obedience by four rules, viz two for
entrance, and two for continuance. 195 Trial of patience by four rules, viz.
two for entrance, and two for continuance. 205 The woeful condition of all in
the broad way despising reproof, under a vain hope of mercy. 214 A council
to enter; with the reason why so many do not: viz. either because they seek
not, or because they strive not. 229 A caution, against the seeming strait
gate of Superstition, enforcing a double care, and diligent circumspection. 243
A consolatary conclusion, making good the happiness of those that travel in
the narrow path, with removeall of exceptions. 257
THE STRAIT GATE, AND Narrow way to Life.
LVK. 13.23, 24. Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that shall be
saved? And he said unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many,
I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
CHAP. I. The Text resolved, and the first general part, viz. the Question
considered.
IN these words is set down, the sum of a Conference, which passed betwixt
another man whose name we find not mentioned, and our blessed Savior,
concerning the great matter, most worthy for us all to harken after, of man's
salvation. Wherein the parts are plain in number, as the verses, two: the one
making way unto the other, and the latter inferred by occasion of the former;
namely, a Question, and an Answer.

The Question moved by that other man unto our Savior, touching the number of
them that should be saved: For, Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few
that shall be saved? whereunto is adjoined our Saviors Answer, directed not to
him only, that moved the Question, but to the rest also then present, for
instruction, touching the manner rather of attaining unto Salvation, but which
withal employed in it, the resolution of the Question, moved about the number:
For, Then said he unto them, Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for,
many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

And first for the Question, (to touch that only by the way, and so as to make
plain the way to the Answer following) the coherence of it with the verse
precedent, Verse 22.
may persuade us to think, that it was occasioned by our Saviors teaching, as
he went journying toward Jerusalem; What? but, as elsewhere it is expressed,
The Gospel of the Kingdom; Mat. 9 35.
inviting all to repent, and believe in him, the Messiah promised, that so they
might be saved. Upon hearing whereof, we may well conceive this fellow to move
this Question, touching the number of them that shall be saved: Lord, are there
few that shall be saved? but how our Savior reckons hereof, we may gather
best by the indirectnesse of his Answer, in appearance not unto the point, but
made rather to the question, which should have been asked; namely, how men
might come to be of that blessed number, our Savior showing thereby, as
elsewhere by the like, his dislike, and disapproving of the Question moved.
Ioh. 6.26.


But how far his dislike was of it, and consequently our censure to pass
against it, whether, as a Question only needless and curious, or farther yet,
carping; and captious; that is not left expressed, and therefore certainly,
cannot be gathered by us, who know not, farther then is here revealed, with
what heart, and to what purpose the fellow spoke it.

Howbeit, as all agree in this, that it was at the best, a curious and
impertinent demand, as of one, who being exhorted to set toward heaven, must
know, first what store of company went that way, ere he would be drawn to
undertake the journey: so farther, that it was worse then so, namely, out of a
captious humor, to carp and catch, if possible, at our Saviors Doctrine; as
all circumstances of the Text may well seem to bear it, so may we be
persuaded to conceive of it, if but from the frequent use of such like
Questions in other places proposed by such carping companions.

As by the Pharisees touching divorce: Mat. 19.3.
Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife upon every occasion? by the
Herodians, touching the Tribute money: Tell us, what think thou, Mat. 22.17
Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar, or no? By the Saduces touching the
woman that had seven husbands, brought in to impeach the doctrine of the
Resurrection: In the Resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven? Mat.
22.28.


Of like cavilling nature to which, to conceive and take this Question also, we
may be moved the rather, by consideration of the matter touching which it is
made, namely, the number that shall be saved: which may easily be conceived, to
contain in it a cavil against our Saviors Doctrine, touching the means of
salvation, only by faith in the Messiah promised, and true repentance, by few
embraced.

Whereat whiles the unbelieving Jews, who had been taught to rest only in the
formal observance of legal ceremonies, marvelled, no doubt, and murmured: we
may well imagine this fellow, more forward then the rest, to move this
Question, by way of cavil, or objection.

Whereto, should our Savior have returned answer, that not a few, but many
should be saved; his reply happily would not have bin to seek, to tax our
Saviors teaching as untrue, that sure then men might be saved, without
receiving him, or obeying his Doctrine, since few were his followers, doing
what he required: but, on the contrary, should the answer have been, as was
expected rather, that indeed there were but few who should enter into life,
this happly he imagined, could not but procure much ill will, if not worse,
unto our Savior, as being one, that taught a cruel Doctrine, much derogatory
to that high conceit wherewith most flatter themselves, touching the
universality, and super-abundant riches of Gods mercy; with which they cannot
conceive, how it should well stand, to suffer the greater number of mankind to
perish.

CHAP. II. A discovery of Atheistical Scoffers and curious Questionists.
THe Question formerly examined, being conceived (as by some of judgment it
is) to be not only needlessely curious, but also impiously carping, and
captious; herein, as in a clear mirror, we may behold discovered the humors
that have ever been in all ages amongst the people of the world; and in
special how -- This great and highest point of truth, touching the matter and
means of salvation, is entertained, either with carping impiety, or with
dangerous curiosity.

For so, to show that this caviller, and his question, be not without fellows;
as it is most certain, that no elder age of the world has wanted them, who,
in the pride of their rebellious and unbelieving hearts, have bin bold to make
a mock, and to move cavil against the Sacred truth of God, in his Word
revealed, which easily might be instanced, even from the days of Adam,
downward until Christ: so, that we may not think such cavillers, by Christ's
coming, to be together with the Heathen Oracles, quite put to silence? Saint
Peter has not spared to forwarne us of the coming in the last days of such
mockers, who walking after their own lusts, 2 Pet. 3.9.
shall ask, where is the promise of his coming; and be ready to bring reason
against it, as if there were no such matter to be looked for.

And accordingly, how easy, alas, is it, now adays, to find, and that
amongst such as profess themselves worshippers of the true God in Christ, many
every where of captious, and contradicting spirits; who not only live the
life, but speak also the very language of Atheism, bewraying by their
tongues, their spite, and deep dislike against the truth of Christ, revealed
in his Word, specially, in this very point of points, touching man's salvation.
Who if they be called upon, according the tenor of the Baptist, our Savior,
Math. 3.8. Mat. 4.17. Acts. 2.38. Ephesians 5.15. Romans 12 2. Psalm. 119.9.
and his Apostles Doctrine, to repent, and believe the Gospel, to walk
circumspectly, as by a line, abandoning the fashions and courses of this
present world, and taking heed unto their ways, according to the Word, that so
they may be saved: what shall you hear from them straight, but questionings
and reasonings, such as this in our Text, uttering the foolishness of their
ignorantly profane hearts?

For (to give instance in some few of their cursed speakings) Then belike, will
they reply, there can none be saved but such as follow Sermons, which commonly
are not the most, and some of them as bad, as proud, covetous, and malicious,
as any whosoever. Or, what? if none can be saved, but such as will be so pure
forsooth, and holy, as your Preachers would have the^; then God be merciful
unto us, for sure but a few of many should be saved. And then; What then? Why?
By this reckoning, you would make God not to be so strong as the Devil. Or,
how can that be true, that God would have all men saved? For, though we be
sinners, yet, did not Christ die for all? Or, Is not God merciful, yea, his
mercy above all his works? Or, may we think, that God made so many to
condemn them? Yea, and what? Predestined them of old unto it ere they were
borne? Indeed, says the Papisticall Atheist, Sir, I have heard Preachers
preach of Predestination; but me thinks, it is a very dangerous doctrine, able
to drive men to despair. Or, What? can they tell who shall be saved, and who
shall be damned? Do they know Gods secrets? When, I marvel, were they in
heaven to speak with God? Or, be not they men as well as others? And good,
many of them, no longer then whiles they are in the Pulpit? Well, we be
sinners all, God amend us; and then we shall, I doubt not, all at length come
to heaven.

I appeal herein, to the judgment of so many, as are able to discern, and
have had experience of any thing; whether these be not the questions and
reasonings, touching this main point of salvation and damnation, of many of all
sorts, no better herein then very Atheists, who believing neither God, nor his
revealed truth, would feign flatter themselves in a vain deluding hope; that,
Live how they list, and do what they please; Yet, God is merciful; and
whenever a sinner shall repent, etc. and, Christ dyed for all, and so for
them; and therefore, they doubt nothing but they shall be saved, as soon as
the best. Or, say, they be bad, yet they be not the worst in the world, there
be as bad as they; and, if the worst therefore befall them, that they do go
to hell, yet they shall have fellows, and trust to make as good shift for
themselves, as shall some others.

But, (to leave these wretches, and their humors for a while) may we not note
also another sort, not so impious, but of a more indifferent temper; who yet
through idle curiosity, are dangerously transported, from embracing the means
and way of salvation prescribed, to make question how many, or what others
shall be saved? Yes verily; but, who herein show themselves to be, what Saint
Peter would not have Christians to be, 1 Pet. 4.15.
busy bodies, or (as the word originally imports) as Bishops in another
Diocese. (...).
As yet once, the same Saint Peter may seem to have been, when our Savior,
saying to him, Follow me; Ioh. 21.19.
He replied straight upon the sight of John, Verse 21.
with, Lord, what shall this man do? Right like to whom in humor, may the
most part of men be found, more curious in enquiring what they need not,
whether, or how many others shall be saved; then faithfully careful, to do
what God requires, that themselves may attain salvation.

Nay, herein, how many are there, that agree in humor, with that Phrisian
Prince; who, when by the French men, under the government of Charles Martell,
Gual. hom. 140. in Luc. Nauel. vol. 2. Generat. 24.
about the year of Christ, 730. the Phrisians were compelled to embrace the
Christian faith, coming to be baptized, and having one foot in the water; is
recorded to have turned about to the Bishop, desiring, first, to be resolved,
whether more, already departed, were in hell, or more in heaven; but receiving
answer, that the greater number were in hell, whither all must that would not be
baptized, and become Christians, refused thereupon to receive the sacrament,
pulling his foot out of the water, and professing that he would follow where
the most were gone before.

This, you will perhaps say, was the desperate humor of an Infidel, that knew
not God: Howbeit, would God, he had not left behind him, even amongst
Christians, many his fellows, all too kind hearted good fellows in this
behalf; who, though in words they will not for shame profess so much, yet
prove by their licentious life, and wicked deeds, that they had rather with the
multitude, though wandering along to hell, then with the lesser, but far wiser
company, go straight to heaven, curiously inquiring, as here this companion,
touching the number of them that shall be saved, how great or small it is;
wishing in heart, and hoping it will be great, that so they might also shuffle
in amongst the multitude; but not caring truly to learn, or when they are
directed, obediently to follow, and walk in that path, which will, though it
be narrow, lead them unto life.

CHAP. III. The second maine part: our Saviors Answer: And first, what is
therein employed -- that, but few are to be saved.
THe bad Humors of the world mentioned, and in part met withal, being
hereafter farther to be censured; we may pass from the consideration of the
Question and proceed to the Answer, which our blessed Savior, his Fathers
wisdom, has wisely, and to better purpose framed, for direction, and
stirring up of so many, as seriously desire to enter into life: Strive to enter
in at the strait gate: for many, I say to you, will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able.

Wherein, we have two things to observe in general: First, what is implied,
viz. the resolution of the question moved, touching the number of them that
shall be saved. Secondly, what is expressed, viz. an Exhortation, or counsel,
together with a reason to enforce it, touching the manner of attaining unto
salvation.

And first, for the employed Resolution of the question; we may conceive our
Savior dealing here with this questioning companion, right, as Solomon
directs a wiseman to deal with a fool; whiles he answers him not,
according to his foolishness, that is, not directly to his question as he
expected, lest so he might seem to approve it as a question pertinent, and
embolden him to further reply: and yet, according to his foollishnesse he
answers him, that is, howsoever indirectly, yet fully to the point, that he
might not grow wise, (as such Cock-braines quickly will, if they be let alone,
unanswered) in his own conceit. For why? whiles here he gives warning, both to
him, and all the rest, to strive and struggle, Pro. 26.4.5 1 Cor 9.25 (...).
and even sweat and wrestle, as those do that try masteries: (for, from such
violence is the word here borrowed) to enter in, viz. into Heaven, by the
strait and narrow gate, as the only door to life; telling them, the more to
stir them up to care, that, Many will seek to enter, if wishing and willing
would serve, who yet for want of earnest violence shall be shut out: how does
he, not only imply an answer to the question moved, that indeed, but a few,
in comparison with the multitude, shall be saved; but also to prevent all
farther cavilling, yield withal a reason, from the straitness of the gate,
whereat therefore so many stick, why it is, that so few come to be saved.

From which resolution of the point, that which it has pleased our Savior to
reveal, we may be bold for our instruction to take notice of, touching the
counsel of Gods will in this particucular, namely, that: -- They are but few,
the lesser number of mankind, that shall enter into heaven and be saved. --
For, what in this answer Christ implies, we may see how elsewhere, he more
fully opens, making, as it were, a comment upon this Text, in Math. 7.13.14.
Enter in at the strait gate: For, it is the wide gate, and broad way, that
leads to destruction: and many there be which go in thereat: Because the gate
is strait, and the way narrow, that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it. So plainly and fully speaks our blessed Savior for resolution of
the point, that we need not, now we once have heard his voice, any farther
witnesses.

CHAP. IIII. A doubt proposed, cleared by St. Augustine, touching the many, and
yet few that shall be saved.
TO the end that none may be dismayed at the former doctrine, Ioh ^.6^.
as an hard saying, and ask as the Disciples, Who then shall be saved? Mar.
10.2^
Let us again hear the same our Savior speaking yet, of many, not a few that
shall be saved, Mat. 8.11. I tell you, that many shall come from the East and
West: (he means those of whom Isaiah before had prophesied, Isa 49 12. and
60.8.
even us sinners of the Gentiles) and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, as at a banquet, in the Kingdom of God. And if we would yet farther
understand how many: consider, how, Revel. 7.9. besides the hundred forty and
four thousand, sealed out of the tribes of Israel, John saw a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds, and people, and
toungs, standing before the Throne, and before the Lamb: clothed with long
white robes, and Palms in their hands, as ensigns of victory, ascribing to God
the glory of their salvation. And if any shall hereupon call in question, how
these contrary sayings may stand together, that so many shall be saved, and yet
but few: let us hear Saint Augustine, sweetly me thinks, Sermon. ^ 32. de
verbis Domini. Multi cert^, and pauci^ and pauci and multi. Multi societate
Ang^lorum: sed pauci comparatione multorum perd^toru^.
reconciling the difference, and clearing this doubt. They are many surely,
says he, and yet but few; and few, and yet many, that shall be saved. How
can this be conceived? thus briefly: they are many, gathered together, in
company of Angels: and yet but few, in comparison with the many wicked, of all
sorts, that perish. Will you have his similitude, very fitting to make this to
be conceived? as the wheat corns in the threshing floor are scarcely
conspicuous for the chafe which covers them, that one may see the floor,
yet not see the corn, except here and there happly a grain, where yet, when
once the corn is winnowed, and the chafe removed, there will be found a great
heap of corn, to fill full the Graynar: even so is it, says he, with the
elect that shall be saved; here, whiles they lie in this world, as in the
barne-floore, mingled with the wicked, they are so covered, that they can
scarcely be discerned, except here and there happly one or two, Aream video,
and grana quaero.
some few of many: and yet, when the winnowing day shall come, that the wicked,
as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 1.4.
shall as the chafe be scatterred with the wind, yea, Mat. 3.1^ Tanta massa de
h^^ Ecclesiae ^rea, (...) impl^a^horreum ^^eli.
as the Baptist threatened, consumed with the fire, the floor being purged; lo
then, so great an heap out of the barn floor of the Church, that it shall
fill full the Graynar of Heaven.

And even so is it, as that good Father has well resolved it. If we consider
the Church of God, and number of Gods elect, who have already entered heaven,
since the worlds first foundation, or shall hereafter, until the last day of
the dissolution; we may well say that they are many, yea, very many;
thousands, hundred thousands, millions, the election of Israel, Romans 11.2^.
the glory and fullness of the Gentiles. And yet for all this, the Doctrine of
our Savior at first delivered, and resolution of the question, still remains
firm as heaven, that a few only shall be saved. How can they be counted few,
that are in themselves so many? Surely, (as St Augustine) by comparison. For so,
as an hundred pounds, were in a poor man's purse a great sum of money, which
yet is but small, and as a matter of nothing to the Prince that has millions
in his coffers: even so, though the elect are in themselves a great company,
hardly by man to be numbered, yet are they but a small number, compared unto
the innumerable multitudes that perish; surely but an handful, or as our Sa,
viour calls them, a little Flock; or at most, Luk 12.32.
all of them both Jews and Gentiles, in respect of the other company, but as
the Army of Israel, sometimes in compare with that of Aram, like two little
flocks of Kids, whiles the Aramites filled the Country. 1 King. 20.27.


CHAP. V. The truth confirmed by testimony of the Prophets, Gods proceedings,
and our Saviors parable.
A Farther proof of the truth already cleared, will easily offer it self, if
we give ear to the complaint, and credit to the report of the more ancient
Prophets, from whom also we may learn how the Lords proportion has ever bin
the least. 1. Testimony of Prophets. Isa. 6.13.
As a Tenth, or a Tithing, scarce one for nine; so Isaiah. Nay, well if it were
always so, but scarce one of an hundred, sometimes hardly two of a thousand;
Ier. 3.14.
as in Ieremies time, one of a City, and two of a Tribe. So again in Isaiah,
Isai 17.6.
as the shaking of an Olive tree, two or three berries left in the top of the
upmost boughs, and four or five in the highest branches. Micah 7.1.
So in in Micah, as the summer gatherings, and as the grapes after the vintage,
no cluster being left to eat.

Finally, to make up a full consent of Prophets in this complaint, so also in
Amos, as the Shepherd takes out of the mouth of the Lion, Amos 3.12
two legs, or a piece of an ear: so shall the children of Israel be taken,
here and there one, violently rescued out of that common and general Apostasy.
And howsoever it be true, that we have nothing precisely to determine,
touching the proportion; yet may we to this purpose, mark that in Isaiah, as
Romans 9.27. it is applied directly to the point: Though the number of the
children of Israel were as the sand of the sea, Isai. 10 12.
yet shall but a remnant be saved. And if this be the proportion, among the
children of Israel, the visible Church, wherein are only the ordinary means
of salvation to be found: alas, what may be thought touching others scattered
thorowout the world innumerable, which have been in all ages, and still are
without the bounds or compass of the Church? that if, as Christ Jesus the
father of the Prophets, yea the truth and life it self has witnessed, and
that oftener then once, many are called, Mat 20.16 and 22.14.
but few chosen, but few of those many, that are called; then may we be bold
to avouch for truth, though delivered in the Apocryphal, (2 Eldr 8.)
that There be many created, and few that shall be saved. The most high having
made (as there it is answered) this world for many, but the world to come for
few.

To illustrate which farther, very fitting is the similitude which there is
added: As when thou ask the earth, (Verse 2.)
it will say to thee, that it gives much earthly matter, to make pots, but
little dust, that gold comes of: (Like our Mendip mines; a great deal of
lead, but a little silver, and that not without much cost and pains refined,
from the baser metal:) So is it, says he, with the work of this world.
Indeed, most true, a great deal of base metal there is, and ever has been
in the world, for a little that is of price, and yet let not us either marvel,
or murmr at it, since we know, how a few little wedges of gold, are more
worth then an hundred times their weight in sowes of lead: and surely so is one
Saint, or Son of God that shall be saved, more worth in Gods account and value,
then a world of sinners, that in their wickedness justly perish, and are
damned, that no marvel if these unions be found single by one and one, and
lie not as common peoble stones in every street.

2. Gods proceedings.
Farther, that we may not marvel that God should suffer so many in their sins
to perish, reserving only but a remnant for himself: let us remember how it
has ever been so of old. As in the old world, one Noah, and seven with him
saved in the Arc, and all besides, even the world of the ungodly (as Peter
calls them) drowned in the flood. 2 Pet. 2.5 Verse 7.
So after in ^^dome, one righteous Lot, with only his two daughters, escaping
of so many thousands, from the fire. So in Jericho, a well-peopled City, Heb.
11.31
only Rahab spared with her family. And what shall I tell you, of that (which
was but a type, not holding in all particulars?) how of six hundred thousand
men of war, of Israel, Numb. 14.30.
coming out of Egypt, two only, to wit, Caleb and Joshua, entered Canaan.
These may serve to show, that in temporal judgments, it has been mercy
with God, when many perished, only to rescue, and reserve a few, marked by
grace, for such deliverance. And right so shall it be in the world to come, a
few only saved through the riches of Gods mercy, and the other left most justly
to perish.

I will spare to open the reason of this Doctrine farther, till I come in the
more particular handling of the Exhortation, to speak of the strait and narrow
gate, whereat so many stick, and for want of striving cannot enter. 3. Our
Saviors parable.
Only to make up the confirmation of this point, that but few are saved: let
me refer your thoughts, somewhat seriously to consider that Parable by our
Savior proposed in the Gospel, Mat. 13.3. etc.
touching the four several kinds of ground receiving seed, of which, one
only brought forth fruit, fit to be gathered into the barn. Whereto if we
add, (that which palpable experience teaches us) that in the compass of the
earth, not the twentieth, no, nor yet the fortieth acre of ground, is arable
receiving seed; but here a wood, and there an heath, a bare common, or at
best, a pasture or meddow, that being neither plowed nor sown, can at the most
but bring forth grass and hay, food fit for cattle, not for reasonable
creatures; hence may our own hearts tell us, what we are to think of the
harvest of the Lord, viz. that howsoever the crop once gathered, will be great
and goodly, never such an harvest, never such a joy, yet is the Lords crop but
small in Isai. 9.3.
compare with that which grows, in the large and spacious surface of the
world.

Wherein, (to come to a suruay) it will easily appear, that of the four grand
quarters of the earth, scarce one, and that the least of the four, belongs
in several, as glebe, and arable first, how has ever the far greater part,
lieu wast, and not at all manured: but there a wilderness of Savages, or
Heathen Idolaters, that never scarce heard of God and Christ: and here an
heath, of cursed Mahometa^s, preferring their false Prophet, before Christ: and
here and there scattered, a barren waste, like Jericho, Ai, or Sechem, razed
down, and sowed with salt, Josh. 6. and 8. Iud. 9 45.
of unbelieving Jews, to this day despising and despighting Chist? Yea, and
farther, of those that would be accounted plough-ground of Jesus Christ, how
much is there that has darnell and cockle sowed, in stead of wheat and
barley, superstitious inventions of man, which cannot bring forth good fruit,
in stead of the good seed of grace, the word of truth? as in the fields of
Spain, of Italy, and other Popish countries.

And yet farther, even here, and where else, through the riches of his love and
grace, Christ Jesus, as the good sower, comes with his seed, alas, how many
that refuse to be either plowed, or sown? and that while, no marvel, if like
the sluggards field, Pro. 24.30.
they lie wast, and overgrowne with weeds and nettles, of loathsome vices;
some with whoredom, and filthy drunkenness; some with swearing, and desperate
profaneness: with pride and malice, others: and others with the world, and
wicked covetousness. Or if so any be, as pasture, or meddow ground, of a
better mould; yet whiles they receive not seed, whiles they hear not Gods
blessed Word, what fruit can it be hoped they should bring forth, better then
grass and hay at the most, of civil conversation, and moral honesty? That
lo, these several portions put apart, alas, where is the fortieth acre, (to
speak in compass) that may be accounted as tillage to the Lord, so much as
ordinary co^mers to hear Gods word, and to have cast on them the seed of Grace?

And yet, secondly, even of Man. 13.
1. whose hard and ignorant hearts give the precious seed no entrance at all,
which are no better then the high way ground? 2. Verse 19.
of those that go farther to entertain the seed, how many spring up at first,
that wither straight again in time of trial, being no better then the stony
ground? Thirdly, Verse 20.
of those that seem so to hear, understand, and practice for a while, that
they are thought to grow a pace, and promise much increase, how many that are
blasted, as in the bud, and quite choked with the world, ere they grow to
ripeness, speeding no better then the thorny ground? That there remains in
fine, Verse 22.
but a fourth (and scarcely that always) of a fortieth part, that as the good
ground receive and keep the seed, and with patience and perseverance, bring
forth fruit, good wheat, ripe and full for the harvest of the Lord. Verse 23.


So has the point by consideration of this parable also, been abundantly
confirmed, that howsoever in themselves they be a great multitude: yet in
comparison with those that perish, and are as tares reserved for burning, but
-- a few, a far less number that shall be saved, and as good corn be
gathered into the barn. So many ways are there to miscarry and go wide,
whereas, their is but one gate (as is showed after) and that very strait to
enter aright.

CHAP. VI. Contrary errors refuted, and the Objections answered.
THe Doctrine of our Savior, thus largely confirmed, affords to us all most
profitable use. For first, it makes flatly for correction and confutation, of
all Atheistical unbelieving ones (of which sort the world to this day is full;)
who, to flatter themseves in their own ungodliness, do seek to set wide open
the gate of Heaven, as if all might enter. Number. 16.3
Bearing themselves and others, what they may, in hand most madly, contrary
unto Christ Jesus his resolution, and the truth delivered, that not a few, but
all rather, or sure the greater part, at least of those that profess faith in
the name of Christ (be they Papists, Familists, Anabaptists, or of what other
sect, howsoever living, or whatsoever doing shall be saved in fine, and go to
heaven. For countenancing of which conceit, you have partly heard before, what
reasonings are brought by such cavilling spirits: from the Mercy, Power, Will,
and Justice of God, and the infinite rich Merit of the death of Christ. For Is
not, say they, God merciful; Yea his mercy over all^* Or, Is not God stronger
then the Devil? and therefore able to save all? Or, Is it not plainly
avouched by S. Peter, that he would have none to perish? And by Saint Paul,
that his will is that all men should be saved? Or, what reason or justice were
there in God the he should make so many to condemn them? Or finally* what
though all be sinners; yet, did not Christ dye for all, great sinners, as well
as less offenders? Or, Is not his blood of price, to wash away the greatest
sins, as David's murder, and adultery; and Peter's denying and forswearing, and
the like: so that men believe in him; which who so does not, is a very beast?
And sure, then there be more beasts then reasonable creatures, even amongst
them, that go for Christians in the world; since, witness the Apostle, All men
have not faith. Nay faith, if not fained but true, 2 These. 3.2.
such as can save, it is, as God does know, a special garden flower, that
grows not wild or common, (as after shall be showed) in every field.

But (to give answer briefly to such cavilling demands:) First, for the last,
drawn from the infinite worth of the Merit of Christ's death. 1 Christ's merit.
Our answer may be easy by that common School distinction; that for the
sufficiency of Christ's death, we grant, it may be said truly, that Christ dyed
for all, that is, that his death was of sufficient worth and value in it self,
had God thereto appointed it, to have saved all; and is, to save his Elect,
from all, even their greatest sins: but in the efficacy of it unto life, so
only says the apostle, Heb. 5.9 He was made an Author of eternal salvation to
all that do obey him; which all do not, nor yet believe in him aright;
whatsoever folks prate of Faith, that know not what it is. For, as the Prophet
long agone complained, Who has believed our report? Isa. 53.1.
And our Savior forewarned for the time to come, when the Son of man shall
come, Luke 18.8
shall he find faith in the earth? no more is there now; but a little true
faith to be found in the world; nor do all, nor the tenth of them believe in
Christ; who boast of faith in im, and hope of salvation by him. And even so, in
the Second place, 2^ Gods mercy.
for the question moved touching the Mercy of God: the answer is proportionable
to the former, that Gods mercy indeed is great and above all his works; Psa.
145.9
howbeit though God be infinite in mercy, as Christ is in merit, to save all
that shall be saved, only through the riches of his grace: yet shall none have
mercy unto life, but only those, who, being ordained vessels of mercy, are
fitted by repentance to receive mercy; as all are not. For so out of Moses, you
know how the apostle argues, Romans 9.15. Exo. 33.19
I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. And verse 23. That he might
declare the riches of his glory, upon the vessels of mercy, which he has
prepared unto glory. Otherwise as God is merciful, to whom mercy belongs, so
is he a just God no less, toward them, Deuteronomy. 7.9.10
to whom justice appertains: neither must we so dream of his mercy, as to
forget his justice; since his song is with David, Psalm 101.1.
Mercy and Judgment, not one, but both rightly disposed.

Thirdly, for that mentioned touching the Power of God, 3 Gods power.
that he is stronger then the Devil: our answer is, that we must not reason
from Gods power to cross his will, neither will it follow, that because he is
able to save all, therefore all, or the greater number shall be saved; since
he has plainly revealed his will unto the contrary. For Fourthly, 4 Gods
will.
for those places alleged to prove his Will of saving all: it is certain
they are misapplied, whiles brought to contradict the truth before confirmed;
against which in the true sense, coming from the same Spirit of truth, they
cannot make. Neither indeed does S. Peter speak in the place alleged, 2 Pet
3.9.
of ought save of the proceeding of his revealed will, which offers with
patience salvation unto al, that will be willing, on the condition of
repentance required, to receive it. For so are his words, and would have none
to perish, but all to come unto repentance, that so they might be saved. As all
shall indeed, that will accept the condition and repent. And for that in Saint
Paul, 1. Tim. 2.4
though we take it to be spoken, (as the schools also distinguish) touching
his absolute will: yet do the circumstances of the Text show plainly, De ger
eribus singulorum, non de singu^is generum: inullum genus hominum excipit a
salute, quia olim tantum Iudaeis, sed modo omnibus pa^et. Et hoc magis facit ad
intentionem Apostoli. Tho. Aquin 1 Timothy 2
how it is to be understood: viz. of all sorts and degrees of mankind, not of
the Particulars of every sort. For so is Gods will, to have all saved: that is,
some of all ages, young and old: of both sexes, men and women: of all
conditions, rich and poor: of all nations, Jews and Gentiles: finally of all
callings, from the King that sits upon the throne, (for whom, though then
heathen, The Apostle there requires the Christians to pray, bringing this as a
reason to persuade thereto) to the maid that grindeth at the mill: but we
cannot say that it is simply his will, to have every man and woman saved; for
then what could hinder, but al should be saved? whereas we may mark, even in
the very place alleged, how this general is bounded with a condition not to
be found in all, of coming to the acknowledging of the truth.

Fifthly and finally, 5. Gods justice.
for that complaint made against the justice of God, that they cannot see how
it can stand with reason or equity, that God should make so many to condemn
them: hereto I answer: First, that God out of his own inclination, does
neither cause nor desire the sin or the condemnation of his Creature. For he
made man righteous* but they have sought many inventions, Eccl. 7.31.
as Solomon speaks; and as God has not made death, neither has be pleasure
in the destruction of the living, Will. 1.13. Ezekiel. 18.32. and 33.11
for he created all things, that they might have their being. But man by the
first fall, and his sin against God, made himself and his posterity liable
to condemnation. And if God should now appoint man to that judgment, which he
has deserved, if any should farther presume to reply, we might stop such
presumptuous mouths, with that of the Apostle, Romans 9.20. O man, who art thou
which pleadest against God? for, shall the thing formed, Isa 45.9.
say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? or, has not the Potter
power of the clay? etc. And secondly, this farther I say with Solomon, Pro. 16
that The Lord has made all things for his own sake, that is, for the praise
of his own glory: even the wicked for the day of evil; Romans 9.21.
and with the Apostle, What and if God would, to show his wrath, and to make
his power known, suffer with long patience, the vessels of wrath, prepared to
destruction? Howbeit though their making and preparation be from God, yet
according to the phrase in Hosea, Hos. 13.^
their destruction is their own, and their damnation most justly merited by
themselves; as will appear most clear, before ^l the world, in the last day
if not sooner, when not only the heavens shall declare their wickedness, and
the earth and all the creatures, Job 20.27.
shall rise up against them: but also their own guilty conscience, shall be
forced in horror to acknowledge without impeachment, the justice of the Lord,
in seeking his own glory, by the just condemnation of so many Reprobates, it
being the riches of his mercy to save, though a lesser number; when as all in
justice have deserved death. And therefore thirdly, for close of all, what,
though our blind eye of carnal reason could not for the present discern
sufficiently of Gods justice, in this behalf? no more are we able to conceive
the causes of far inferior matters, as (for instance) of the ebbing and
flowing of the sea, except only by conjecture. And how much less then are we
able to understand Gods fearful power, or to comprehend his judgments, which
are as a great deep, Psalm. 36.6.
hard to be sounded to the bottom, with the plummet of our reason, specially
in this particular, touching which you know how the Apostle cries out by way
of admiration: Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways
past finding out! Howbeit, this we may resolve, that howsoever the reasons of
them be now hid from us, yet are they known to his eternal wisdom, and
therein reserved to be revealed as most just, before all the world, at the
glorious appearing of the Lord Jesus: who, as the Sun of righteousness, will
then lighten all things, 1. Cor. 4.5
that are now hid in darkness.

CHAP. VII. That men ought to endeavor to be of the lesser number, and not to
follow multitudes.
THe truth of the Doctrine formerly delivered, and now cleared, and freed from
those cavils and objections that might be raised against it, may serve to us in
the next place, briefly, for instruction: to settle and confirm us in the
faith and persuasion of this secret of God, by Christ himself so plainly
revealed, that but a few shall be saved. And let us be withal persuaded of the
reason, why our Savior has vouchsafed to reveal this secret to us. Surely,
not to drive any to despair, or to work in them distrust, as if they might
not come to be saved, except the fault be in themselves: but rather to stir
all up to prayer and watchfulness, To work out their salvation with fear and
trembling; Phil 2.12. Solliciti de medijs, non dubij de fine.
not doubtful of the end, but careful of the means, bringing to that end.
Since the fewer that we hear like to partake true happiness, the more earnest
should be our endeavor to come to be of that smaller number; not securing our
selves (as the manner of some is) as if heaven should be cast on us, or as if
all the world should be saved: no, for the blessing of life eternal, though it
be great, yet have we learned, that it is not general, nor shall all, no, nor
the greatest part, nor yet, if we will believe The'apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26. the
noblest or wealthiest part generally enjoy it.

Wherefore, howsoever Papists stand much on multitudes, and carnal wretches
(not caring what they do) bear themselves out in this, that they do but what
they see others, yea, the most, to do before them: yet let this serve to
persuade us to a safer course, viz. as The Apostle wishes, not to fashion our
selves after the world; Romans 12.2.
neither ever to suffer our selves to be drawn, to do ought, for company,
which is not warrantable. For, what though most in their common use of speech,
inure their tongues to take in vain the name of God? and but few that (as the
opposition is in Solomon) fear an oath? What? though the greatest number
remain in sottish ignorance, Eccl. 9.2.
having the preaching of the Word in no esteem, because they never felt the
power thereof? And but a few in comparison, that either love or care much to
listen after saving knowledge, in attending unto the means by God thereto
appointed? What though most do reckon of the Sabbath, only as a day of rest
for carnal delight? And but a few of many, that, as God in the Prophet
counsels, Isa. 58.13.
do consecrate it, as glorious unto the Lord? that many neglect Gods worship,
and speak evil of the truth? And but few that have a right respect, and love
thereto? In brief, what though all seek their own? Being from the least unto
the greatest given unto covetousness? Phil. 2.21.
that many, assemble themselves by troops, Ier. 5.7.
in Harlots houses? or otherwise join together, as those good-fellowes, Prove.
1. to do wickedly? Oh yet, (as there ver. 10. the wise man counsels) My
son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not: so let not us be swaied, if we
love our souls, by such good fellowship. No, for let us remember this rather
which we have learned, that the greater number are travelers in the broad
road way to hell; and therefore howsoever company be good in travel, (if so it
be good company) yet safer for us to hearken to that counsel, or command
rather of God himself, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude: (...).
Potentioru^. Trem.
no not of great ones (as the original word will bear, and is by some
rendered) to do evil.

Rather let it be for bruit beasts, without farther consideration, to follow
the herd, as soon to the shambles as to the pasture: but for us to who^ God
has given reason to consider, yea, taught faith and Religion to believe; and
who would be accounted in the number of the righteous, let us remember that
sweet counsel of Saint Augustine, In Psalm. 39. Haec paucos, illac multos. Si
iustus esse velis, noli numerare, sed appende via lata mortifera est.
when we see many going one way, and few another: Yet, not to take things by
tale, or number, but try them by weight, And since the broad way is so
dangerous, Turbae strepunt, turbae festi^ant etc. no^i imitari, noli averti.
or rather deadly; wherein (says he) the multitudes in troops run after
vanities, and lying follies: but do not thou run after them: (Where by the
way, I wish it may be noted, how he instanceth in Theater plays, and other
idle and ungodly spectacles, then which scarcely any thing can be found more
pleasing to the corrupt minds of the carnal multitudes.) Let us never imagine
that we are privileged to do ought, because we see others so to do. For let us
remember that in the Psalm: The transgressors shall be destroyed together;
Psalm. 37.38
this is all that is gotten by having company in sinning, so also to be
accompanied in perishing. And therefore how far safer for us, to leave
reckoning what others do, wisely betaking our selves to whatsoever God
prescribes us to do? And if at any time, we begin to muse, as Peter, Ioh.
21.21.
touching John, what? or how such or such will do? Let us think straight how
the check of our Savior, unto Peter, is no less for us; verse 22.
For, What is that to us? when we are directly enjoined to follow Christ. And
hereupon, what must be our resolution? but that of Joshua, that whatsoever
others make choice to do, Josh. 24.15
yet we and ours will serve the Lord, so as he requires, of them that will be
saved. Which since the fewer sort do in good earnest, even of those that say
they are Christians (amongst whom, many like those Jews in Smyrna, only say
so, and are not: having at most, Reu. 2.9.
as Sardis, a name to live when they be dead) therefore let our care be, Reu.
3.1.
to live as the fewer do, that with the fewer we may enter into heaven. And
this is our next use of the doctrine before delivered, for admonition.

CHAP. VIII. Comfort to Gods faitfull Ministers, in regard of their
unsuccessefull labors.
THe last and largest application yet remains, to show, namely, how this
doctrine, touching the small number to be saved; (which may at first sight
happly seem full of fear, and is indeed, I grant, a point of terror to
wicked worldlings, who therefore of al other points can hardliest brook it)
affords abundant comfort, and even the riches of consolation: first, to Gods
faithful Ministers: and secondly, to all true believers.

For, first, for us who are set apart for this special service, this great
work of winning souls; if happily at any time we find discouragement,
laboring all in vain, and as for nothing without success; Isai. 49.4.
that after much pains taken in sowing of the fairest seed, there appears so
little green above ground, giving hope of harvest; iniquity and infidelity
still overflowing for all our preaching, and but a few who yield sincere
obedience, being won by the working power of the word, to the truth of faith:
yet for all this so we be found faithful, 1. cor. 4.2
in our service we need not faint; but consider how it has so ever fared, and
no better, with those that were the most faithful preachers of righteousness
in all ages. As with Noah, in whom S. Peter tells us, how Christ went and
preached to the old world, 1. Pet. 3.19
full six score years; with how little profit? and with Lot, who in Sodom
vexed his righteous soul, 2. Pet. 2.8.
to win the rest to goodness, without success. As with Isaiah, Isai. 49.4.
and 53.1.
whose complaints in this behalf are upon record. Yea, with our Savior, who
by all his painful travel, got but, as himself does term them, a little
flock; Luc. 12.32
and they not Scribes and Pharisees, not Herod* Pilat, or such great ones, but
of the meaner sort; for, do any of the Rulers believe in him? Ioh. 7 48. Ioh.
19.38, 39.
surely (except one Nicodemus, or one rich Joseph; who yet are sore afraid a
great while to confess him) hardly any. A reason of which hard success for
comfort to us, if happily we find the like or worse, in this last and worst age
of the world, is yielded in the doctrine before delivered; because namely,
there are but a few of many, the lesser number, that shall be saved; that we
need not to let fall our courage, if we see not wished for success always in
the most or many.

No, but rather how may this consideration serve to cheer up our spirits, and
make us to account it, as well we may, a special gift, out of the undeserved
riches of Gods grace: shall God vouchsafe to deal so graciously with us (who
are at best, but servants receiving nothing but what is given us, Ioh 3.27.
) as to make his word put in our mouths, to become powerful by his Spirit,
for any of his childrens good; that any though but some few of many, some one
of twenty, or two of an hundred, or ten of a thousand, sincerely embrace our
Ministry, and come to believe our report, being brought to yield obedience
unto Christ, as heirs of life. For surely, if so God please to honor us,
howsoever his alone and only must be the glory, who is alone the father of
the spirits, Heb. 12.9.
able only to give grace by whatsoever instrument: yet may this comfort and
encourage us, to go forward without fainting, in this so weighty business;
like the painful Husbandman in the Morning, Eccl. 11.6.
as Solomon counsels in another case, sowing the seed; and at Evening not
letting our hand to rest; as not knowing which shall prosper by Gods blessing,
which only can give the increase. Being instant, as Saint Paul so straightly
charge Timothy, 1. Cor. 3.7 2. Tim. 4.2
in season and out of season; as himself professes, Acts 20. how he had
labored in Asia, publicly, Verse. 20.
and more privately, with all of all sorts, to win them unto Christ.

And then, as it is recorded, Act, 17, to have befallen the same Apostle at
Athens, when he preached to them of the Resurrection; Ve^se 32.
that some mocked and others marvailed, howbeit, as ver. 34. certain clave
unto him and believed: amongst whom was also Denis the Judge of Areopagus (or
Mars-street) and a woman named Damaris and others with them* so may we hope to
find, that howsoever at our preaching, some shall mock, and others marvel,
or at the most applaud, and say Well done, etc. and there an end: yet some by
Gods mercy will cling and cleave, believing and being vvon to Christ; a Damaris
perhaps at one Sermon, and Judge Denis at another; that howsoever not all, nor
yet the mayor part be gathered, yet sooner or later the elect shall; so many,
at one time or another, (as it was said of the Gentiles at Antiochia, Act.
1^.48.) as are ordained to eternal life. Yea, for howsoever, as those who
flocked to see wonders, Act. 2. they be ready in the beginning of the sermon,
to scoff and mock, Ver. 13.
or, at least, in their heart to contemn the Preacher: but yet what know we,
but they may be caught upon the hook, if God shall bring them once to nibble at
the bait: as even those were many, so pricked at the very heart, by Peter's
powerful preaching, that their cry was as you know there, ver. 37. Men and
brethren what shall we do? their meaning was, what the trembling Jailer. Act.
16. Ver. 30.
more fully spoke, being awaked by a wonder, to ask a far wiser question then
the fellow in our Text) what they should do that they might be saved? to whom,
being so humbled once, when Peter had given counsel to amend their lives, Act.
1.38
and with all, applied, the comfort of the promise, to revive their souls,
telling them that the promise of life was made to them: you know what is added,
verse 41. How namely, about three thousand souls, in that one day were added
to the Church.

By means like to which, as it is said after in the conclusion of that
Chapter, that God did them; so still will he add to the Church from day to day
such as shall be saved; verse 47.
Saint Peter's net cast out, being able to catch at once a multitude, when
Christ Jesus shall come, (Luc. 5.^)
(as once we read he did) to help the fishing, within the cords of which net,
howsoever we may not hope to compass all that swimmeth in the sea, and
happily of those which we draw to land, some prove but sorry ones, not worthy
keeping, (as in that Parable of the draw-net is observed) yet let this be our
comfort that we catch some good to put as into vessels for service of the Lord:
and for the rest, Mar. 13.48
let us remember that, wherewith Isaiah in like labor comforted himself;
namely, that our judgment is with the Lord, Isa 49.4.
and our work is with our Gods and though Israel be not gathered, verse 5.
yet shall we be glorious in the Lords eyes, and our God shall be our strength.
For why? 2. Cor. 2.15. We are unto God the sweet savor of Christ, in whom? in
them that are saved? indeed in them chiefly; yet not only in them, but, in
them also that perish. Will ye have told how the Apostle opens it? To the one
we are the savor of death unto death, viz. to seal up their condemnation;
while we preach Christ a Judge, 2 These. 2.8.
coming in flaming fire to render vengeance, to all that shall contemn to know
or follow him: but to the other; we are the savor of life unto life, to assure
their souls of eternal life; whiles we preach Christ a most merciful Savior,
to all that shall believe; When as he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
2 These. 1.10.
and to be made marvailous, for mercy (though not simply in all, not the most,
yet) in all that believe in him; because our testimony has been believed by
them. So may this serve to comfort Gods faithful Ministers.

CHAP. IX. What thankful rejoicing they ought to have in God, that are freely
chosen to be of the lesser number.
IN the second place, To. 1.6.26.
to all true believers, called and converted to the obedience of faith; may
this point touching the few that shall shall be saved, yield comfort in
abundance, and great encouragement. First, Comfort, in the free and gracious
rich mercy of the Lord, who has vouchsafed merely through his eye of love cast
on them, to separate them from the many of the world, and to mark them for his
own: making them through faith to become what Zacheus was, when upon his sound
repentance, Luke 19.9. Gal. 3.3.
salvation came into his house, even Children, and so blessed with faithful
Abraham. To every one of whom how can this consideration possibly but add an
increase of joy; that whereas it has pleased God in the unsearchable depth of
his eternal wisdom, to choose out and reserve unto himself, only a few, a
remnant, for the glory of his grace: it has also pleased him, in the free and
unconceiveable riches of that his grace, to vouchsafe to make them some of that
small remnant which shall be saved.

Assurance whereof whosoever thou be that can find unto thy soul, let me
beseech thee to consider seriously, only to increase thy joy and
thankfulness; whether God might not have left thee justly, as he has many
round about thee, to walk (as once thou did assuredly, though perhaps thou
then did not take notice of it, which was indeed thy greatest misery) in the
broad way, wherein so many walk unwisely, toward destruction. Or, tell me if
thou can, what did God see in thee, more then in any other, that might move
him to cast his love, on thee, more then on many an other? perhaps, richer, or
it may be more noble; or more learned, or more mighty, witty, strong, or better
favored: for, do but remember the times of old, and call to mind, the days
and months, and years, which are already passed; and tell me in good earnest,
or rather tell to God with rejoicing thankfulness; wast thou not as ignorant,
as the most ignorant, til he instructed thee? as blind as the blindest, till
he enlightened thee? as dissolute, perhaps, and disorderly, as the most of thy
state and standing, till God himself took in hand to order and reclaim thee?
say man, wast thou not once a Saul, till God struck thee down, to make thee
turn to him that smote thee, and so to become a Paul? wast thou not, perhaps,
a lover of pleasures, or of profit, or of praises, more then of God? or wast
thou not once perhaps a contemner of the holy Word and worship of God, a
blasphemer, and tearer in pieces with thy tongue, set on fire by hell, of the
sacred and holy name of God? or a prophaner, (contrary to Gods moral precept
still in power,) of the holy Sabbath of God? (of which, how truly spoke he,
that spoke worthily, in a great assembly, and since has written it: D. Denison
at the Act in Oxford. on Neh. 13.22.
that Where the Sabbath is not sanctified, there is neither sound Religion, nor
a Christian conversation to be-expected.) Or for the second Table; wast thou
not, perhaps, rebellious in times past, and disobedient, if not an
heartbreaking to thy tender parents? or it may be a scorner and derider of
Gods Ministers; or have thou not been (to hasten in the rest) of a malicious,
revengefull, stout, and perhaps stabbing stomach? or not, it may be, of a
filthy, and unclean, a drunken and defiled conversation? or has not thy heart
and hand dealt unjustly, and even theevishly with others? or perhaps, which was
a greater fault, with thy parent? or thy Master? or thy dead friend, that left
thee his Executor? or any else who trusted thee? if not (by thy riotous and
wastfull spending also) happly with thy self? or what finally, can thou not
remember the time, when (alas,) thou made no conscience at all, for either
thine own commodity, ^or others sinful profit, (which seldom prospers) to
let thy tongue tell many a lie, if not sometimes confirmed with very oaths;
not fearing that dreadful doom of ecxlusion, Rev. 22.15 and 21.8.
and casting into the Lake, denounced against all that love, or make lies? In a
word, (to leave every one to examine themselves in what manner) do thou not
think that there be many in hell, now damned, and so shall be for ever, that
never committed so many fearful sins, of what sort soever as thou have done?

And, if thus happly upon inquiry, thou can find thy former estate to have
been, before God by his Word and Spirit pulled thee out of the fire; how there
was in thee at all, no manner of sound goodness, no love unto Gods Word, nor
reverence of his Name, nor conscience of his Sabbaths, nor care to keep any of
his righteous laws: Oh then; urge I this to drive thee to despair? no, dear
Christian, but to make thee rather to stand astonished, with thankful
admiration, at the rich, gracious, and free mercy of thy God; who (as he told
Moses,) showing mercy, and having compassion on whom he will, Exodus 33.19. Mat.
11.16.
has of his own good pleasure, without farther reason that can be given,
reserved thee for grace, marking thee as with his own sheepe-brand, for one of
his little flock; who though small, yet need not to fear, since his pleasure
is (as Christ himself has promised) to give them the Kingdom. Luke 12.32.


CHAP. X. Four special notes for the trial of our right in that estate.
IN the soundness of this rejoicing joy, that they may be the more confirmed,
if any shall desire to have those notes or marks assigned, whereby they may
come to know themselves, to be undoubtedly of that lesser flock: behold, for
trial, four only amongst many, as I conceive, most especial ones; which
therefore I will make choice of, briefly to commend unto our use.

The First, whereof is new, that is renewed, hearts: not new tongues only to
speak, not new faces only to look, nor new hands only to work, otherwise
then before; (for all these, though good signs of the renewing of the heart,
yet may be found, where the heart remains old, 2 Cor. 5.17. 1 Cor 6.11
in very Hypocrites) but new hearts, which are never found but in new converted
Crhistians whose sins are washed away, by the blood of Christ, who shall be
saved.

For so in the new covenant, Ezekiel. 36. on whom God promises to power clean
water, that they may be cleansed from sin; I will power clean water upon you,
and ye shall be clean: verse 25.
to them does he promise also a new heart and spirit, that they may be wholly
renewed with grace; verse 26.
a new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and
what a new heart he means, he opens farther in the words following, I
will take away the stony heart out of your body (i.) the stony hardness which
was in your heart before, Non carnale sed carneum cor.
and I will give you a heart of flesh; he means not a fleshly, but a fleshy,
that is, a soft and tender heart; to tremble at Gods judgments, and believe
his promises, and obey his Commandments, so as before they did not. Indeed so
it shall be, when one is truly converted unto God, he shall find in him for
spiritual matters, what in regard of managing civil affairs, is said, 1 Samuel
10. that God gave Saul, Verse 9.
when he was turned from Samuel, even another heart: Surely, another mind,
another will, otherwise disposed affections, then before. That what before he
liked and loved, those exercises, tha^ company, those courses, sinful, wicked,
and profane; those now contrarily, he finds his soul to abhor and loath:
and on the other side, what before he cared not for, he could not abide, he
esteemed not of; that now, those exercises, that company, those courses, Gods
Word and Sabbaths, and Ministers, and people, and their holy practices, be they
wherein his soul and spirit, chiefly delights. And whosoeever can find thus
in him a new or an other heart, it is as Gods privy seal set upon his soul,
that his soul is one of these few, that shall be saved. Of which seal, when
David by his fall and folly, had even defaced the stamp, he prayed so, to
have it again renewed upon him, in that Psalm. 51.10. Create in me O God, a
clean heart, and renew within me a right, or settled spirit. So is this the
first, and evermore a sure note of salvation, a new heart.

second, let us observe whether we keep aright, an old remembrance: I mean,
remembrance of what has passed of old, our former ways and works that were
not good; how? but with a kind of shame and detestation of them, Romans 6.21.
and even judging of our own selves for them, as worthy of wrath. For so is
this given for a note of a right in Christ to life, to judge our selves in our
selves deserving death; as in Ezekiel. 36.31. Then, when (as before) God has
powered clean water on them, and given them new hearts, shall you remember your
own wicked ways and your deeds that were not good: and shall judge your
selves worthy to have been destroyed, for your iniquities and abominations.
Till when, that men come to see and judge themselves worthy to be destroyed,
they can never come to assurance that in Christ Jesus, they shall be saved.

For, first, as in Zach. 12. Verse 10.
they must weep over Christ, whom they have pier-ced; ere they may hope to
find, what is after promised, Zach. 13.1.
the fountain opened, by whose waters they may be cleansed. And therefore
prayed holy David, Psalm. 51. Have mercy O God on me, after thy loving
kindness, etc. for in ver. 3. I know mine iniquities, and my sins, that is,
the bitter remembrance thereof, is ever before me. So must we with humbled
hearts remember our former sins, if we would have God to forget them; since
this remembrance will be a means to break our hearts, and to keep us, as it
did S. Paul, still humble, 1 Cor. 15.10. Iam. 4.6.
and so capable of saving grace. This therefore is a second note.

thirdly, will we have as it were Gods broad seal set upon us, that others
also may see and perceive that we are his servants, who shall be saved? Then
see, Psalm. 101.2 119.59.60.
as what present care we have for reformation of our own lives: so what
zeal withal; to turn and draw others unto God, who, as our selves of old, or
perhaps with us, have gone astray. For so in Ezech. 18.30. return, viz. your
selves; but is that enough? No, but (which will follow upon the former) and
cause others to turn away from all your transgressions: wherein they joined,
perhaps formerly with you, and you with the^, each provoking the other, and so
iniquity shall not be your destruction. In which regard, let us think it said
to every one of us, what was once to Jeremy, Ier. 15.19. If thou return, then
will I bring thee again, and thou shall stand before me: and if thou take away
the precious from the vile, that is, seek to win the good from the bad, thou
shall be according to my Word; whereupon also, let us mark the counsel
following, let them return to thee, that is, seek, if thou can, by all
means to win them unto God, (for this is a property ever of one truly
penitent, what David therefore promised in Psa. 51. verse. 13.
when once himself was reconciled unto God, and which was by our blessed
Savior enjoined Peter,) but howsoever, if thou can not, yet this beware of,
do not thou return to them, to become as in former times, perchance, a
companion in evil. No, but if we cannot amend them, rather let us mourn for
them, and this also shall be as that mark of life in Ezekiel. set upon us, Ezekiel.
9 4.
that when all else shall be destroyed, our souls shall be spared. This
therefore is a third mark, Zeal to turn other sinners unto God, as our
selves are turned.

Fourthly, and finally, we love we bear unto the Saints of God; our love
toward such as are the heyrs of Heaven, being that which may afford us sure
hope of heaven. Witness that of S. John, 1 Ioh. 3.14. We know that we are
translated from death to life, because we love the brethren, that is; Gods
children anew begotten of him, as our selves, to a lively hope. For why? this
love to them, who are brethren, it is that, which can only prove true, our
love to God our father; by the same Apostles rule, elsvvhere delivered, (which
holds also, 1 Ioh. ^.1.
being inverted) every one that loves him which begat, loves him also which
is begotten of him. Now if we love God, it is surely, because he loved us
first; 1 Ioh. 4.10
of whom if once we believed, is as certain, we shall be saved by his grace;
since his love is, as in Jeremy he speaks, Iere 31 ^.
an everlasting love: making him to love, whom as his own he loves, Ioh.
1^.1. Psalm. 36.3 119.63.
ever unto the end. So is this also a mark of life, with David, to delight
in, and love the Saints.

CHAP. XI. No disheartening to such from the worlds maligning, or their old
friends forsaking.
NOw by these forementioned marks (not to reckon any more) shall any find
themselves to be in truth of the fold, and flock, though little, of Jesus
Christ; howsoever it cannot be, but that the world should hate them, and the
greater multitudes malign and stomach them; Oh yet, since Christ Jesus has
foretold hereof, and bidden us not to marvel; Ioh. 15.19
let not this hard usage of the world discourage the^, rather let this
instruction touching the few that shall be saved, serve, as for comfort; so
(which was the last branch of this use) to yield encouragement: that hereat
they be not dismayed, if the rabble, which before did seem to fawn upon, and
follow them, whiles they followed sin, do now forsake and frown, or, perhaps,
grow furious and mad against them.

What marvel? for it is not enough to make them grow even mad, and besides
themselves, to see (as in that tale of the young man, and his old acquaintance
which Saint Ambrose mentions) an old friend shake hands quite, Sed ego non
sum ego. Lib. 2. de poenit. cap. 10.
and bid farewell to al their fellowship? Wherein, says S. Peter, it seems
to them strange, 1 Pet. 4.4.
that ye run not with them into the same excess of riot; and therefore
speak they evil of you, but who shall be the worse for it, but themselves?
For so he adds; Verse 5.
Who shall give an account, to him that is ready to judge quick and dead.

Wherefore, far be this from discouraging thine heart, that thine old
friends and companions do forsake thee, when thou set thy self after that
which is good. For why? it is, because thou first have left the world, that
thou may win one worth ten thousand worlds, even Christ Jesus to be thy
friend; whom whilst thou followest as thy guide, thou need not to complain
for want of company, though thou should travel solitary, and all alone
toward heaven in an untroden path. Howbeit if it be in good earnest thou will
follow Christ, thou shall not walk alone in the way to life: there be others
many that have gone in that narrow path, Heb. 12.1.
and some, though not the most, yet by far the best companions; that will
foot it with thee. In a word, if thou will be a Saint of God, a godly
Christian, laboring to lead an holy and blameless life, striving against
sin: assuredly all the Saints of God will love and reckon of thee, Psalm.
118.74. and 15.4.
(as in the Psalm it is noted to be both their practice and their property;
rejoicing in their hearts to do thee good; yea they on earth vvil give thanks
to God for thee, Gal. 1.23.24.
who shall come to hear of thy change, though they never savv thee.

Besides which joy on earth, conceive thou may from those Parables in S.
Luke, Luke 15.
what joy also will be in heaven, not only amongst the Angels, to see the
lost sheep found again: but with God thy father also, ver. 6.
who, howsoever thine elder brother may seem to stomach it, has both robe,
and ring, with a kiss and the fatted calfe, to receive and entertain thee
his son, who wast dead, but art alive again, ver. 24.30.
and being so once revived, shall live for ever. So, that now what remains,
to make up this feast of joy, but that thou also rejoice as did Zacheus to
receive thy Savior: Luc. 19.6.
yea that already thou have received him into thine heart, by faith, and true
repentance, and vowed obedience, wherein thy purpose is to persevere with
patience; he giving thee strength to walk in the narrovv way, who has
vouchsafed thee grace to enter in at that strait gate; Whereat for want of
striving, whiles so many stick, we may conceive the reason, why so fevv are
to be saved: plainly yielded by our Savior in this holy Exhortation, farther
therefore to be opened: Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for many, I
say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

CHAP. XII. The second maine point in our Saviors answer chiefly intended,
and at the full expressed: that 1. it is no easy matter to attain salvation.
HItherto of that which is implied in our Saviors answer, viz. his resolving
the question touching the number; now of that which is expressed and mainly
intended concerning the manner of attaining salvation, laid down by way of
counsel, with a reason annexed, drawn from the danger of such as shall
neglect it.

The meaning whereof will be most evident and plain, if we shall but remember
how elsewhere Heaven is set forth (for our conceiving) as a Kingdom: Or, as
in Saint John, Mat. 25.34 Reave. 21.2.
a glorious City; inro which to enter, is all one as to be saved. For hereupon
may we straight conceive, how this reply was by our Savior in most
admirable wisdom fitted, as for correction to him that moved the question
touching the number, whether fevv should be saved: so for instruction
vvithall, unto us all about the manner, now we might come to be of that
number. As if in more words he had answered him, (right as to Saint Peter, Ioh
21.22.
in the case also before mentioned, not much unlike to this;) What is that to
thee? or indeed to any present, whether few or many shall be saved? whose care
should be rather, and would be even of you all, were you truly wise, to seek
to find your selves, among the number that shall be saved. In which
weightiest business, that you may not deceive your selves, as many do very
foully, whiles they imagine it a matter of no great labor; but obvious and
very easy, to attain salvation: Let my counsel be acceptable unto you, which
if you entertain, will assuredly prove most profitable: Strive ye, I say not
that you should only wish, (...).
or barely enquire after, and seek; but strive, as those that prove masteries,
or who thrust against a door with an earnest violence, to enter in: I mean,
where only is salvation to be found, into the holy City, the new Jerusalem,
Heavens Kingdom. To gain entrance wherinto, that ye may not marvel, why I
should counsel you to use such violence: I add for your direction (which may
withal yield the reason of the necessity of that my counsel) that it must be,
if at all, at the strait gate. Which because it is but one, and that a strait
and narrow one, letting into life, your selves may conceive good reason of mine
advice, for setting the shoulder in good earnest thereunto, and striving with
eager earnestness to get thorough. To stir you up the more whereto, this let
me be bold to tell you, and take it you may upon my word; for, I say unto you,
who speak not to deceive you; that Many shall seek to enter in, if only that
would serve: who yet because they do nor strive, as I do counsel you, shall
not be able.

From which counsel of our Savior, thus plainly unwrapped, (to reserve the
reason, brought to press it only in the application to be urged) the general
note of instruction, wherewith we will content our selves, as by our Savior
mainly aimed at, is this, most worthy by us to be remembered, that namely -- It
is no easy matter, but difficult, and of great labor, to enter into life
eternal. For thereto this our Saviors counsel tends, in love unto our
souls, to advise us to strive as Wrestler:, from whose violence (as before was
noted) the 1 Cor 9.25. (...)
word is borrowed, with an eager earnestness, that we may enter in. The
necessity of which contention required, is implied in the direction given,
touching the condition of the entrance or gate assigned; because (which is the
maine reason, for confirmation of the doctrine thence collected, and which in
Math. 7.14. is by the same mouth of our blessed Savior expressed more fully,)
the gate is strait for entrance, and the way for the vvalking, when once we
be entered, narrow that leads unto life; and therefore but few that find it.
And yet fewer that pass through it, because they strive not.

CHAP. XIII. The ground of that difficulty, with the resolving of a doubt, how
Christ being the gate and way, can be said to be strait.
NOw for farther direction if it be demanded, what this strait gate is,
through which alone we may hope by striving to enter heaven: let us consider
how in Matthew, (where by our Savior it is also termed a way: Mat 7.4.
) It is noted forth unto us, that we may come to know it, as by the property,
that it is a strait gate, a narrow way leading to life: so also by the adiunct
of company therein travailing, but few that find it. Which farther we may
mark, Verse 13.
how it is set forth there, and illustrated by the opposite, in like manner
also described, first by the condition; for, It is the wide gate, and broad way
leading to destruction: and then by the company, viz. whole multitudes that go
in at it. That who so have any eyes to see and discern, between strait and
wide, or broad and narrow; between a great road way and wide gate where
through many pass in troops, and a little narrow wicket, and winding foot
path, wherein but few do walk, may easily more then guess, which is the gate
and way of life that brings to heaven, No doubt, the way to climb up that
hill top, which the Psalmist mentions and calls holy, Psalm. 15.1. Isai.
35.8.
as therefore also must needs be the way unto it, will appear to be like that
by which Jonathan and his Armor-bearer went up upon their hands and feet
between two sharp rocks; ^ ^am 14.1^.
a way that few, in comparison, Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, two of an
army, are either so wise as to find, or so valorous and industrious, as to
venture up.

Touching which (...) or gate, a doubt here may be moved: how it can be
verified to be strait and narrow; since Christ Jesus has borne witness of
himself, that he is the door. Ioh. 10. and he the way, the truth and life,
ver. 9.
that is, the only way, by truth, leading unto life, Verse 6.
Ioh. 14. who cannot be said to be a strait gate, or a narrow way, now
especially, since by his coming and suffering in the flesh* the partition wall
is brok^^ down, Ephesians. 2.24.
and an entrance made thorough him unto the Father, even for us Gentiles also,
Verse 18.
who were once far off That from every quarter of the earth, a path and
passage is opened to heaven; yea as John saw in his vision, Reu. 21.12
not one but twelve gates, three on every side, verse 25.
of the holy City, the new Jerusalem; always standing open to receive the
glory and honor of the Gentiles brought thereto: even the many mentioned in
Matthew, Mat. 8.11.
to come from East and West: and (besides so many thousand sealed Jews) that
innumerable multitude, which Rev. 7. John saw in their robes, Verse 9.
and with their palms standing before the throne. By all which what may seem
to be gathered? but that, whether we respect the condition of the way, or
Company; the gate, or goers in: the path, or passengers: the gate and way to
life is not strait and narrow, nor yet only one; but rather that heaven has
many gates, and they always wide and open, for all, or sure for many to enter
in.

Howbeit for all this, or whatsoever more can be urged, what here, and in
Matthew, our Savior has avouched, that still must we cleave unto, as the
very truth: that certainly, this gate and way leading to life, is strait and
narrow: and which therefore but few do find. For why? as that part of the
objection touching the Company, has already bin in the explication of the
former doctrine, out of Saint Augustine at full resolved: Ser 32. de verbis
Domini.
how namely those that enter heaven, though they be many in themselves, are
yet in comparison with the far greater number who perish, to be reckoned and
accounted, as the wheat corns in comparison with the chaf, but a few; as it
were an handful or a gleaning after harvest, a small remnant, and little
flock; that we need not to speak farther in that behalf: so also, for the
other part of the doubt, touching the condition of the gate or way, (to resolve
that also, for the opening and full clearing of the point) this first as a most
comfortable truth we gladly grant, that Christ Jesus our blessed Lord and
Savior, is (as himself has witnessed of himself) the only door and way to
life, and indeed that true Jacobs ladder, Genesis 28.12
which alone gives passage from earth to heaven. For, neither is there
salvation in any other, there being among men, none other name given under
heaven, whereby we must be saved. Act. 4.12. concerning whom, howsoever
considering him in himself, and so as in the rich grace of the Gospel, he is
offered unto all, we cannot say, that he is either strait or narrow: but
fair rather and goodly, broad and spacious: a gate, like that of the Temple,
which (for the magnificence and stateliness of it) was termed beautiful:
Act. 3.2.
and a way, like that which in Number. 20. verse 17.
is called the Kings high way; thorough which as by the true and living way,
Heb. 10. ver. 20.
the whole host and army of the Church shall enter heaven. Yet, as the Apostle
tells the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.12
that they were not kept strait in him, but were straightened in their own bowels
toward him: so may we in like sort conceive, how even Jesus Christ this gate,
and way of life, though he be not by God made strait, yet is made strait to
most, by their own corruption; whiles naturally, all love to wander and rove
at large in the ways of sin, abhorring whatsoever restrains (as this way
does) their carnal liberty.

CHAP. XIV. Four paths comprehended under Christ, viz. that of faith,
repentance, obedience, and patience: not strait in themselves, but so to flesh
and blood.
FOr better understanding of this point in hand, and a more evident explication
of the path of life, we are to know, that as Christ is called the Way, because
he is the substance and scope of Religion, wherein, as in a way, we walk to
happiness, according to that, Colos. 2.6. As ye have therefore received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk in him: so under, and within the compass of this way,
which is Christ, we must conceive to be comprehended, all those several
duties which being necessary unto those who walk in this way, are so
distasteful to so many as refuse it, or have not yet made choice thereof.
Amongst which, the Scripture points out four as the chief, viz. First Faith
in Christ: and secondly, Repentance: thirdly new Obedience: and fourthly,
Patience, all which by God prescribed, we may reckon, as gates, for entrance;
and paths, for the continuance: whereby we may be said, as by Christ to enter,
so in Christ to walk, and that also unto Christ; who is not only the way, but
the end also of the way, Col 3.4.
even happiness, and our life.

Faith, that it is a gate and way, in and by Christ the truth, leading to
Christ as he is the life: consider what Paul and Silas answered the Jailer,
when he came trembling and fell at their feet, asking of them what he must do
to be saved? Act. 16.31. Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved.
And for Repentance, that it is no less, witness that counsel which Saint
Peter gave, in answer to those Jews, who, being pricked in their hearts, asked
the like question what they should do? Act. 2.38. Repent, or amend your lives,
(...).
and in testimony hereof, be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins. Thirdly, for Obedience, how truly may
that be spoken, as of a way (which is falsely expounded by the Papists, as of a
cause or merit) Math. 19.17. If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments; since Rev. 22.14. Blessed are they, that do his Commandments,
that they may have interest in the tree of life, and Finally, for Patience,
that by it we must necessarily follow Christ in sufferings, if we would also
be glorified with him in his kingdom, witness what our Savior spoke to his
Disciples, Mat. 16.24. If any man will come after me, let him forsake himself,
and take up his cross, and follow me. And again, that of The Apostle, Heb.
10.36
Ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of God, ye may
receive the promise.

Concerning all which porches and paths of this gate and way to life,
howsoever we may truly say, as before of Christ himself, under whom they are
contained, and who did prescribe them; that they be in themselves both fair
and spacious, like Wisdoms ways, all ways of pleasure and paths of
prosperity, Pro. 3.17.
life to them that enter in at them, and making blessed those who walk in
them: yet may we easily conceive, in what respect this gate and way is by our
Savior termed strait and narrow, if we call to mind, how Moses termed the
Moon one of the greater lights, Genesis 1.16,
in regard of the appearance, which yet is not so in the knowledge of the
learned, but only so appears to us by reason of the small distance. For
right so does our Savior speak of this way, not as indeed it is in the
experience of the spiritual traveller, but as it seems in the apprehension of
the carnal sluggard, who dreameth of difficulty, Pro. 26.13 22.13.
if not of a Lion, in every of these paths and ways of God.

CHAP XV. Two reasons of that straitness, viz. 1. because the way is but one:
and 2. because it is, or seems strait to carnal reason, and that in 4.
respects.
THat we may see for the farther confirmation, of that that has bin spoken,
how the difficulty of the way to heaven presents it self to carnal
apprehension, making so many to forsake these ways of life, and to run
headlong like the herd of possessed swine into the deep of destruction; Mat.
8.32.
let us consider how our Savior Christ, first, compriseth them al under one
gate and way of truth, leading unto life, opposed unto the many false gates and
ways of sin tending to death; and secondly, calls it, as ^hey account it,
who refuse ^o enter into it, strait and narrow.

For so, for the former of ^hese two general reasons, most true it is, that
the passage unto Heaven is but one, one gate to enter in at, and one way to
walk on in, being entered; on either side whereof, is the broad way unto
death, that step but out of the strait path of Salvation, and on whether hand
soever the turning be, it is into the way which has in it many by-pathes of
destruction. For, why? as there is but one way only to be borne, but many to
die: and one way for Archers only to hit the white, but many ways for them to
miss the mark; by shooting under, or over, o^ vvide on either hand: even so
are there many ways, wherein people may go to hell. As some do in the high
way of blockish igno^ance: and others, through ^he puddle of svvinish
^runkennesse: some, in the ^ire of uncleanesse: and o^ers, upon the ridge of
^ride and haughtiness: or (...) the crooked winding ^ack of covetousness: or
^se in the path, perhaps, ^at bends as much ^ite the other way, of pro^igall
luxuriousnes. Some, ^hiles like Gallio, they care ^or no Religion: and others,
^hiles they are too hot in ^eale, as Paul once was, Act. 18.15. Act. 22.4.
by ^is own confession, after a ^alse Religion. When as, ^o, to bring to
heaven only ^e gate and path (which therefore so few do pass through) by
the truth of faith, and soundness of r^pentance, and sincere endeavor of holy
obedience, together with constant a^ cheerful patience; vvher^ in such as
will have pea^^ on them, as the Israel of Go^ must enter, and being e^tred,
must walk, as the Apostle wishes them, Gal. 6.16. (...)
as were by a line or rule, vvit^out declining.

But to pass briefly from this, to the second reason (since the considerati^
thereof, will make both the former reason, and t^ whole conclusion yet mo^
clear) as this gate and wa^ is only one: so shall vv^ find that it is, or at
lea^ seems to most to be, n^ for any fault in it, but one^ through the
sinful folly of ^esh and blood, both strait and narrow, and that in ^oure
respects, viz. first, in ^egard of the finding: and ^econdly, of the entering:
and ^hirdly, of the proceeding: and fourthly, of the perseve^ing therein unto
the end.

CHAP. XVI. The two first respects, viz. in regard of the finding, and in
regard of the entering.
TO open these in order; for the first, most true it (...), that the gate and
way to ^eaven, which is but one, ^ath ever in all ages been ^ery hard to
find, because unknown and hidden (...) flesh and blood. Howbe^ this has not
been becau^ it has not by God in h^ Word of truth been reve^led, but indeed,
becau^ flesh and blood is by ^ture blind, and cannot s^ it. For, why? you ha^
heard how plainly t^ Scripture speaks of ev^rie of the four paths, a^
porches before mentione^ As of the first, which Faith: Believe in the L^ Jesus,
Act. 16.31:
and thou shall be sav^ And of the second, Repentance, Act. 2.38.
thus: Amend your liv^ and be baptized, and you she receive remission. Third^
of Obedience: This do, a^ live; Mar. 19.17
for, blessed are they the keep his Commandemen^ Rev. 22.14
Fourthly, of the last also: Heb. 10.36 Romans 2.7.
Ye have need of patienee, that ye may enjoy the promise. All which, what
are they in effect, but as that voice for direction promised to them of Sion,
Isai. 30.21. This is the way, walk ye in it. But which voice, as there, they
only come to hear, who are truly humbled; all ^aving their ears and ^earts
naturally shut up, and hardened, till by God ^hey be opened, and enlar^ed, and
their eyes blin^ed, til God take away the ^aile from off their hearts; that
they can neither hear that word, nor see the way (...) life, though plainly
poin^ed out, and discovered. ^or so does the Apostle witness, (...). Iud. ver.
19 1 Cor. 15.45.
1 Cor. 2.14. That the natural man who has in him only a living soul, and
not the quickening spirit, does not perceive the things of the spirit of God;
that is, which are in the word by Gods spirit plainly revealed: neither can he
know them (says The Apostle) being no more then natural, because they are
spiritually discerned, that is, by the enlightening power o^ the holy Ghost.
Without which supernatural light, it is not in the power of fles^ and blood,
as our Saviou^ told Peter, to reveal unto us so much as the ground of truth
touching the great gate and way to life, Mat. 16.17
tha^ Jesus is the Christ, the son o^ the living God. From whence therefore
it comes, that so many in their blindness go astray; Some not knowing, or
not caring to know, what Religion means: and others hanging loose, and
halting between two opinions; that some embrace, without farther
consideration, that profession which the times and state wherein they live, may
seem to favor: Ioh. 4.20.5.
or else rather, will be of no Religion, because they see such variety of
opinions: that finally some, only to follow their forefathers, as those
Idolaters in Jeremy, ^er 44.17.
(whose successors are our ignorant English Papists at this day, much to be
pitied) cleave to a false Religion: or perchance go farther, Act. 22.20.
as S. Paul did once in a blinded zeal, to persecute the truth of faith; like
those of whom our Savior foretold in John, Ioh. 16.2.
who killing of Christ's servants, thought they did God service. All which, and
alas, how many more, are there even among Christians (not to mention any other)
that all in blindness go astray, wandering as in the darkness, in the ways
of death, not coming so much as once to find and know, that they might thereat
enter, the gate of life; to all whom therefore, no marvel if the gate seem
strait, because not known, and therefore so hard to find.

But add hereto, the second difficulty, making it seem strait to such as find
it, because being found, it is as hard to enter. Howbeit, neither is this so
much in the low building, or straitness of the gate, as in regard of the
stature, or rather stately look of flesh and blood, together with that luggage
wherewith it is laden; by which it becomes, shall I say, like (...) Cammell,
not possibly able with his bunch to go through a needles eye; or rather, like
to an Elephant, with a Castle on his back, which cannot enter in, though at the
gate of a Palace. In which respects, until there be a pulling down, and
withal, an unpacking and putting off, of what may stop the passage, and make
it to stick in the entry, it is not possible, that flesh and blood should
enter, 1 Cor. 15.50.
and come to inherit (as in another sense The Apostle speaks) the Kingdom of
God.

For, first, for the former of these twain, the pulling down of the look,
how true shall that of our Savior be ever found: Mat. 18.3.
excep^ ye be converted, and becom^ as little children, that is, humble and
lowly in heart, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of God? First, the pride
of heart must be abated, and all presumptuous conceits of our own sufficiency
pulled down, yea, vile and foolish must men become in their own esteem, that
(as The Apostle speaks) they may be wise: 1 Cor. 3.18
humbled ere they can so much as enter this gate of life; Luc. 18.12 Job 40 34
Psalm. 73.22 Micah 7.9.
as the Publican and Job, as the Prophet, and the Church in Micah, with sight
of their own unrighteousness, and vileness of their former disobedience, and
great unworthiness. Which dijecting and humbling of the soul, for as much as
it goes exceedingly against the hair of proud flesh and blood, which has
naturally a stiff neck, and iron sinews; Isa. 48.4.
that will neither bend nor bow, Act. 8.51:
nor willingly stoop to be beholding for ought to God, until God even beat it
down, and break the heart by his powerful grace; what marvel, if this gate
seem all too low, as an ordinary door is to a tall man, that will not bow to
enter under it.

putting by, and shaking off also, of whatsoever pelf or baggage, which
otherwise with the bulk would stop up this passage: Witness the Apostle, who
counselling hereto, does withal tell us what this loading is, which must be
laid aside. For so, Heb. 12. Verse 1.
the sin that hangs so fast on, that must be shaken off: and in Ephesians. 4.
the old man which is corrupt with the deceiveable lusts, Verse 22.
that must be cast off; yea, the earthly members, fornication uncleanesse,
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, they must be
mortified, Colos. 3.5. the covetous man must restore his ill gotten goods, to
the rightful owners, Luke 16.8.
as Zacheus did: and the voluptuous man, leave his pleasures, and return home
to his father, as the Prodigal: Luke 15.20
and so must the blasphemous swearer, leave his hellish oaths: and the
malicious his revengefull thoughts: and both go and be reconciled to God and
man, by crying mercy, ere they can have entrance. Which whiles such, and others
like, laden and stuffed with sins of all sorts, refuse, they stick as in the
door, and cannot enter, not so much for the straitness of the gate, as indeed
through the corruption and impenitency of their wicked hearts; 1 Ioh. 2.16
who being led with lust either of profit, as are covetous ones: or of
pleasure, as voluptuous ones: or of credit and estimation, as all ambitious
ones, will not, with the serpent, cast their skins, nor willingly let go from
them, their beloved sins, Job 20.12, 13.
that so they may get within the gate. In those respects therefore we see how
the gate seems strait to such, and hard to enter.

CHAP. XVII. The two later respects, viz. in regard of the proceeding on, and
of the persevering in.
AS the gate for the entrance seems difficult and strait to flesh and blood,
so thirdly, does the to be passed through, when entrance has been made. For
why? as in giving of the Law in Exodus, we read, Exo. 13.12
how God Almighty appointed Moses, to set marks and bounds unto the people
round about the mount, Exodus 19.12.
which they might not pass: so has it pleased him to bound and hemme in this
path to life, with many a pale on either side of both Law and Gospel; over
which, who so would walk to life, must not dare to leap, nor give liberty to
themselves to think, or speak, or do, as either they see others to do, or
as, perhaps, themselves have done in former times; for why? the bounds are set
which they must not pass; as (for instance) nor dare to swear, or any way
take in vain Gods holy name: Exo. 20.^
nor by travel, or idle sporting, to profane his holy Sabbath: Verse 8.
nor to be wrathful and furious, breaking forth upon every light occasion into
bitter words: Mat. 5.22.
neither to adventure by uncleanness, or drunkenness, to defile themselves
like brutish beasts: Ephesians. 5.3. 1 Cor. 6.9.10. 1 These 4.6
nor for matters of the world to deal injuriously in gathering wealth with a
large conscience. All which, howsoever they be rife in the examples and
practice of worldly men, among whom they also had their conversation in times
past: Ephesians. 2.^.
yet must they be far from such as will walk within the lists of this way of
life. Which as it is bounded by these, and other the like precepts and
prohibitions of the Law: so likewise no less, by the commandments of the
Gospel; requiring us (for instance) to go out of our selves for
righteousness, that we may be found in Christ: Phil. 3.9. 2 Cor. 5.7.
and to rest on Gods mercies, apprehended by faith only, Ephesians. 5.2. Ioh. 15.12
Mat. 16.24
and not by sense: enjoining us to love our brethren as Christ has loved us,
and finally, to deny our selves, and with patience, to take up our cross. All
which and the like restraints, howsoever they seem irksome, I grant, and
grievous to flesh and blood; insomuch that carnal men conceit how they should
loose their liberty, and be even put in prison, if they should keep within
these bounds, which makes them to refuse to walk on in this way, if not to
wonder at their madness, as they conceive, which yield so to be restrained:
yet is this also, from their erroneous conceit and foul mistake rather then
from any unpleasing straitnes of the way, as the godly know best who once being
brought to walk on in this path, find it to be most pleasant, and the very
rejoicing of their souls; Christ's yoke to them strengthened by grace, being,
as himself termed it; an easy yoke and his commandments, as in S. John,
Mat. 11 30. 1 Ioh ^ 3.
not burdenous. Nay, vvheras carnal worldlings account Gods service to be a
very burden, Mal. 1 13.
as (for instance) to hear Gods word twice on the Sabbath, or so much as to
be restrained from traveling, Amos. 8.5.
or from trifling on that holy day: the godly on the other side know it to be
a drudgery indeed, that worldlings endure; as the vvanton and voluptuous
person to be so enslaved to his sports; and so the covetous, and ambitious to
his base esteem, and gain: that the one, will not spare to sit up from his
sleep night after night, Exodus 32.6.
to follovv his idle games, and to satiate his lusts: and the other, that he
may compass what he coveteth, Neh. 13.15
to drudge and droile, not sticking basely to gain the Sabbath day, from the
service of God, and the rest due to his own soul and body: yea, to lie, and
swear, and live by usury and deceit, Mar. 4.3. Verse 9.
to make (if need be) bread of stones, and fall down on his knees without a
cushion to the very devil, to gain the world. Then which what can be held a
more slavish slavery? and in comparison with which how truly may the way of
godliness be called a way of liberty; Iam. 1.25.
So that for conclusion, howsoever worldlings think Christians to be fools,
Christians know assuredly that worldlings be not wise.

Fourthly, in the last place, as there is difficulty in proceeding in this path
by reason of the listes and bounds, so much more in persevering constantly
therein, in respect of the briars and bushes, yea the snares and bonds, with
which it is overspread and all belaid, viz. with persecutions on every side,
from Satan and the world: 1 Timothy 3.12.
which all must suffer that will live godly, in Christ Jesus; as also with
corrections and daily chastisements from the Lord, who chasteneth whom he
loves, Heb. 12.6.
and scourges every son that he receives* to verify that testimony of Paul
and Barnabas. Act. 14.22. that thorough many tribulations men must enter, if at
all, into Gods Kingdom. In regard whereof, what marvel if the way seem
rough and most unpleasant to flesh and blood; yea sometimes so uncomfortable,
not only to carnal people unregenerate, but even, to such as David, the
dearest Saints of God: that when (as in Psalm. 73.) they look upon the present
prosperity which the wicked enjoy, and consider withal how themselves are
daily chastened and corrected every morning, Verse 14.
they begin to repent them of their bargain and are ready to faint, and even
turn aside, almost condemning, as for fools, the generation of Gods children,
Verse 15.
that will go forward in that course, Verse 15,
so full of trouble. And yet shall men repair, as the Prophet there, Verse 17,
into the Sanctuary of God, and there understand the fearful end of wicked
men; who stand amidst all prosperity, but as malefactors on the ladder, in
slippery places, Verse 18,
and shall withal conceive why God so pleases in love, to exercise his
children for their good; as namely, either to stop their ways with thorns,
Hosea 2.6.
that they may not find their evil paths; Mal. 3.3.
or else, to purge out their dross: or finally, to try their faith and
patience, that they might appear unto their praise: 1 Pet. 1.7.
and surely, this path of tribulations will not seem so troublesome; whiles
faith amiddest all afflictions, will make them under hope, to wait for the rich
mercies of the Lord, and as Moses, to choose rather, Heb. 11.25.
to suffer adversity with the children of God, and to esteem the rebukes of
Christ greater treasures, and indeed more delightsome pleasures, then all else
which the Egypt of this world can yield. For thus they judge who have, as he,
an eye to the recompense of reward; which, who so have not, as carnal people
wanting faith cannot have, no marvel, if this way to such seem rough and
thorny, the prickings whereof have driven back many an one, who have not had
their feet well shed, Ephesians. ^ ^5.
with the preparation of the Gospel of Peace. So is finally in this respect
also, the way to heaven strait and narrow, and hard to be gone thorough with
perseverance unto the end.

CHAP. XVIII. How needful it is for a Christian to try whether ever he entered
or continues in this way: and that in the four particular paths.
BY all that has been hitherto delivered, the doctrine being fully explained,
and abundantly confirmed: that namely, It is no easy matter, but of difficult
and of great labor, to enter into life eternal. -- And why? but because the
gate and way, leading to Christ the life, is but one: and that to flesh and
blood, for both finding, and entering, and proceeding, and persevering in,
strait and narrow: if yet you expect the application for farther profit, it
will, being marked, easily apply it self, by a fourefold use, viz. first for
trial: and secondly, for terror: thirdly, for Counsel: and finally, for
Comfort.

And first, for Instruction this may serve, to teach us to try our state,
whether we be in the way to life: by considering, whether we have entered in at
the right gate, and in what path we walk. And this is an application of this
doctrine most necessary and profitable; since there is hardly any, but would
most gladly be sure of this, that he is in the way to life, and shall be saved
when he dies. Yea the Popish ignorant, who has been taught to hold it
presumption, for any to account himself sure of being saved, yet has his joy
in this, that he is of a good belief, and hops well (though he be not
sure of it) that he shall go to heaven. But it is, you know, the counsel of S.
Petr, 2 Pet. 1.10.
to give all diligence, to make our calling and election sure. How means he?
in it self? no, for so from all eternity, it was with God, in his immutable
decree: but rather, in our knowledge, and assurance of belief. And therefore
in the contrary extreme, how confident may we find another number, of ignorant
profane ones in the world, that howsoever they live an unholy and wicked
life, yet are or seem at least to be secure, that they shall die an happy, and
blessed death, and doubt they do not, one whit of this, but they shall be
saved. Howbeit, since we have learned in the doctrine delivered, that it is
not so light a matter to attain to heaven, nor indeed possible at all, except
we enter in, and walk thorough the right gate and way, which is but one
and strait, leading to life: it will be good for people, first to make trial
of themselves, ere they rest secure, since every gate is not, what Jacob called
Bethel, Genesis 28 17
the gate of heaven; nor yet every beaten way, a path to life: but some
rather, of that sort, which the wise man notes, which though it seemeh right
to a man, Pro. 14 12
yet the issues of it, are the ways of death.

And therefore herein for direction, that we may not deceive our selves (as
many miserably do, with a bare profession of the name of Christ, trusting as
those Jews in Jeremy, Ier. 7.8.
in lying words that cannot profit) this let us remember, which in the
doctrine before delivered we have already learned, that howsoever Christ Jesus
that very Ladder, Genesis 23.1^
which Jacob savv in Bethel reaching from earth to heaven, be^ indeed the
alone gate of heaven, and only way, that leads by truth unto eternal life;
that (as the Apostle alleges for proof, Joel 2.3^.
the Prophet Ioels testimony, concerning him, Romans 10.13.) Whosoever shall call
on the name of the Lord, that is, shall seek for salvation, only for, and by
him, whom God has mad^ both Lord and Christ, he, an^ he only, shall be saved:
ye^ God forbid that we Christians, who have learned if we call on the Lords
name (...) depart also from iniquity should ever imagine, Act. 2.36.
tha^ the bare name of Chri^ were a gate to let in wickedness into heaven; 2 Timothy 2.19.
into which holy City, Reu. 2^ though the gate stand ^pen day and night, yet is
not possible, Verse 27,
that any u^cleane thing or abhominati^^ should ever enter. No, for (...) have
learned, how under and in Christ, as the one gate and way to life, w^ are to
conceive, besid^ the name and bare profe^sion, those four severa^ porches and
paths, of Faith, Repentance, Obedience, and Patience; all which are both for
finding and entering into them, as also for proceeding and persevering in them,
strait and narrow: that men had need with the Baptists hearers to press with
violence, Mat. 11 11.
if there-thorough they will pass, and enter into heaven,

How necessary is it therefore for us all, to examine and try our selves (that
we may find comfort) whether or no, we have entered in at those gates, and are
walking in those ways of life. As, whether we can find that we believe in the
Lord Jesus, looking for salvation only and alone by him: whether we have
repented unfainedly of al our sins, giving our selves no allowance farther in
any of them: Thirdly, whether our endeavor be without dissimulation, to yield
obedience, not to some, but to al Gods commandments: Finally, whether we be
resolved, by his grace that strengthens us to bear with constant cheerful
patience, whatsoever crosses and troubles may in this way encounter us.

CHAP. XIX. Trial of Faith by four rules. viz. two for entrance, and two for
continuance.
IN this trial that we may Faith.
and not deceive our selves with seeming shows, let us be willing to receive
more special rules of direction, from each of those four particulars, to try
our selves; all which, since we consider them, as both gates, for entrance: and
ways, for continuance; leading to Christ and life, our trial shall be to
observe, first, how we have entered: and secondly, how we walk in every of
these gates and ways.

Touching the first, which is faith in Christ: who ever thou be, that say,
or think, that thou do believe; let me say to thee, as the Apostle to
his beloved Corinthians, 2. Cor. 13.5. Prove thy self whether thou be in the
faith. Yea, examine whether thy faith be such indeed, as can bring thee unto
life. For remember, what Saint James has taught, that it is not enough for a
man to say he has faith, Iam. 2.14.
except he show it by the fruits; since otherwise, it may well be feared he
does but say so, and either has no faith, or but a false faith, such as a
Devil may have that trembles with the horror of assured damnation. Verse 19.
Wherefore whosoever thou be that perswadest thy self thou stand by faith,
Rom 11.20
call thine heart in Gods name to account, first, how thou have entered in at
that gate: for certainly, if thy faith be the gate of life, thou have entered
in at a strait gate, whereinto without striving thou could not have entered.

And therefore first, consider with what stir or struggling thou have got
in; since our Savior bidding thee enter in, presupposes (what thou know
well, if thou know any thing) that once thou stoodest without; borne, as all
Adams generation, in wretched unbelief. And therefore remember, if thou can,
to thine own hearts comfort, Who first forewarned thee to flee from the wrath
to come; Mat, 3.7.
or when were thine eyes anointed with eye salve, Rev. 3.18.
to see the filthy nakedness of thine unbeleeving nature, and the necessity of
this white robe of faith?

Happily the carnal man that knows no otherwise then that he did believe
ever since he was borne, or certainly since he could well remember, will
marvel much to hear such questions moved: but for those who are acquainted
with the Anatomy that the Scripture makes of our wretched nature, Romans 3.12
and how this heart of ours is an heart of stone, Eze. 11.19
not capable of nor caring for faith, till God thereto prepare it, brusing,
breaking, yea, grinding it to very powder; such plainly discern, how
necessary the hammer of Gods law is, Ier. 23.^^.
for breaking of this stony heart, and preparing it for the grace of Faith;
whiles it humbles men, with the sight of sin, and sorrow for the same, and
so forces them to fly out of themselves, to escape from death. To whom thus
humbled, when as the Gospel offers Christ, as the only means of life, God
by the same Gospel stirs up their appetite, John 3.16.
so to hunger after him and his righteousness, that with fervent prayer they
fly unto the throne of grace, Mat. 5.6.
desiring to attain salvation alone by him, still begging therefore with
earnest importunity at the hands of God, to be yet more and more persuaded of
his love in Christ, and of the forgiveness thereby of all their sins. Such
ado there is, (howsoever many who never knew what it means, conceive of this
gate of faith as of an easy entry) to bring men to true faith in Christ, not
without humbling first, and then hungring: not without seeing and sorrowing for
their sins, and then sighing and seeking after Jesus Christ.

Howbeit, since this entrance into faith, is not always wrought with like
manner or measure of humiliation in all, or not so well observed or remembered by
all, (especially in such who either have been sanctified from the womb, Luke
^.15
as was John Baptist, or else though not regenerated before full age, yet, as
Timothy, 2 T^m ^ ^
have been trained up from their infancy under godly parents, and by that
means kept from wounding themselves with more gross iniquities.)

Therefore, let this second trial of our faith be, by considering it as the
path wherein we presently walk. For our direction wherein, this let us know,
that howsoever the Rhemists by distinction seem to object, In marginall note
upon the Text.
that Christians in their lives must seek the strait way, but in Religion the
ancient common way: yet it is truly answered, By D. Fulk
that it is the strait way as well in religion as in life that leads to life.
Wherein though in all ages the fewer sort have walked, yet it is the ancient way
wherein all that are saved have entered, surely that good old way in Jeremy, and
that high way, Ier. 6.16.
called the way of holiness in Isaiah, Isa. 35.8.
where through Abraham and Isaac, and all those ancients, Hebr. 11. have entered
heaven. After whom, if we would be assured that we walk aright; following God,
as Abraham at the foot; Isa. 41.2.
then let us try our faith, whether it be right, first, by our strait walking:
and secondly, by our working: by our looking first, and then our loving. For,
for the former, if we be in the right track of saving faith, it only leads,
and we thereby only look unto Christ Jesus: not as the Turks to Mahomet: nor
as the Jews to a Messiah, yet expected: nor yet to either our own merits, or
other meditation, as Papists, and Hypocritical Justitiaries: or finally, to an
imaginary Christ, only to be inbred in us, out of the pure Doctrine of H.N. as
do the Familists; for, what is this, but to leave Christ Jesus, the true gate
of life, and each by their false faith, forsaking their own mercy, to look
after Vanities, Ioh. 2.8. 1 Samuel: 12.2^.
and vain helps that cannot profit? To none of which does the Word of truth
direct the eye of our faith, but only to Christ Jesus, the Virgins son,
lifted up as the Serpent in the wilderness; Ioh. 3 14.
and made unto us of God wisdom and righteousness, sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30
and redemption. On whom alone who so do not look, without confidence for
salvation, either in themselves, or in any other creature, well may they
suspect by their wandering, that the faith wherein they think they walk, is
not the way of life; of which the Apostle speaks. As ye have received Christ
Jesus, the Lord, Colos 2.6.
so walk in him; rooted and built in him, and established in the faith.

But farther, the work of Love, will give trial of our right walking in the
faith. Since faith, if it once truly apprehend Gods love in Christ, cannot but
inflame the heart with love again, both to God, and for Gods sake to men also;
and so, as that of Abraham and Rahab, will show it self by the fruit, to be
that only living, Iam 2.21. Verse 25. Gal. 5.6.
and availeable faith that works by love. Thus therefore, amongst so many who
boast of faith, may we prove our selves, whether we be in the faith: as,
first, by calling to mind our entrance thereinto, surely not without an
humbling of our souls, and withal an hungring after Christ, wrought in us by
God; so secondly, observing, how we continue therein, by the straight looking
of our eye, and the diligent labor of our love. And this is the first point of
examination, the trial of our faith.

CHAP. XX. Trial of Repentance by four rules, viz. two for entrance, and two
for continuance.
AS for Repentance, which flows from faith, and is evermore begun for time,
together with faith, that purifieth the heart: Act. 15.9.
since of those many, who profess Repentance, few therein rightly walk,
therefore herein also it shall be good for us to try our selves, first, whether
we have rightly entered thereinto: which being a laborious work, and of great
moment, consisting in the change of both heart and life, and pulling violently
the whole man out of the fire; Jude verse 23.
is wrought at the first by God not without much ado, to the repentant party,
by enforcing him both to stoop low, and even to strip himself. To stoop, as
Ephraim, who being instructed to see the untamed wantonness of his youth, was
brought as one ashamed and confounded to smite upon his thigh: Ier 31 19.
or as the Publican, so pressed down by the heavy burden of his sins, Luke
18.13.
that he durst not lift up his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast. To which
^ght and conscience of sin, ^ill men be brought, that their faces be filled
with ^hame, and their hearts with sorrow; and farther their tongues enforced to
^asse sentence on themselves, not only in general ^cknowledging themselves ^o
be sinners, (which the ^ery hopeless Hypocrites will not stick to do) but in
particular, 1 Timothy 1.13.
confessing their wicked sins against themselves unto the Lord; ^hey come not
so much as to look in at this gate of ^ife; no, but on the contra^y, whiles,
in the pride of their deluded hearts, they conceit all to be well with them,
and that they have no need to change for better, how far stand they from this
blessed state? being rather, as those in Zephany, frozen in their dregs:
Zeph. 1.12
or, as those Jews, against whose impenitency the Lord protests by the
Prophet Jeremy, saying, they are not humbled unto this day. Ier 44.10.


But yet this stooping is not all, for it is farther required of the Repentant
sinner, that he also strip himself, shaking off, and casting from him, those
cloakes of shame, and fardells of sin, that make the gate of grace too strait
and narrow for him. For want of which, how many carnal wretches remain still
in an unrepentant state, sticking (as it were) and hanging in the very entry:
some by their purse (that I may so express it) of ill gotten goods: and others
(as Absolon by his hair) by their plumes of pride: yea, 2 Samuel 18.9
some, as by their cheeks swollen big with oaths of blasphemy, and lies: and
others, as the drunkard beset around with his cups: or as Zimri, loath to part
in very death from his unclean Harlotry. Number. 25.9
None of them all, being willing to forsake their sinful lusts, that with the
Prodigal they may turn home to God their father, Luke 15.20
by true repentance. (...).
Which requiring (as both the Hebrew and Greek names significan^ly import) a
change both (...) heart and life; therefo^ hereby must our trial be if we be
brought to loat^ in heart, and in practice (...) life to leave, those sins,
(...) whatsoever kind, wherei^ formerly we lived; Psalm 18 23.
and i^ to the snare whereof we easily and naturally fall (...) our selves, but
cannot r^turne, till we be powerfully freed and forced back by supernatural
grace; 2 Timothy 2.2, 26.
o^ nature being like to the spring-locke that shuttet^ of it self, but cannot
open without a key.

But farther, since in regard us to often falls, it is not sufficient for us to
enter in at this gate, except we also proceed to walk on in this penitentiary
path, renewing our repentance daily, both by a godly sorrow, for what we do
amiss, as also by a careful striving to do so no more; therefore hereby al so
must our trial be made, first, whether, when at any time we do amiss, our
conscience straight check, and smite us for it, as David's heart did him fot
cutting off the lap of his Lords garment; 1 Samuel 24.6
and again after he had sinned in numbering the people: yea, 1 Samuel 24.10.
whether to bring our selves to godly sorrow we often search our souls, by the
righteous law of God, to find out o^^ most secret sins, as the afflicted
Church, Lam. 3.40.
stirs u^ her self to do, when Go^ began for neglect hereof t^ search her
with his judgments: yea, farther, turning our eyes to look upon Jesus Christ,
whom w^ have pierced with our sins that so we may be moved to lament over him
with godly sorrow: Zac. 1^.10.
testifying thi^ our sorrow by our humble and unfeigned confession before the
Lord, 2 Samuel 25.10.
as Davi^ did in that case of numbering the people: finally, joining ever with
this confession, fervent suit for pardon, as in another case, we find the same
Prophet, like a condemned prisoner, supplicating with strong cries unto his
Judge, Ps. 51. And secondly, in respect of the time to come, let us farther try
our estate, by considering how we, upon such sorrow, are brought to a more
earnest strife against sin, as well by shunning heedfully, and flying
speedily as honest Joseph did the lewd allurements and provocations unto sin,
Genesis 39.11
especially, learning wisdom, of the burnt child, to dread that fire
wherewith we have been already scorched: as also, 2 Cor. 7.11.
with holy David, by earnest prayer for strength of grace to have our hearts
first purged and renewed, and after enlarged to run the ways of Psalm. 51.10
Psa. 119.32
Gods commandments: and finally, with the same Prophet, hiding Gods
promimises in our hearts, that we may be kept thereby hereafter, Psa. 119.11
from sinning against the Lord: Lo, thus also may we make trial of our
repentance, whether it be a gate and way of life: As first, by calling to mind
our entrance not without stooping low, and stripping of our selves: so,
secondly, by considering how we walk, both sorrowing for what we do amiss,
and striving still with an increase of godly care to sin no more.

CHAP XXI. Trial of obedience by four rules, viz. two for entrance, and two
for continuance.
TO proceed now unto obedience, a sure gate, if it be sincere and a certain
way to life: since many profess obedience to the Lord, who, yet like to sorry
servants, be not oftentimes such as they should be, for their Masters credit,
or, perhaps, do but serve themselves in the best service, which they seem to
go about. Therefore herein also is our trial needful, if we would with
comfort expect the reward of good servants, which is, to enter into our Masters
joy. Mat. 25.21
First, by considering how we have entered within this gate, and suffered our
ear to be nailed to the Lords door. Exo. 21.6.
And whether our entrance have been right, we may find by these two marks,
namely, first, if we have taken direction from God, touching this gate: and
secondly, if we have entered thereat with right aim, and resolution to please
the Lord.

For first, if the gate wherinto we be entered be right, it is that which God
has set up and prescribed to us in his Word. Concerning which is that, Deuteronomy.
6.25. This shall be our righteousness before the Lord our God, if we take heed
to keep all these commandments, as he has commanded us. All, and as, he
has commanded, lo, (...)
these are the bounds of our obedience set by God; and as it were, the posts of
this gate, with David, Psalm. 119.6.
to have respect, not to some, but all Gods commandments; always remembering
that of S. James, Iam. 2.11.
how he that commanded one of them, commanded all, and that for the manner, as
he has commanded either in the Law, or in the Gospel. Which who so has not
resolved to make the rule of his whole life, in willing obedience submitting
himself in all things to Gods holy will, he may fear that he has not entered
in at this gate. As may he no less (to touch also the second point of this
trial) who has not hereto yielded without by-respects, in a right aim, and
sincere intent, to be pleasing to the Lord. For that is the very end of our
redemption, as Zachary teaches in his song, that being delivered from all our
spiritual enemies, Luke 1.74, 75.
we should serve him without fear, all the days of our life in righteousness
and true holiness. Wherefore herein let our trial be, that we may have
comfort in our obedience, whether of our entrance into th Lords service, we be
able to say, as Saint Paul with thanks to God, of the believing Romans, Romans
6.17.
that once we were the servants of sin, but now we have obeyed from the
heart unto the form, (or print) of doctrine, (...).
into which we were delivered up: as also touching our resolution and aim
herein, as the same Apostle of his own faithful labors in the great work of
the Lord, that the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, 2
Cor. 5.14, 15.
that if one be dead for all, then were all dead: and he dyed for all, that
they which live, shoud not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who
dyed for them and rose again.

But farther secondly, for our walking in this path, wherein our obedience may
chiefly be discerned, let us make our trial by considering in all our
courses, first, how we keep still in that right way: secondly, how we go
on forward in the same. For first, howsoever, I grant, through weakness in
our footing, we may stumble and slip aside sometimes out of this narrow path,
and yet by returning eftsoons into the other path of true repentance may
thereout recover our selves, and regaine our way: yet if we will be so bold and
wilful, as wittingly and willingly to let our mouths swear vainly, or (so
it be for our advantage) to lie and speak falsely, our hands to deal
deceitfully, or our feet any way to expatiate and break beyond those bounds
and lists, which God has set for our obedience: it cannot be imagined but
that as we lose our way, so we shall also vvithall lose our comfort. At the
consideration whereof, how may many tremble, who having for a while made
forward show of entrance into the obedience and service of the Lord, may find
themselves relapsed, and like water once made hot, grown the colder for their
first heat, in so much that they are now so far from walking themselves
precisely, as S. Paul requires, that Ismael-like, Ephesians 5.15. (...). Genesis 21.9.
2 Samuel 6.20.
or as Michal, they are ready sooner then any other, presently to mock at any
heir of promise, that they see walking in holiness, and signifying the joy of
his heart, in the service of the Lord. From which fearful fall, to preserve
all them who walk with a true heart, though weakly, in this path, we have
the Apostles cohortation for our encouragement and direction, Heb. 12.13. To
lift up our weak knees, and to make straight steps unto our feet, lest that
which is halting be turned out of the way: such must our care be to keep our
feet from straying, and no less (to pass unto the second note) without
staying to go forward. For why? this is that, which in Saint Peter, 2 Pet.
3.18.
is required, that we should grow in grace, vvalking, as the Israelites toward
Zion, from strength to strength; Psalm. 84.7.
forgetting that which is behind, and endeavoring our selves unto that which
is before, (...). 3.^^.
and following hard toward the mark; that our way may be approved, to be that
way of the righteous, which Solomon compares to the light shining more and
more, Prove 4.8.
from the dawning, unto the perfect day. Of which proceeding we have the more
need to take special care, since in this way, not to go forvvard, is to go
backward: not to grow better, is undoubtedly to wax worse; our nature in
regard of spiritual motion being like a Boat floting in a stream, which if
it be not by force of oars continually rowed upward, will of it self
ne^^^sarily be carried downward. Wherefore, herein, to the end that we may be
assured of blessedness, let our trial be to find our selves to walk in this
perfect path of obedience; as first, by our direction taken from God, and
resolution only for God in our entrance: so secondly, for our continuance, by
our keeping still therein with out turning back, or straying, and by proceeding
forward without standing at a stay; so have we also the trial of the third
way, and gate, our sincere obedience.

CHAP. XXII. Trial of Patience by four rules, viz. two for entrance and two
for continuance.
THere remains the fourth and last path, viz. our Patience, of which as
Christians stand in continual need, the way to heaven being thorny (as before
was showed) and be set with troubles: so it is needful for the^ to make trial,
what their patience is, or whether that which happily they make show of, be
Christian patience, and not senseless blockishnesse. As they may, first for
the entrance, by considering how it has been wrought in them, first, by
learning that hard lesson, to deny, not their sins, or substance only, b^t
even themselves, Mat. 16.24.
their (...) wisdom and will: and secondly, by entertaining persuasion of the
love, and good will of God their father toward them, in Christ Jesus. For
first, till men have learned to deny themselves their own wisdom, and
carnal will, what marvel if they be angry and impatient (as Jonah was for
his Ion. 4.8.
gourd) at every thing that comes overthvvart the^, whether it be a cross
from God, or vvrong (as they conceive it) offered by men: neither can (...) be
imagined, that with patient meekness any should take up the cross, until
they have learned to sacrifice their will to God, with that submission of our
blessed Savior, Father, Luke 22.42.
not my will, but thine be done. Howbeit, neither may any hope to come
hereunto, until they become (which is the second point for trial) persuaded of
Gods good will toward them in Jesus Christ; by whose power and wisdom,
whiles they know that all things are Lam. 3^ 37.38.
disposed, and nothing befalling them without his appointment who works all
things after the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11.
and whose thoughts toward his are evermore thoughts of peace, Ier. 29.11.
and not of evil, still rejoicing over them to do them good, Ier. 32.41.
they rest withal assured out of this persuasion of Gods love, that all things
shall work together for their good. Rom 8.28.
The consideration whereof cannot but work them unto patience, that if it
please God, why should it not please them also? since God, who loves them,
knows better then themselves, what is for their good. And therefore in all our
sufferings, either for Christ, or with him, this must be the trial of our
patience, by considering whether the ground thereof be faith and obedience, our
being assured of Gods love in Christ, and having learned thereupon to deny our
selves.

And now, for the other trial of continuance, if we would see, whether we
possess our souls by true patience, let us observe first, Luke 21.1^.
the strength supporting, and secondly, the hope encouraging thereunto. For,
first, if our patience be Christian, and from above, it is supported by the
spirit of grace and prayer, helping our infirmities, and teaching us, as S.
James counsels, Zac. 12.10. Romans 8.26.
when at any time we lack wisdom, Iam. 1.5.
to ask it of God, who reproacheth no man, that so our patience by strength
and counsel received from heaven, may have in us her perfect working. And
secondly, for the expectation, encouraging us to hold out with comfort and
rejoicing, amidst all sufferings, of what less thing may it be, then of the
kingdom of heaven, the crown of glory? Whereof when once S. Paul had but a
glimpse by the eye of faith, you know how he prefers it in his account above
all the sufferings of this life; Romans ^.18.
grounding thereon the courage of a Christian, amidst the greatest troubles;
For, Therefore, says he, 2 Cor. 4.16
we faint not, but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is
renewed daily. Verse 17,
For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, causes unto us a far
more excellent, and an eternal weight of glory. While we look not on the
things that are seen, Verse 18.
but on the things which are not seen; for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal. So that if Iaacob,
serving seven years for Rahel, under so hard a master as Laban, thought it but
a short and easy apprentiship, because he loved her, Genesis 29.20
how much more ought every true Israelite, that loves the Lord Jesus, to serve
with patience, the years of his appointed warfare, having an eye unto so great
a recompense of reward? Heb. 11.26.
Wherefore thus also let our trial be touching this fourth and last particular
of patience, by considering: as first, how it has been wrought in us, by
persuasion of Gods love, and the denial of our selves: so secondly, how it is
continued, by the support of the spirit of prayer, and expectation of future
glory.

And now, for conclusion of this first use, (enlarged as you see for our
direction, with hope of profit) let me beseech you in the bowels, and by the
tender mercies of Jesus Christ, that since this is a business, which may well
be termed the Maine chance, and all things else, in comparison, but trifles:
you would, as S. Peter wishes, 2 Pet. 1.10
give all diligence thereunto, that you may make your calling and election
sure; and purchase this assured comfort to your souls against the hour of
death (which none of us know how soon it may seize upon us) that you have
entered, and are walking in the way of life; the several paths whereof, seeing
we have had amply and severally described, what remains but that, as David,
we consider our own ways, Psa. 119.59. Psalm. 4.4.
and examine our hearts each of us upon our beds, as we have been directed.

CHAP. XXIII. The woeful condition of all in in the broad way, whiles they
despise reproof, under a vain hope of mercy.
NOw because upon examination it is much to be feared, that many will be found
out of the way; and of those the greatest part, not caring ever to set foot
therein; it will be needful in the next place to infer from the doctrine
before delivered, our second use of terror and commination, unto such, who, if
they will deal unpartially with their own souls, cannot but find themselves
wanderers in the broad way hereto opposite, and therefore in the estare and
expectation of unavoideable destruction, unless, being warned of the danger of
Gods displeasure, they resolve to endure the difficulty of this strait gate,
and way, that they may enjoy his favor.

For, howsoever such many times, as Moses warns, promise to themselves peace;
Deuteronomy. 29.19.
their own hearts, like Ahabs flatte^ing Chaplains being ready to sooth them
in their madness, 1 King. 22.12.
and to bid them not to fear, but go on and prosper: yet if Balaam, though a
corrupt Prophet, durst not take upon him to curse where the Lord had not
cursed, Number. 23.8
how may any servant of Christ, that has obtained mercy of the Lord to be
faithful, presume to pronounce a blessing, where the Lord has not blessed?
but rather with the Prophet in the name of the Lord deny all peace unto the
wicked; Isa. 57.21.
answering him, as Iehu did Iehoram, what peace? whiles the whoredoms of their
mother, 2 Kin. 9.22.
that Iezabel of sinful nature, and her witchcrafts, are yet in great
number? For alas, what shall I, or what can I say unto thee? I know thou
would gladly hear of peace, and have those blessings as from mount Gerizim
pronounced on thee, that for all this, God is merciful: Deuteronomy. 27.12
and Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners: and at what time soever
a sinner shall repent, etc. Yea, it may be thou iudgest it unbeseeming the
ministers of the Gospel, to beat men down by the terrors of the Law, and not
rather apply the sweet comforts of the Gospel to raise them up with the hope
of life.

The hope of life? surely it is our only aim, and the travel of our souls,
so to fashion the new creature in you, that you may abound in that blessed
hope. But what? would you have us to deceive you? and that that lying spirit by
our 1 Kin. 2^.23.
mouths should bid you go on and prosper in your wickedness? or would not
your own heart in that case, as Micaiah, discover and justly reproove us? or
think you it is in our power to make wider or straiter the gate of heaven, at
our pleasure? surely; it is not we, but our God and yours, who has measured
these gates, and pointed out these narrow ways to life, in his eternal word
of truth; neither is it our part to determine judicially of any man's
everlasting estate; that power we willingly leave to your own consciences,
rightly informed by the word o^ truth, under God the judge of all, who is
greater then our hearts, and knows all things. 1 Ioh. 3.20.
Our only office by God assigned, is (as our names of Watchmen, Shepherds,
Eze. 3.17. Iere. 3 15.
and the like import) to stand in the ways, and, as our selves have learned
from the word, to give direction to our fellow Travelers, how they may guide
their feet in the way of peace. Luke 1.79.
And would you take it well in a iourny, having lost your way, to be told that
you are right and may go forward boldly? Joseph, when he missed of his
brethren in Shechem, and was wandering in the field, Genesis 37.16
was found of a man, by whom he was directed to follow them to Dothan; and
shall we, when the spouse of Christ, seeking her welbeloved, and her brethren,
comes for direction to the Tents of us Shepherds, Cant. 1.17
turn her out of the way, and (as Elisha did the blinded Aramites) lead her
to Samaria in stead of Dothan? we take it for granted, 2 Kin. 6.19
that know and teach men what they ought to do, that when you come unto us, as
the people uses to come, Exe. 33.31
and sit before us to hear our words, your desire is to understand from God by
us, the way wherein you may walk, Ier. 42.3.
and the thing that you may do: remembering, that the Lord is a witness of
truth and faith between us: Verse 5.
God forbid then, that either we should sin against the Lord, 1 Samuel 12.23.
ceasing to pray for you, and to show you the good and right way: or that you,
like those in Jeremy, should be found to dissemble in your hearts, Ier. 42.20.
having resolved with yourselves before hand to go down to Egypt: Ier. 43.2.
much less to give the lie to Gods servants, when they shall advise you in the
Lords name to the contrary, which is in effect, to say unto the Almighty, Job
21.14.
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. Nay, so far be
it from you, despising the counsel of God against your selves, Luke 7.30.
to fall out with the watchman, who in love unto your souls, and care to
deliver his own makes you to hear that voice, This is the way, walk ye in
it, Esa. 30.21.
when you turn to the right hand or to the left; or to account him your enemy
fortelling you the truth; Gal. 4.16.
That you rather show your selves to be of David's spirit, who receiving
counsel from God by a woman, 1 Samuel 25.32.
blessed the Lord the counsel, and the counselor, that caused him to desist
from his unadvised and unvvarrantable course. But if any one shall so please
himself in the opinion of his own wisdom, as to refuse, by God to be
made wise for himself, and shall mock and rage at him, who carefully seeks
to make him see the danger of his error, that he may return; let such a
scorner learn his doom from Solomon, Prove. 9.12.
that he alone shall suffer: and taking the guilt of his blood upon his own
head, shall leave this comfort unto the Watchman, Eze. 3.19.
that by giving faithful counsel, he has delivered his own soul.

Wherefore I beseech and charge thee, whosoever thou art, that wilt escape the
terror of the last, and dreadful day of Christ, do not sooth thy self with
senseless, and unreasonable presumptions, looking for a blessed end of an
accursed life, because, God is merciful: and has sent his son to save
sinners: and, made promise of pardon, whenever a sinner shall repent: for,
what warrant have we to extend Gods Mercy, though unlimitable in it self,
beyond the bounds which he has set in his word? wherein he has utterly
excluded from mercy, all that sin presumptuously, Deu. 29.20 Psalm. 59.5.
and of malicious wickedness. Or what comfort can thou have in this, that it
is not impossible for God to save, whiles by impenitency, thou make it
impossible for thee to be saved? And howsoever it be a true saying and worthy
of all men to be received, 1 Timothy 1.15
that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners; yet what can thou
claim therein, who by unbeleefe make God a liar, 1 Ioh, 5.10.
and accounting the Son of God no better worth then to be trod under thine
unhallowed feet, Heb. 10 ^9.
iudgest thy self unworthy of everlasting life. Act. 13 46.
Finally, howsoever mercy be never denied to any, that seriously and heartily
repents, yet, seeing God who shows mercy to every sinner that repents,
vouchsafes not repentance to every one that sins; what madness is it for
men to presume, not only of mercy, when they repent, but also of repentance
when they list? or how can he say, that ever he shall enter into life, who by
staying longer makes his entrance every day harder? or that only with a Lord
have mercy, at the last breath, he shall leap into the gate of life, when he
has all his days, and with all his might, run desperately in the ways of
death? what though one poor malefactor, were received to mercy on the Cross,
whose faith miraculously shone, Luk 23.43.
when, together with the sun of righteousness, the whole Church was in the
eclipse? how unsafe a course were it for any wretched soul, rather to presume
upon this one example, which God has extraordinarily given lest any should
despair, then to be afraid, considering there are no more recorded, lest any
man should presume?

Wherefore rather, to avoid the wrath of God and rage of all his creatures
(which as his hosts serve him in his war against his rebellious enemies) and
amongst the rest, the fury of a guilty conscience which as Gods secretary, is
ready to write, thy Mean Tekel; Dan. 5.25.
and to put thee ever in mind that thy judgment long ago is past, 2 Pet ^.3.
and thy damnation sleeps not, but happily this night may surprise thee
sleeping, and the Devils, Gods Executioners seize upon thy foolish soul, as was
threatened to the rich Epicure in the parable, when he prophesied to himself
of long life and Luc. 12.20.
good fare. How much better will it be, taking these things to heart, to listen
to the admonition, or counsel of striving to enter, which, being mainely
intended by our Savior, comes now to be urged, as the third use of the
doctrine proposed.

CHAP. XXIV. A counsel to enter; with the reason why so many do not, viz.
because they seek not, or because they strive not.
TO enforce upon us this counsel of our Savior, let us here take in and
consider his reason, in the latter part of the Text, drawn from the danger of
exclusion, to so many as do not strive to enter; for, Many, I say to you (so
does he avouch it on his word, that we may give the more credit thereunto)
shall seek (or enquire) to enter in, viz. into heaven; (...).
who for want of earnest striving shall not be able. So would all gladly go to
heaven, if wishing or willing would bring them thither; but to take pains for
it they are loath, and therefore wish in vain; like Solomon's sluggard, Prove.
13.4.
who lusts, but his soul has naught, because he refuses to put his hands
to work: so fares it with the spiritual sluggard, who is ready to vvish
with Balaam, to dye the death of the righteous, Number. 23.10
but does no more then he regard to live their life. Yea, how many are there,
that with James and John, vainly desire to sit on either hand of Christ, Mar.
10.37
and to wear the crown, who yet are loath to pledge him in his cup or to
take up his cross? but oh, that such as profess they have hope in Christ,
would so endeavor to be holy, as they affect eagerly, to be happy! for, then
surely they should be both holy and happy. And did they so strive for grace, as
they vvish for glory; then should grace end in them with glory, and as here
they live the lives, so should they after possess the joys of Saints in
heaven. But for this cause do men come short of that happiness they would
attain unto, because, either at all they seek not, or certainly they strive
not, to enter in, as here our Savior counsels, at the strait gate.

For if we mark well the humors of the world, first, ye shall see that
some seek not at all to enter, but running a most licentious and ungodly race,
as if they had made a covenant with death, Isa 28.15.
and with hell were at agreement, or rather, as if they cared not for either
Heaven or hell, God or devil, yet are ready in an hellish bravery, to belch
out that damned poison, drawn by the Atheistical Spider, from the most fragrant
flower of Gods eternal Predestination, whereout the Christian Be does suck
her sweetest honey; that live as they list, and do what they please, yet if
they be elected unto life, the shall be saved: when as on the contrary, Romans
9.19
if God have rejected them, they cannot do withal, the fault is not in them,
if they be condemned. Yes, doubtless (to answer thee who ever thou be that
thus openest thy mouth blasphemously against heaven, Psalm. 73.9.
) if thou be condemned, Romans 2.15 Tit. 3.11.
thine own conscience will one day tell thee, that the fault was wholy,
and altogether in thine own self, that being left to thy self, have most
justly demerited, by thine own wickedness, the judgment of eternal
condemnation; never entertaining so much as a desire of grace or love of the
truth, 2 Th. 2.10
that thou might be saved. But might thou not as absurdly reason, that
because God has determined how long every man shall live, and numbered his
days, therefore it is no matter, Job. 14.5.
whether men eat or drink to prolong life, since, till God has appointed
they cannot die? or should not he be accounted a murderer of himself, who,
so reasoning, would abstain therefore from food; seeing God who has
appointed the time, has appointed no less the means of preserving life? and
shall not thou deserve to be held a murderer of thine own soul and body in a
worse manner, who, thus reasoning from Gods determination in his most secret
counsel, touching thine eternal e^ate, shall therefore neg^ect all care of
the holy ^eanes which God in this ^evealed will of his (which ^nly belongs to
thee to look after) has prescribed to ^ll who would attain to that
blessedness, Deu. 29.29
whereto he has fore-appointed them; as if thou would have heaven drop
into thy mouth without thy seeking of it?

But (to leave such miscreants, not worthy farther mentioning, who desperately
profess themselves not once to seek entrance into heaven) in the second
place, how many are there, even of professed seekers, who yet, alas, for want
of striving, shall not be able to enter? witness for proof hereof, besides
the Text in hand, three other pregnant testimonies from the same our Saviors
mouth; The first, Math. 7.21. Not every one, that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my
Father which is in heaven. Yea, says he, many shall say unto me, in that day,
Lord, Lord, have not we by thy name prophesied, and by thy name cast out
Devils? and done many great works through thy name? and then will I profess
unto them, I never knew you; depart from me ye workers of iniquity. Parallel
whereto is the second place, in the words immediately following upon our Text,
as an exposition and confirmation thereof; Verse 25.
when ^he good man of the house is risen up, and has shut the door, and ye
begin to stand without, and to knock, saying: Lord, Lord, open unto us, and
he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are. Then, lo,
what pleading of old acqaintance, (not as if after death, before Gods
Tribunal, there shall be any such parley, but to note what it is, that many in
this life rely upon, hoping thereby to be let into heaven when they dye, even
a bare profession of Religion) for, then shall you begin to say, we have
eaten and drunk in thy presence, that is, have been partakers of thy sacrifice^
and Sacraments, and th^^ have taught in our streets, as i^ they should say, we
have been diligent comers t^ hear sermons, and yet neither is this enough,
for, no^withstanding he shall say, (...) tell you, Verse 29.
I know you not from whence ye are; depart from (...) all ye workers of
iniquity. The third proof, consonant i^ meaning to the two forme^ is taken
from the Parable (...) the five foolish Virgins, Math^ 25. who, because they
ha^ Lamps of an outward profession, though they had (...) wise care to provide
them selves of oil in their vessel are noted to have gone for^ to meet the
Bridegroom, Verse 1.
the^ by showing desire, and expectation of his coming, as also, no less then
the wiser five to have slumbred and slept whiles he tarryed, that is, Verse 5.
to have rested secure of entrance in with him, whenever he should come; and
yet, seeking too late to enter, were most miserably disappointed, and shut out,
with, I know ye not. Verse 12.
All these serving to teach us thus much, that it is not every crying, Lord,
Lord, not every calling, though with earnestness (as men often on their
deathbeds seem to do) on the name of God: no, nor yet preaching, or working
miracles in the name of Christ: nor yet coming to eat and drink yearly, (as
the Jews did in the Passover) or if it were monthly to receive the holy
Sacrament at the Table of Christ: (Exo. 12.)
or weekly, or daily to repair to the Church to hear the word of Christ: not
any, or all of these, nor yet lamps of outward temporary profession, touching
our hope and expectation of the coming of Christ, that will serve our turns,
to admit us with Christ into his kingdom. No, for though we thus seek,
(which is more then many do) and hereupon conceive some hope of happiness,
yet this is not enough; such hope, if there be no more, will but deceive us,
except we shall labor to supply what is wanting, which in those places we may
find added in the reasons of exclusion; viz. first to leave to be workers of
iniquity: and secondly, to labor to do our Fathers will which is in heaven:
and thirdly, to get with the wise Virgins, oil in our vessels, that is, true
grace in our hearts, which alone is able to nourish, and keep in the lamps of
our profession, until the Bridegroomes appearance. The endeavor whereof, what
is it in effect? but that earnest strife, which our Savior exhorts unto, to
enter in at the strait gate, and walk in the narrow way; so distasteful to
flesh and blood, that most had rather quite forgo the hope of salvation, then
enter and walk in it: and yet, as our Savior makes the comparison, Mar. 9:43
etc. that it is better to go maimed, halt, or with one eye, to heaven, then
having every limme and member sound, to be thrown headlong into hell: So may
we boldly say, that it is far better, though crouching with broken
shoulder-bones, and stripped naked of all garments spotted with the flesh, to
enter in at this strait gate to heaven, then with the multitude, who prefer
earth to heaven, and the enjoying of the pleasure of sin for a season, to the
fruition of everlasting joys, to wander, without this gate, in the dark ways
of death.

CHAP. XXV. A caution against the seeming strait gate of superstition,
enforcing a double care and circumspection.
But yet Satan, that old Serpent is so cunning, and still so ready to deceive,
Rev. 12.9. 2 Cor. 2.11 and 11.3.14
that even here also we had need to be warned of his subtilty; who because our
Savior has counseled to enter, and walk in the strait gate and narrow way,
has (according to his Apish, and crafty custom) to the end he might mislead
men devised and set forth certain gates and ways, which carry show of
straitness. Such as there are many (after the heathenish and Idolatrous guise)
in the Popish, pretended high way to heaven; as, their vows of voluntary
poverty, perpetual chastity, and regular obedience, their set times of
fasting, shrift, barefoot pilgrimages, whippings of themselves, and other
penances (to which the Rhamists, upon this text, refer us;) all which,
howsoever they make a show of straitness to such poor underlings, as are not
able to releeve themselves by dispensation, yet, as many ways, seeming strait,
may be paths of the broad way leading to death (which the Papists themselves
cannot deny, unless they will make that a way to heaven, wherein the Priests of
Baal trod, which yet may seem as strait to flesh and blood, as any way of
theirs, when they cut themselves, and that (says the Spirit) as their manner
was, 1 King. 18.28.
with knives and launcers, till the blood gushed out) so, that such, and no
better, these ways of Popery be indeed, howsoever magnified, as the only
state of perfection, may appear by two reasons: First, because they be none
other, then such as are taxed by the Apostle, Col. 2.21. for Will Worship,
consisting in beggarly traditions, Verse 22.
such as touch not, taste not, handle not, etc. which all perish with the
using, and are after the commandments and doctrins of men, never prescribed by
Jesus Christ: secondly, because they bring not unto Christ, the end of the law,
and aim of obedience; Romans 10.4 Ephesians. 4.20.
but contrariwise, as Jeroboam set up Calves in Dan and Bethel, 1 Kin. 12.28.
to keep the ten tribes from going to worship God at Jerusalem, so are these by
Satan erected, as false gates, to make men to repose confidence in their own
meritorious perfections, and supererrogations, and not in Christ.

Seeing therefore, every gate and way, which makes show of straitness, is not
that strait gate, and narrow way, of which our Savior speaks, unto the
agony and strife here required, must be added that counsel, which the Lord
in Jeremy does give his people, Ier. 6.16. (...)
to stand in the ways and behold, and ask among the old ways (as some with
warrant from the original, Trem.
and necessity of truth, do render, since there be many old ways, Eze. 20.18
that are not good) which is the good way, and to walk therein, that we may
find rest for our souls. For so does a twofold care lie upon us; the first to
labor to find out which is the good gate, and way; wherewith God, if we will
submit our selves, and look to be taught of him, will acquaint us by these two
certain and infallible marks, viz. first if it be prescribed by Christ, the
truth: secondly, if it lead us to Christ, our life: as the paths before
discovered are and do, which being found out, our second care ought to be,
putting away all delays (which in this case above all other, are most
dangerous) to strive for entrance, and being entered, to walk on with Abraham,
and the rest, (by faith made children, and blessed with faithful Abraham) who,
(Gal. 3.9) Heb. 11.13
confessing that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, declared
plainly thereby that they sought a Country; not that whence they came, but a
better, that is, an heavenly; of whom therefore God (says the Apostle) was not
ashamed to be called their God, Verse 16.
for he has prepared for them a City. A follower of whose footsteps, and a
guide to ours, was that famous Travailer, the blessed Apostle himself, the
penne-man of that their praise; who having wandered long before he came to see
the way, yet having found it, and being entered, how did he (as is noted of
Jacob, Genesis 29.1.
after he had passed thorough Bethel, that gate of heaven) lift up his feet,
Malac 4.2
and make have unto that land of the children of the east; upon whom th Prophet
promises that sun of righteousness to arise, and health under his wings:
witness his own words, wherein he professes his resolution in travail,
Philip. 3.13. and so forwards: Brethren, I account not my self that I have
attained to it: he means to that full comprehension of Christ, or perfection
of grace which he ought to labor after. And if not S. Paul, the^ who may,
Pharisaically think himself perfect, and as the Angel of Laodicea wanting
nothing but one thing, (Rev. 3.17)
says he, I do: one thing indeed, that one necessary thing, Luke 10.42.
in comparison whereof, like Mary, he minded nothing else: forgetting that
which is behind, and endeavoring unto that which is before, I follow hard (or
press with an eager pursuit, (so does the word emphatically import) after the
mark, (...)
or by levelling at the mark, for (or unto, that is, to attain unto) that
high price of the calling of God in Jesus Christ: being that which Peter
calls an immarcessible garland, (1 Pet. 5.4)
or crown of glory. Upon which worthy president, let me infer by way of
counsel to us all, the Apostles own conclusion: Phil 3.15.
let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: And as for those who
yet are otherwise minded, let our prayer be, that God, if they belong to him,
would his appointed time, reveal the same unto them. In the mean time, let us
all, in that whereunto we are come, Verse 16.
according to the measure of grace received, proceed by one and the same rule,
and line, minding the same thing by the direction and conduct of Gods word and
Spirit; (...).
as the Israelites by the leading of the Pillar toward Canaan, Exo. 13.21
or the wise men unto Christ, Math. 2.9.
by the guidance of the star; yea, Psalm. 119.32.
farther, let our promise be, and prayer, also, with that man after Gods own
heart, that we may run, not creep, nor go, but run the ways of God,
when he shall enlarge our hearts. For, surely, in this course only may
ambitious strife seem commendable, when as Peter and John, Ioh. 20.4.
ran both together unto the Sepulcher; so we run with contention to seek
our Savior, striving, as they did, 1 Cor. 14.12.
each to ouer-run the other, to surpass not only others, but also our selves,
not in greatness, but in goodness, growing still in grace as we do in age.

In which race, so to run, that we may obtain, we are notably directed,
and encouraged, by that cloud of witnesses, which is to us, as that pillar of
cloud was to the Israelites, under the standard of that Lion of Judah, our
most victorious leader, Hebr. 12.1.2. Wherefore, seeking that we are compassed
with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us also cast away every thing, that
presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on, and let us run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, that Chiefetaine
and perfecter of our faith; who, for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross, and despised the shame, and is set at the right hand of the Throne
of God; whom, if we be truly wise, we will be ready to follow, though it
be to Golgotha, with Simon, Mat. 27.31.
bearing the cross, that with him from mount Oliver, Luke 24.50
we may ascend to heaven, and be made partakers of his crown, and if as
Iaacob (though not without sweating and pains) we shall wrestle with Christ
until the breaking of the day, not letting him go, Genesis 32.14 (Can. 2.17)
except he bless us, doubtless, as he did, so shall we prevail with God
(for assurance unto us that so we shall with men also) and being of that
brood of travelers, which the Psalmist calls Iaacob, Psalm. 24.6.
howsoever, we depart limping, Genesis 32.31
to show, that we have buckled with our better, Verse 29.
yet, we shall carry away the blessing, and Israel shall be our name.

CHAP. XXVI. A consolatorie conclusion, making good the happiness of those
that travel in the narrow path, with removal of exceptions.
TO come to a conclusion, (and so to shut up all in the fourth, and last place,
Ioh. 13 11.
how can the consolation of God seem small unto us, who, though not without
much agony and strife, Heb. 12.11.
being gotten within the gate, and walking as pilgrims upon earth for a while
in the narrow path, Psalm. 119.19.
yet may rejoice in this, which our Savior directs his to look unto, as the
chiefest cause of joy, that our names are inrouled for citizens in heaven, Luc.
10.20.
where is our home and head, and all our treasure. Toward which our country
whiles we are making speed, longing with The Apostle hence to depart, Phil.
1.23.
and to get home, (as we may well with old Simeon, Luc. 2.29.
when once we have embraced in our arms of faith, our thrice blessed
Savior) Oh blessed may we be, and blessed this our travel and speed. For
why? having innocent hands, Psalm. 24.3.
and a pure heart, not lifting up our minds to vanity, nor swearing
deceitfully, assuredly we shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and
righteousness, that is, Verse 5.
the crown and reward of our righteousness, from (that righteous Judge) the
God of our salvation. For, first, in death we shall be sure of life, to
ascend where our glorious head is already crowned, into the highest heavens,
there to dwell before the Throne, and in presence of the lamb, and to enjoy
with God himself, and all the holy Angels, and triumphant Saints,
everlasting and most blisfull glory, which seeing eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor the heart of man has been ever able to conceive; Why should my pen go
about to describe; and not rather leave all our souls, who can entertain hope
thereof, with joy unexpressible, to stand astonished? To speak therefore
only of our present state; wherein, though we be the sons of God, 1 Ioh.
3.2.
yet it appears not what we shall be; whiles we are beneath in this veil
of tears and Tabernacles made of clay, Job 4.19.
whose foundations are in the dust, yet stand we now in Gods courts, and
dwell in his holy Tabernacle, of which you hear what the Singer of Israel sang
so sweetly, Oh how amiable! Psalm. 84. Verse 1. Verse 10.
etc. One day in thy courts is better, then elsewhere a thousand years: yea,
a better choice by far, to be a door keeper in the house of God, then to
dwell, though with sovereign command, in the tents of wickedness. Indeed let
us weigh things well in the balances of the sanctuary, and we shall find,
that, there is no comparison between those dvvellings, ways and vvalkings.

For (to prevent exceptions briefly, and give vvithall encouragement to every
faithful, but fainting soul) First, for the company; what though, vvalking
in this narrovv path, we seem to walk alone, or with fevv companions?
Surely, this may add courage to us, to go on, in assurance that we are in
the way to life, which (if our Savior be worthy credit) but fevv do find.
For, neither have in any age the best things pleased the greatest multitudes,
nor the best profession bin ever best reported of, witness that speech of the
Jews at Rome touching the profession of Christians, Act. 28.22. As concerning
this sect, we know that it is every where spoken against. Notwithstanding,
neither shall we be in this journey all alone; some in all ages having gone
before us, and some to the worlds end following after; and many doubtless
(though not the most no^ greatest Rufflers in the world) even for the present
footing it with us, of all other the trustiest companions in the way. Neither,
put case we were forced, as Jacob, to go all alone, Genesis 18.
need we to fear want of company, since in this way, lo, as to him, Christ
Jesus, and all the host of God, the holy Angels, Gen 32.1.
are ready to meet with us. Secondly, for the way it self, howsoever at first,
it may seem difficult, and displeasing to our flesh (the duties of piety to
weak beginners, who are yet as old bottles not able to hold new wine, Mat.
9.17.
being not so delightful, but a burden rather, and the profession of the
faith, as to Nichodemus, at first, matter of fear, Ioh. 3.2.
till we are accustomed thereunto, and have gotten strength as did the same
Nichodemu^ after to grow bold) yet, Ioh. 19 39.
wh^ once we have tasted, 1 Pet. 2.3. Psalm. 34.8.
and ar^ grown well accquainte^ with the grace of life, w^ shall find with
David, Psalm 11 9.
nothing so sweet unto ou^ souls, as the service of the Lord. Insomuch, that
w^ shall see cause rather to pity, then envy their wre^ched liberty that, being
no^ servants unto righteousness are, Romans 6.20.21.
whiles they think themselves only free, the mo^ miserable slaves of sinne^

And farther (to preven^ the cavil which some make an Apology for the
sinful sloth,, in doin^ naught or nothing, becau^ they can never do enough
what though when we ha^ done all that is commanded (if we could, Luc. 17.10.
(...).
which none can do) we must confess, we are unprofitable servants: yet
neither let this discourage us from doing our best, or making it with S. Paul,
our only aim to finish our course with joy, Act. 20.24.
who have been taught that what was impossible to the Law, Romans 8.3.
Christ Jesus has supplied for us: and withal obtained, that whosoever believe in
him, showing their faith by their sincere, howsoever weak, endeavor of
obedience, should be in God the Fathers reckoning esteemed righteous, and for
his righteousness, not their own obedience, held worthy of life eternal.

And, what though the children of God, (having their worldly state proportioned
in Christ himself, who in the days of his humiliation refused to be made a
King) do for the most part want that outward pomp, Ioh. 6.15.
and luster of the world, thar so dazeleth the carnal eye? Yet herein the
Kings daughter excels all the children of this world; Psalm. 45.13.
that she is all glorious within; perfectly fair in the eyes of her
welbeloved, Cant. 1.14
through his beauty which he has put upon her, Eze. 16.14. Cant. 1.4.
and comely as the curtains of Solomon, in the sight of the unnatural sons
of her mother who are angry and envious, against her. Yea, so do the hidden
beams of grace break through the cloud of their afflicted, and despised
condition, that not only the clear sight of the spiritual beholders, does
discern them, as sparks of heavenly beauty, but even the envious eye of
malignant worldlings cannot but look upon them, though as eye-sores, nor their
preiudicious heart, but allow and admire them, making them that never regard to
imitate the practice of their life, at times to wish that they may be
partakers of the comfort of their death. Number. 23 10


Finally, where may the voice of lasting joy and sound rejoicing be heard, but
as the Psalmist speaks, in the Tabernacles of the righteous? Psa. 118.15.
For, howsoever worldlings, that never knew what true delight o^ pleasure
means, make a crackling of laughter, like a fire of thorns under a pot,
Eccl. 7.8.
thinking themselves to have, at least, the advantage of mirth above Gods
children, who sit as Joseph in afflictions unminded: Amos 6.6. Judge. 16.25 Ps.
35 16.69, 12.
or, as Sampson and holy David derided of them in their merriments and good
fellowship: yet herein also the righteous are more excellent then their
neighbors, Pro. 12.26
who, though they walk in thorny ways, and cannot but be pricked with many
griefs and disquietments, have yet Christ Jesus as the brazen Serpent to Number
21.9
look upon; whereby the sting of Death, 1 Cor. 15.56.
and strength of sin is so remooved from their hearts; that, grounded in faith,
renewed by repentance, practiced in obedience, confirmed in patience, they
cannot but rejoice with joy unspeakeable and glorious. 1 Pet. 1.8.
Neither is it for the Stranger to meddle with the Christians joy. Prove. 14.10
Suffices it him, that (as his portion in this life) his corn and wine and
oil increases: Psalm. 17 14. Psalm. 4 7.
the light of Gods loving countenance, the promise of his continual assistance,
the comfort of his gracious spirit, the hope of his glorious presence, are
hidden from the gross and carnal eye, partly by the malice and subtilty of
the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. 1 The. 2.16
but chiefly by the just wrath of the God of heaven, wh^ leaves those
despisers to behold, Act^ 13.41
and wonder at, the hopeful endeavor and alacrity of his servants; who
weighing the precious worth of this counsel of our Savior, do strive by
violence to enter into this gate of Heaven.

Psalm. 118.20. This is the gate of the Lord: the righteous shall enter into it.
Isa. 30.21. This is the way: walk ye in it.

