A Detection of damnable driftes, practiced by three Witches arraigned at
Chelmisforde in Essex, at the last Assizes there holden, which were executed
in April. 1579.

Set forth to discover the Ambushementes of Satan, whereby he would surprise
us lulled in security, and hardened with contempt of Gods vengeance
threatened for our offenses.

Imprinted at London for Edward White, at the little North-dore of Paul's.

To the Reader.
ACcept this pamphlet (Christian Reader) view, and peruse it with discretion,
and hedefulnesse. No trifles are therein contained worthy to be conte^ned, nor
pernicious fantazies deseruyng to be condemned. But contrariwise in this
pretty plot may wholesome herbs of admonitions for the unwary, and careless,
and soote flowers to recreate the wearied senses, be gathered. For on the one
side the clear sight may epsy the ambushmentes, which Satan the secret
woorkemaister of wicked driftes, has placed in most parts of this realm,
either by crafty conueighaunces, to creep into the conceiptes of the simple,
or by apparaunt treachery to undermine and spoil the states of such as God
permits him to have power over. And on the other side the eye that is
wimpled, may hereby be advertised of the darkness, wherewith his
understanding is ouercast, and puttyng of the veil of vanity, may reclaim
his concept, and esteem of the impiety of the offenders and vilanie of their
acts, according to the word of God, and waightinesse of the case. And if in
time past he has escaped their Sorceries, let him not the less fear the
harms that may hereafter ensue. For the Devil by the sufferaunce of
almighty God, is as well able to plague the person, that most presumes of
safety, as any have bin who in this treatise are mentioned. Some with much
ado ca^ be awaked out of their drousie dreams, though they be told that
their neighbors house is on fire. But when their own walls are invaded with
like flames, they shall find that it had bin better to have come an hour too
soon, to quench those foreign fires, then to have risen one minute too late
to extinguishe the same, creepyng into their own chambers. If therefore thou
be assured that thy neighbor, either in body, family, or gooddes is impaired
by damnable witchcrafte, or perceiuest by information, or other wise ought of
such devises, intended to be practiced, or likely presumption of such
Deuilishe deeds contrived, for Charity to thy Christian brother, and tender
regard of thine own state, preuente or stop the mischief by all possible
means. And for thine own part with prayer, and assured faith in the merits
of Christ Jesus shield thy self, so shall neither the Devil nor his Angels
have power, over thee, or thine.

Farewell.
The Confession of Elizabeth Fraunces, late of Hatfeelde in Essex.
IMprimis, the said Elizabeth Fraunces confessed that about Lent last (as she
now remembers) she came to one Pooles wife her neighbor, and required some
old yest of her, but being denied the same, she departed toward one good
wife Osbornes house a neighbor dwelling thereby of whom she had yest, and in
her way going toward the said good wife Osbornes house, she cursed Pooles
wife, and badde a mischief to light upon her, for that she would give her no
yest, Whereupon suddenly in the way she hard a great noise, and presently
there appeared unto her a Spirit of a white color in seemyng like to a little
rugged Dog, standing near her upon the ground, who asked her whether she
went? she answered for such things as she wanted, and she told him
therewith that she could get no yeest of Pooles wife and therefore wisled the
same Spirit to go to her and plague her, which the Spirit promised to do,
but first he bad her give him somewhat, then she having in her hand a crust of
white bread, did bite a piece thereof and threw it upon the ground, which
she thinks he took up and so went his way, but before he departed from her
she willed him too plague Pooles wife in the head, and since then she never
saw him, but she has hard by her neighbors that the same Pooles wife was
grievously pained in her head not long after, and remains very sore payned
still, for on saterdaie last past this Examinate talked with her.

2 Item this Elizabeth Fraunces says further, that she knows one Elizabeth
Lord awidowe, dwelling in the same parish of Hatfielde and so has done of
long time, of whom she hard, that about seven or eight years paste she brought
drink in a crewse, and gave it to one Ihon Fraunces servant to goodman Some
of the same parish, shortly after the taking of which drink he sickened, and
died.

3 Item she further confesses that she likewise knows that the same Widow
Lord, was said to have bewitched one Ione Robertes, servant to old Higham,
in a piece of an Apple cake which she gave her, upon the eating whereof she
presently sickened, and not long after died.

4 Item she also confesses, that she knows one Mother Osborne, a Widow in
the same town to be a witch, and that she has a mark in the end of one of
her fingers like a pit, and an other mark upon the outside of her right
leg, which she thinks to be plucked out by her Spirit: and that one Mother
Waterhouse her own sister (long since executed for Witch craft) had the self
same marks, whithe she terms (nippes) and she says that this Mother
Osborne liyng lame, and complainyng of her sore leg, she the said Elizabeth
Fraunces came unto her, and required to see her leg, which being showed unto
her, she the said Elizabeth badde to pnt it into the bed again, saying: that
she her self knew that the same came, by want of well seruyng of God. And
thus much for Elizabeth Fraunces.

The Evidence given against Elleine Smithe of Maldon.
THere was one Ihon Chaundeler dwelling in Maldon, whose wife named Alice
Chaundeler, was mother unto this Elleine Smithe, and for Witchcrafte was
executed long before, after whose execution he went unto his daughter in law
Ellein Smithe, and demanded certain money of her, which she had received of
her mother his wife, by means of which money they fell out, and in falling
out the said Elleine in great rage said unto him, that it had been better
for him, he had never fallen out with her, and so it came to pass, for the
same Ihon Chaundeler confessed before his death, that after the same hour that
she had said so unto him, he nener eat any meat that digested in him, but
ever it came up again as soon as it was done, by which means he consumed,
and wasted away to his death.

2 The son of the foresaid Ellen Smithe, of the age of thirteen years, or
there aboutes, came to the house of one Ihon Estwood of Malden, for to beg an
almose, who chid the boy away from his door, whereupon he went home and
told his mother, and within a while after the said Estwood was taken with very
great pain in his body, and the same night followyng, as he satte by the
fire with one of his neighbors, to their thinkyng they did see a Ratte run
up the Chimney, and presently it did fall down again in the likeness of a
Tode, and taking it up with the tongges, they thruste it into the fire, and so
held it in Forcesibly, it made the fire burn as blewe as Azure, and the fire
was almost out, and at the burning thereof the said Ellen Smithe was in
great pain and out of quiet, whereupon dissemblyngly she came to the house
of the fore said Ihon Estwood, and asked how all that were there did, and he
said well I thank God, and she said, I thought you had not been well, and
therefore I came to see how you did, and so went her way.

3 Also it was avouched, and by this prisoner confessed, that where as her
daughter, and the daughter of one Widow Web of Maldon before said, did fall
out and fight, the same Ellein Smithe offended thereat, meetyng good wife
Webbes daughter the next day, gave her a blow on the face, whereupon so
soon as the child came home she sickened, and languishyng two days, cried
continually, away with the Witch, away with the Witch, and so died. And in
the morning immediately after the death of the same child, the said good wife
Web espied (as she thought) a thing like to a black Dog go out at her
door, and presently at the sight thereof, she fell distraught of her wits.

4 Besides the son of this Mother Smith, confessed that his mother did keep
three Spirits, whereof the one called by her great Dicke, was enclosed in a
wicker Bottle: The second named Little Dicke, was put into a Leather Bottle:
And the third termed Willet, she kept in a Wolle Pack. And thereuppon the
house was commanded to be searched. The Bottles and pack were found, but the
Spirits were vanished away.

The effect of the Evidence against Mother Staunton, late of Wimbishe in
Essex, who was arraigned, but not executed, for that no manslaughter, or murder
was objected against her.
IMprimis, this Mother Staunton, late of the parish of Wimbishe in Essex, came
to the house of one Thomas Prat of Broke Walden, Thou Farrour of Libleburie
being present, and one Thomas Swallowe, and the said Mother Staunton, being
demanded by one of them how she did, she answered, that a knave had beaten
her: saying she was a Witch, then said he again, in good faith Mother
Staunton, I think you be no Witch, no Master quod she, I am none in deed,
although I can tell what belongs to that practice, of which words, the
goodman of the house took witness of the aforenamed parties, and delivered a
bill subscribed mith their hands thereof, to Master George Nicolles.

2 Item, the said Mother Staunton came to his house an other time, and after
certain words of anger between him and her, he raced her face with a Nedle,
what quoth she, have you a Flea there: and the next night after, the said
Pratte was so grievously taken with tormente of his Limbs, that he never
thought to have lived one hour longer, which also was subscribed and sent.

3 Item, she came the third time by his bore with Grains, and he demaundyng a
few of her, she asked what he would do with them, I will give them, said he,
to my Chickens, and snatchyng a handful from her, did so. But after they had
tasted of them, three or four dousen of them died, and only one Chicken
escaped of them all.

4 Item, she came on a time to the house of one Richard Saunder of Brokewalden,
and being denied Yeest, which she required of his wife, she went her way
murmuryng, as offended with her answer, and after her departure, her young
child in the Cradle was taken vehemently sick, in a merue^lous strange manner,
whereupon the mother of the child took it up in her arms to comfort it,
which being done, the Cradle rocked of it self, six or seven times, in
presence of one of the Earl of Surreis gentilmen, who seeing it stabbed his
dagger three or four times into the Cradle ere it stayed: Merrily iestyng and
saying, that he would kill the Devil, if he would be rocked there.

5 Item, the said Mother Staunton, came on a time to the house of one Robart
Petie of Brookewalden, and being denied by his wife diverse things, which she
demanded at once, and also charged with the stealyng of a Knife from thence,
she went her way in great anger, and presently after her departure, the
little child of the said Petie fell so straungely sick as for the space of a
Week, as no body thought it would live.

6 Item, the said Stauntons wife, came also to one Willyam Corners house of
Brokewalden upon a Fridaie, as she had done often in times paste, and being
denied of certain things which she craved, as a piece of Leather etc. she
asked the good wife how many children she had, who answered one, which child
being then in perfect health, was presently taken with such a sweat and
coldness of body, and fell into such shrickyng and staryng, wringyng and
writhyng of the body to and fro, that all that saw it, were doubtful of the
life of it.

7 Item, she came on a time to the house of Robart Cornell of Suersem, and
craved a Bottle of Milk of his wife, but being denied it, she departed for a
little while, leauyng her own Bottle behind her, and took an other with her,
that belonged to the before said Cornell, after three days she came again,
and requested her own Bottle, and restored the other, crauyng Milk as before,
the wife of the house always suspectyng her to be a Witch denied her
request, and barred the doors against her, whereupon she satte down upon
her heels before the door, and made a Circle upon the ground with a knife.
After that she dug it full of holes with in the compass, in the sight of
the said wife, her man, and her maid, who demaundyng why she did so? She made
answer, that she made a shityng house for her self after that sort, and so
departed, the next day the wife coming out at the same door, was taken
sick, and began to swell from time to time, as if she had been with child, by
which swellyng she came so great in body, as she feared she should burste:
and to this day is not restored to health.

8 Item, she came often to the house of one Ihon Hopwood of Walden, and had
continaally her requests, at the last being denied of a Leathern thong, she
went her way offended and the same night his Geldyng in the stable, being the
day before in very good case, died suddenly, and afterward being burdeined
with all, she never denied it.

Item, she coming to the house of Ihon Cornell the younger of Wimbishe, and
being denied her demand, she took offense, and immediately after his cattle
in steed of sweet Milk, yielded gore stinkyng blood, and one of his Kine fell
into such miserable plight, that for a certain space, he could by no means
recover her.

Item, she came on a time to the Uicars house at Wimbishe, and being denied her
errande by his wife (he being as then from home) his little son in the
Nurses lapp was taken with such vehement sickness, that the beholders supposed
no less, but it would straight have died, the said Mother Staunton sittyng
by, and having touched the child before it grew sick: but within one hour
after the Uicar came home the child recovered perfectly, and played as before.

Item, also she came on a time to the house of oue Rohart Lathburie, of the
same Town, who dislikyng her dealyng, sent her home empty, but presently
after her departure, his Hogs fell sick and died, to the number of twenty,
and in the end he burned one, whereby as he thinks, he saved the rest: He
also had a Cow straungely cast into a narrow gripe, and being helped out in
the presence of master Henry Mordaunt, notwithstanding the diligent care that
was takn of her, she was in few days three times like to be lost in the
mite. And thus much for Mother Staunton.

The effect of the Evidence given in against Mother Nokes late of Lamberd
Parish in Essex.
A Certain Servant to Thomas Spycer of Lamberd End in Essex yoman, sporting,
and passing away the time in play with a great number of youth, chanced to
snatche a pair of Gloves out of the pockette of this Mother Nokes Daughter
being a young woman of the age of xxviij years, which he protests to have done
in jest. Her Mother perceiuyng it, demanded the Gloves of him, but he giving
no great ear to her words departed toward the feeldes to fetch home
certain Cattle. Immediately upon his departure quoth the same Mother Nokes to
her Daughter, let him alone, I will bounce him well enough, at what time he
being soudainely taken, and reft of his limbs sell down. There was a boy
then in his company by whom he sent the Gloves to Mother Nokes.
Notwithstanding his Master was feign to cause him to be set home in a Wheel
Barrowe, and to be laid into a bed, where with his legs a cross he lay
beddred eight days, and as yet has not attained to the right use of his
lymmes.

Further it was avouched that mother Nokes had said that her housbande lay
with one Tailers wife of Lamberd End, and with reproachful words reviled her
saying at last; thou have a Nurse child but thou shalt not keep it long, and
presently thereupon the Child died.

Another affirmed, that when he had reproved the said Tailers wife, and Mother
Nokes as they were at Church, and willed them to agree better, the same Mother
Nokes in a fume answers that she cared for none of them all, as long as Tom
held on her side, meaning her Feende.

The same man having a servant of his at Plough, this Mother Nokes going by,
asked the fellow a question but getting no answer of him she went her way.
Forthwith one of his horses fell down. At his coming home to dy^^er, he told
his Master how the same horse was swollen about the head. His Master at first
supposyng that it came by a strype, was greatly offended at the ploughman, but
afterward understanding of Mother Nokes going by, and the circumstance before
mentioned, went to the said Mother Nokes and chid and threatened to have her to
her answer, howbeeit the Horse died.

FINIS.

