THE CHARTERHOVSE WITH THE LAST WILL and Testament of THOMAS SVTTON ESQVIRE.

Taken out of the Prerogative Court, according to the true Original.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Thorp. 1614.

THE CHARTERHOVSE.
CHARITY, of the three Theological Virtues, by the vncomptrolable testimony
of Saint Paul the greatest, has in these our days, upon whom are (or may be
supposed to have been) come the ends of the World, amongst them all, of all
sorts has been least regarded. The consciences of some particular persons,
sealed with the true seals of peace and purity, to their own everlasting
comfort, and the sensible good of their fellow members remaining, have left to
posterity notable marks of their godly devotion; (...) followed.

This (...) dooers, agrees well (...), where (every (...) according to the
works he has done in his body) it is said, few shall be saved. Indeed it
is not to be meruailed at, that Charity waxes cold in these times, where
Auatice has gotten the upper hand; Christ himself long since prophesying,
that toward the end of the World it should be so. All States generally are
corrupted: each man preferring his own private interest, before the common
care of his distressed brethren; not measuring any thing, but by the rule of
his own profit.

To insist longer upon these common places would be ouer-tedious to the
Reader; and not much available, but rather hurtful, as wherein he may behold
the Worlds miserable thrift, and so become a sectator thereof, whilst in the
mean while he make shipwreck of his Conscience, and hazard the perdition of
Heaven and his own Soul. Let us therefore walk into the Valley of Lillies,
where Christ with his true and everlasting delights is ready to entertain us.

Hereunto wishes alone avail not; though in themselves commendable. Quiddam
altius in desiderio: There is something more to be desired. With this godly
desire we must join sanctity. Holiness of life is it, whereby we are
acceptable before God.

Naturally we are inclined, to wish well to our own selves. Nemo odit earnem
suam. But to this well-being, well-doing is required. Quid oportet me facere,
was well propounded by that Holy Conuertite in the Acts; What must I do, to
attain everlasting life? For to this end by the free grace of God we are
delivered from the bondage of Sin and Death, That we may serve him in
holiness. Surely the yoke of the old Law was insupportable; in respect of
flesh: yet that yoke was not so taken off by our Savior, that we should think
our selves free from all manner of yoke. Iugum meum dulce and leave, My yoke is
sweet and light; yet a yoke. He that sustaines the World, bears part with
us: therefore an easy yoke. As easy notwithstanding as it is, few undergo
it. How culpable therefore the most part of Mankind is, in refusing to be
coupled in this sweet yoke, and to draw together with Christ, who bears the
heauiest part thereof, it is more than to be lamented.

Not a fountain, but an Ocean of tears, is here to be desired; to wash away
this guilt. Ex fructibus, by their fruits you shall know them, is the
Cognizance, whereby the good are discerned from the bad: the surest mark of
all others, whereby either God, or Satan may claim their own.

If therefore we would be accounted and taken for the true servants of God, we
must wear his cognizance: we must labor to make our Election sure, by
bringing forth such fruits, as proceed from a faith working by Love. But this
Badge is so seldom seen among us, as it may well be supposed, that God has
here but a very few servants.

Let us desire the Almighty for his great Love to Mankind, that he will more
and more kindle the small spark of Charity that is amongst us, that it may
break forth into a bright flame of brotherly love, and wholly involue us in
the zeal of Gods House. Then may we joyfully burn incense to the GOD of
Israel, and offer up our vows without fear. For the merciful man has cast
his bread upon many waters: and the Lord has assured him a reward.

Now it is time to commend to posterity, the due praises of that truly worthy
and never to be forgotten Gentleman, Master Thomas Sutton, the right Phoenix
of Charity in our times: who mounting up to the highest top of Gods holy Hill,
and gathering together the Aromaticall spices of Love and Compassion, has
consumed himself in the fire of fervent zeal toward Gods poor Saints, who
setting all worldly respects, either of Alliance or Consanguinitie, far
behind his Love to God and his poor brethren in Christ, has made them (in
effect) the Heirs of all those great riches, wherewith it pleased the Lord to
bless him. This godly Act of his has herein especially approved it self,
for that he never stuck at any cost, nor let slip any occasion, which might
further, or establish it, to the benefit of the poor people.

The greatness of the gift, and the religious care taken for confirmation
thereof, with the pious forwardnes of our good Sovereign in the advancement of
so good a Work; are at large set forth in a more full Volume, amongst many
other notable Reports, by a Reverend, famous, and learned Judge of this Land:
whereunto, when it shall be published, I refer the courteous Reader for his
more ample satisfaction. In the mean time briefly take this.

The late dissolved Charter House by Smithfield, not long since belonging to
the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain of the Kings
household, is well known to be a very large and goodly Mansion; beautified
with spacious Gardens, Walks, Orchards, and other pleasures; enriched with
diverse dependencies of Lands and Tenements thereunto belonging, and very fitly
seated for wholesome air, and many other commodities.

This commodiousness of syte, and largeness of circuit, gave occasion to this
worthily renowned Gentleman Master Sutton, to affect this House, as the only
fit place, wherein to lay the foundation of his Religious desseignes. For he
had before that time a settled determination to erect an House in Hallingbury
Bouchers in the County of Essex, to be an Hospital for such poor Men and
Children as He himself in his life time, or the future Governors of the same
Hospital, should nominate and appoint to be lodged and relieved there: As
also for a Schoole-Maister and Usher to teach the Children to read and write,
and instruct them in their Latin and Greek Grammar: for a Divine likewise, to
preach the Word of God unto them all, and for one Master to govern all those
people belonging to that House.

And to that end and purpose, He had, upon earnest Petition, procured himself
ability by Virtue of an Act of Parliament, begun and holden by prorogation
thereof at Westminster in the County of Middlesex the 9. day of February in the
seventh year of his Majesty's reign over England, etc. and there continued to
the 24. day of July then next following. To erect and build in the said Town
of Hallingbury Bouchers such an house for an Hospital, as is immediately before
remembered: and that the said House should be called The Hospital of King
James, founded in Hallingbury in the County of Essex, at the humble Petition,
and at the only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire. And that the
Archbishop of Canterbury that then was, and other Reverend Praelats of this
Realm, and their Successors in their several Seas, the right Honorable Thomas
Lord Ellesmere, Lord Chancellor of England, and such as should succeed after
him to be Lo: Chancellors or L: Keepers of the Great Seal of England, the Lord
Treasurer that then was, and those that should succeed in that Office, with
diverse other select persons both of the Clergy and Laity, in such manner as
you shall find them set down in the said Volume of Reports whereunto I refer
you, were by the said Act of Parliament elected, nominated, and appointed the
first and present Governors of the Lands, possessions, revenues, and goods of
the said Hospital. But afterward, upon more mature deliberation, finding this
great Mansion of the Charterhouse, far more convenient for his purpose, then
that of Hallingburie could be, He was an earnest suitor to my Lord of Suffolk
to buy that House of him: acquainting his Lordship with the change of his mind
concerning Hallingburie, and his great affection to make the Charter House his
Hospital. To this Petition of his, it is not to be doubted, but that my Lord
gave the more ready and willing way: because the chief end thereof was the
glory of God, and the relief and comfort of a great number of poor people.
Long the matter was not debated between them: but the price being concluded,
the Bargain and sale was assured. The sum disbursed for this purchase, came
to thirteen thousand pounds: which was paid down in hand, before the
conueyance was sealed.

Having thus assured the state of this great House to him, and his Heirs, He
makes humble suite to his Majesty, to grant him license to erect and establish
his intended Hospital and Grammat School, and other his godly and charitable
uses, in the said late dissolved Charterhouse; as in a more commodious place,
then that of Hallingbury. Hereunto the King readily yielded; being graciously
affected to so charitable a work.

The better therefore to encourage and enable this Heroical Gentleman, to
prosequute this good mind to the full perfection; it pleased his Majesty out
of his most Royal disposition, to grant his Letters patents unto him, thereby
authorizing him to the uses last mentioned, as in his Letters pattents more
fully appears.

Now therefore with alacrity this business goes forwards. The Reverend Father
in God, George now Archbishop of Canterbury, Thomas Lord Ellesmere, Lord
Chancellor of England, Robert Earl of Salisburie, Lord high Treasurer of
England, John the elect Bishop of London, Lancelot now Bishop of Ely, Sir
Edward Cook Knight, chief Justice of the common pleas, Sir Thomas Foster
Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of the common plees, Sir Henry Hobart
Knight and Baronet, Attorney general, John Ouerall now Deane of the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul in London, George Mountain Deane of the Collegiat Church
of Westminster, Henry Thursby Esquire, one of the Masters of the Chancerle,
Geffrey Nightingale Esquire, Richard Sutton Esquire, John Law Gentleman, Thomas
Brown Gentleman, and the Master of the Hospital of King James, founded in
Charterhouse, within the County of Middlesex, at the humble Petition and the
only costs and charges of Thomas Sutton Esquire, are elected, nominated, and
ordained by the Kings most excellent Majesty in his Letters Patents granted
(as aforesaid) the first Governors of the Lands, Possessions, Revenues, and
Goods of the said Hospital of King James founded in Charterhouse.

And further power is given to the said Governors, as you may find more at
large in the said Letters Patents.

Hereupon diverse Lands, by him formerly purchased, are made and past over to
this Hospital, for maintenance of the poor people there to be relieved.
Preparation is made for fit lodgings, and other necessaries; and all things go
onwards, with as convenient speed as may be, to the wished end.

Now for the Readers better information and content, it will not be amiss to
set down, what Lands they were, and in what Counties, which were made over and
annexed by Master Sutton to the said Hospital. Thus therefore they are named,
as they follow in order: (viz.) All those his Manors and Lordships of
Southminster, Norton, Little Hallingbury, alias Hallingbury Bouchers, and Much
Stanbridge in the County of Essex, with all their and every of their rights,
members, and appurtenances whatsoever.

Also all those his Manors and Lordships of Bastingthorpe, alias Buslingthorpe
and Dunnesby in the County of Lincoln, with their and every of their rights,
members, and appurtenances whatsoever.

Also those his Manors of Salthorp alias Saltrop alias Haltrop, Chilton, and
Blackgroue, in the County of Wilts, with their and every of their rights,
members, and appurtenances: and also all those his lands and pasture grounds
called Blackgroue, containing by estimation two hundred acres of pasture with
the appurtenances in Blackgroue and Wroughton, in the said County of Wilts: and
also all that his Manor of Missenden, otherwise called the Manor of
Missunden, in the Parishes of Wroughton, Lydierde, and Tregose in the said
County of Wilts, with all his rights, members, and appurtenances.

And all that his Manor of Elcombe and Park called Elcombe Park, with the
appurtenances, in the said County of Wilts.

Also All that his Manor of Watlescote, alias Wiglescete, alias Wiglescete
with the appurtenances in the said County of Wilts.

And also All that his Manor of Wescote alias Wesete, with the appurtenances,
in the said County of Wilts: and also al those his lands and pastures,
containing by estimation 100. acres of land, and 60. acres of pasture with the
appurtenances in Wiglescote and Wroughton in the said County of Wilts: and All
that his Manor of Vffcote with the appurtenances in the said County of Wilts:
and also al those his two Messuages, and one thousand acres of land, two
thousand acres of pasture, three hundred acres of Meadow, and three hundred
acres of wood with the appurtenances, in Brodehinton in the said County of
Wilts.

And also All those the Manors and Lordships of Camps, alias Camps Castle,
otherwise called Castle Camps with the appurtenances, scituare, lying, being,
and extending in the Counties of Cambridge and Essex, or in either of them, or
elsewhere within the Realm of England,

And also all that his Manor of Balsham, in the County of Cambridge, with all
and singular the rights, members and appurtenances thereof whatsoever. And also
All those his Messuages and Lands situate, lying, and being in the Parishes of
Hackuey and Tottenham in the County of Middlesex, or in either of them, with
their and every of their rights, members, and appurtenances whatsoever, which
said Message was lately purchased of Sir William Bowyer Knight; and the said
Lands in Tottenham now or lately were in the tenure or occupation of William
Benning Yeoman. And also All and singular the Manors, Lordships, Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Reuersions, Services, Meadows, Pastures, Woods, Aduousons,
Patronages of Churches, and Hereditaments of the said Thomas Sutton whatsoever,
scituat, lying, or being within the said counties of Essex, Lincoln, Wilts,
Cambridge, and Middlesex, or in any of them, with all and every of their
rights, members, and appurtenances whatsoever. (Except All his Manors or
Lordships of Littlebury and Haddestockc with their appurtenances, in the said
County of Essex.) But alas, what perpetuity can be looked for in this world;
where there is no certainty but of change. In this great expectation of all
men, whilst our eyes and minds are occupied with admiration of the Work,
Death steals away, the Master workman: but not unprovided; as having his
Viaticum sealed up unto him in the peace of a good conscience. Many prayers of
the Saint went up before him, to prepare a place for him against the day of his
dissolution: and the corruptible Mammon, which he had here employed to the
relief of Gods servants in Earth, begot him friends to entertain him in
heaven. So he fell asleep in the Lord: leaving the rest of his pious
intendments, to be performed by his trusty Executors, Master Richard Sutton,
and Master John Law. Behold, here a perfect Israelite! This is a good work:
but he has not set his rest on this only. He has grown up from faith to
faith, to the accomplishment of many other singular works of Charity: whereof
his last Will and Testament gives such abundant testimony, that it needs no
other splendor than it self.

Upon this respect, I will make no other Proeme to it, than a gentle inuitation
to the Reader to peruse it; lest otherwise I might seem to show the Sun at
Noone Day; or persuade credit, to apparent demonstration. Thus it follows.

THE LAST WILL and Testament. OF Thomas Sutton Esquire.
THE LAST WILL and Testament of Thomas Sutton Esquire.
IN THE NAME OF GOD AMEN.

THE Second day of November in the year of out Lord God one thousand six
hundred and eleven I Thomas Sutton of Camps Castle in the County of Cambridge
Esquire being weak in body, and of good perfect mind and me mory thanks be
given to Almighty God for the same: Do make and declare this my last Will and
Testament in manner and form following that is to say. First, and principally
I commend my Soul into the hands of Almighty God trusting through his mercy
and by the precious death and passion of my Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ
to be saved and to inherit the kingdom of Heaven for ever. And my body I will
to be buried where and in what sort it shall seem meet and convenient to mine
Executor or Executors and Superuisor or Superuisors of this my last will and
Testament, with the least pomp and charge that may be.

Item I give to every one of the Children of Richard Coxe late Bishop of Ely
who shall be living at the time of my death, Ten-poundes a piece, of lawful
money of England.

Item I give to the Children of Ellenor Ask late wife of Robert Ask of
Aughton in the Countye of york Esquire the sum of one hundred pounds of good
and lawful money of England to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item I give to the poor town of Berwicke upon Tweede one hundredth marks of
lawful money of England to be distributed amongst the poor there by the
discretion of the chief governor and Preacher there for the time being to be
paid within one year after my decease.

Also I give to Andrew Westwoods wife of New Castle upon Tyne, or to her
Children, or to so many of them as shall be living at my death, ten pounds, to
be bestowed equally amongst them.

And I give to the poor people of Stoke-Newington, in the County of Middlesex
Ten-pounds to be distributed by the Constables, Churchwardens, and Parson of
the same Town, for the time being to their most needy, people there,

Also I give to Master Gray dwelling in yorkshire, sometimes servant to
Ambrose Earl of Warwick or to his Children if any of them be living at my
decease Forty pounds of good and lawful money of England, to be distributed
equally amongst them, within six months after my decease.

Also I give to the Children of my Aunt White or to so many of them as shall
be living at my decease, one hundred marks to be equally distributed amongst
them within six months next after my decease.

Also I give to William Cocket son to William Cocket, late Alderman of the
City of Lincoln one hundredth pounds of lawful money of England.

Also I give to the Children of John Copeland late of Skillingthorpe in the
County of Lincoln or to so many of them as shall be living at the time of my
decease, one hundred pounds of lawful money of England, to be equally
distributed amongst them saving unto Elizabeth Copeland, for my meaning is that
she shall not have any part of the said Legacy of one hundred pounds.

And unto the said Elizabeth Copeland I give the sum of one hundredth pounds,
of lawful money of England to be paid unto her at the day of her marriage, or
within one year after my decease.

Item I give unto Jane Vpton one of the Daughters of Elizabeth Vpton late wife
of Hamond Vpton of Wamfleet in the County of Lincoln Esquire, the sum of
fifty pounds of Lawful money of England.

And to every other of the Children of the said Elizabeth who shall be living
at the time of my decease twenty pounds a piece of lawful money of England,
to be paid with in six months next after my decease.

Also I give to the Children of one Skeleton late of Lowth in the County of
Lincoln and sometimes toward the Henneages of Heniton in the said County ten
pounds to be equally divided amongst them.

Item I give to the Children of Thomas Pynner, late of Mitcham in the County of
Surrey Esquire or to so many of them as shall be living at my decease, twenty
pounds to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item I give to the Children of Henry Tutty late Gunner in Barwick, or to so
many of them as shall be living at my decease ten pounds of lawful money of
England to be equally distributed amongst them.

Also I give to my Niece Elizabeth Allen, two hundred pounds of lawful money
of England.

And to every of her Children which shall be living at my decease one hundredth
marks a piece.

Item I give to Simon Baxter if he be living at my decease, three hundred
pounds of lawful money of England, if not then I give the same sum to his
Child or Children to be equally divided amongst them.

Item I give unto Francis Baxter if he be living at my death five hundred
marks of lawful money of England if not I give the same sum to his Child or
Children to be equally divided amongst them.

Item I give unto each of my seruingmen to whom I give wages with my Cook that
shall be alive at my decease thirteen pound six shillings and eight pence
over and above their wages then due.

Item I give to so many of my maidseruants as I have in my house at the time of
my decease five marks a apeece over and above their wages.

Item I give unto the Children of Reinold Tomps my late servant if any of them
be alive at my death ten pounds to be distributed amongst them.

Item I give to the Fyshermen of the Town of Oastend in the Low Cuntries one
hundred pounds of lawful English money to be given and distributed amongst the
poorest fishermen of that Town or for want of a competent number of them to
call in some other of that Town to have a shre of the said one hundred pounds
by the discretion of the governors of that Town and his assistants and the
Parson and Minister there for the time being the same to be paid within one
year after my decease.

Item I give toward the mending of the Highways between Islington and
Newington in the County of Middlesex Twenty six pounds thirteen shillings
and four pence of lawful money of England to be employed and bestowed by the
good oversight of mine Executor or Executors the Cunstable of Newington and the
Churchwardens there for the time being the same Highwayes to be amended made
and helped within one year after my decease.

Item I give toward the amending of the of highwaes between Ashden and Walden
in the County of Essex called Walden Lane one hundredth pounds of Lawful money
of England. And toward the amending of the highwaies between great Lynton in
the Cou^ty of Cambridge and the said Town of Walden three skore six pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence of lawful money of England: And I also give
toward the amending of Horseth-Lane threeskore pounds of lawful money of
England.

All these works next before recited I will shall be ouerseene and guided by
the two head Constables thereunto next adjoining the Tresorer of Walden and the
Parsonnes of Ashden Hadstock and Horsheath and the Constables of the same
Parishes for the time being: And the same several sums to be employed and the
said Highways so to be amended so far as the same sums will extend within
one year after my decease.

Also I give toward the amending of the Bridges and the ordinary high ways
between South minster and Malden in the said County Essex the sum of one
hundred pounds of lawful money of England and the same work to be ouerseene
and guided by the two head Constables thereunto next adjoining and the parsons
or Vicars of South-minster and Malden for the time being and the same money to
be so employed and the high ways so amended within one year next after my
decease.

Item, I give to Master Robert Dudley Alderman of Newcastle upon Tyne or to
his Children or to so many of his Children as shall be living at the time of
my decease Thirty pounds of lawful money of England which he owes me.

And I will and do earnestly charge mine Executor or Executors to deliver into
the Tresurie or Chamber of the City of London one Thousand pounds in current
money of England with such care and foresight to be had that such bonds or
assurances be taken of the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of the same City that for
the time shall be by learned Counsel in the Law as the same may be safe and
for ever go and be converted to these uses following: That is to say that the
said thousand pounds be yearly lent and put forth to ten young Merchant men
not having any great stocks of their own being young men and of honest life
and conversation and towardly in their trades that is to every one of them one
hundredth pounds for a year without paying any thing for the same; And these
ten young Merchants to be chosen and appointed by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of the said City that for the time shall be and the Deane of the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul in London for the time being. Provided as before that
none have or continue the said hundred pounds so appointed above one year.

Item, I will and give to the Children of Justinian Crome Draper sometimes
dwelling in the City of Lincoln or to his childrens children if any of them
shall be living at my decease Twenty pounds of lawful money of England to be
equally divided amongst them.

I give also to the Wife and Children or Child of Martine VVathersine Dutchman,
sometime dwelling at the sign of the White Bear in Buttolph Lane London if
any of them be living at the time of my death Ten pounds to be equally divided
amongst them.

Item, I give to the next kinsman or kinswoman of Henry Vauering Dutchman Smith
sometimes dwelling in Barwick three pounds six shillings eight pence.

Item I give and bequeath unto Sir Francis Popham Knight as well in respect and
good will which I bear unto his Wife being the Daughter of my late deceased
dear Wife the sum of two thousand Marks of lawful money of England upon
condition nevertheless and so that the said Sir Francis Popham and the said
Lady Anne his Wife give a sufficient discharge and a general release to mine
Executor or Executors as well for that sum as also for the receipt of all the
rest of her part of portion of the plate money and household stuff already
paid and delivered to them or to their use as appears by several bills or
notes subscribed with mine own hand which I do think to be the very true
half and better half of the said plate money and household stuff part
whereof was delivered by one John Fishborne my late servant to Sir John Popham
Knight late Lord Chief Justice of England at his late house in Chauncerie
Lane, The rest of the household stuff as Chaires Stools Bedsteedes
Kitchin-stuffe Tables and such like was delivered by the said Fishborne to the
said Sir John Pophams Servants at Newington, one Thousand pounds in money paid
in this sort (viz.)

To Sir John Popham by his servant Straker upon the said Sir John's bill before
marriage three hundred pounds which bill after the marriage I returned to the
said Sir John Popham seven hundred pounds were paid to the said Sir John
Popham upon the marriage by one Mr. Anthony Law late dwelling in pater noster
row London the better moiety of the plate due to Sir Francis Popham was by the
appointment of the said Sir John Popham received by one Master Clarke sometimes
toward the said Sir John and now a Councellor at the law of the middle Temple
as I guess.

Item I give to my well-beloved friend Amy Popham two hundred pounds to be paid
to her at the day of her marriage, or when she shall accomplish the age of
eighteen years.

Item I give to Francis Popham Mary Popham Elizabeth Popham Jane Popham and
Anne Popham all daughters of the said Lady Anne Popham one hundredth pounds a
piece which several sums I will shall be paid them at the days of their
marriage or when they shall accomplish the age of eighteen years: And my will
and meaning is that unless the said Sir Francis Popham and the said Lady Anne
his wife do or shall give to mine Executor or Executors a general acquittance
or release to the effect above mentioned that then as well the said Legacy of
two thousand marks so wiled to be given to the said Sir Francis Popham and the
Lady Anne his wife as also the other several legacies given and bequeathed to
every of the said children of the said Sir Francis Popham and the Lady his Wife
shall remain and be to the use of mine Executor or Executors to be wholly
disposed and given by them within one year after my decease partly to the
amending of high ways and partly to poor Maidens marriages and partly to the
releasing of poor men that lie in prison for debt and partly to the poor
people of mine intended Hospital when it shall please God that it shall be
established and erected. And where perhaps it is or may be supposed that the
said Sir John Popham has paid three hundred pounds to Sir Rowland Hayward of
the City of London Alderman as a debt due unto him upon the bonds of John
Dudley and Thomas Dudley I protest before God that I paid the whole three
hundred pounds to the said Sir John Popham in this sort to be paid over to
the said Sir Rowland Heyward viz Two hundred pounds by my servant John
Fishborne and one hundred pounds by one Henry Best Scriuener near:
Temple-barre There was a demand made by Alderman Ducats Executors for four
hundred pounds owing to the said Alderman upon the bonds of John Dudley and
Thomas Dudley for Copper for the use of the Earl of Lecester which the said
Earl transported into Spain which debt was paid to the said Alderman For I my
self was a messenger from the said Earl to the said Alderman to let him
understand that Master Bainham my Lords special Officer and receuer should
discharge them presently and after it was discharged the said Alderman demanded
interest for the forbearing of the four hundred pounds which as I remember
Thomas Dudley discharged: Master Justice Owin as I remember who had the doing
in the testament of Alderman Ducket promised to deliver in the said bond to Sir
John Popham then being Attorney which I do believe he did: And where Master
John Gardener brother to my late wife by his last Will and Testament did give
unto Anne Dudley now Wife to Sir Francis Popham one hundred pounds to be paid
to her at the day of her marriage the same hundred pounds was and is paid by
me at or before the day of her marriage videlicet. In a Chain of Gold being
fourscore seauenteene pounds ten shillinges in Gold and for the fashion
paid to Master Podmore Goldsmith in London fifty shillinges which compleates
the hundred pounds for the which amonst other things which I delivered in
trust I have no acquittance.

Item I give to Master Ieffery Nightingale Esquire the some of forty pounds
of lawful money of England.

Also I give to my Cosen William Stapleton son of Sir Richard Stapleton
Knight one hundred marks.

Item, I give unto the Children of Sir Frauncis Willoughbie Knight one hundred
pounds of lawful money of England to be equally distributed amongst them.

Item I give unto John Law one of the Procurators of the Arches London two
hundred pounds,

And to Master Thomas Brown ten pounds to make him a Ring.

Item I give to the wife and Children of John Gardener my late wifes Nephew if
they be living after my decease being the mother and two sons two hundred
marks to be equally divided amongst them.

Item I give to the poor people of Hadstock to be distributed amongst the^ by
the Churchwardens and Constables there for the time being twenty pounds.

Item I give to the poor people of Littlebury and to the poor people of
Balsham to be distributed as before to either Town twenty pounds.

Item I give to the Parson and Churchwardens of Balsham aforesaid for the time
being to buy a Bell withal to be hanged up in the Steeple to amend the Ring
there twenty pounds.

Item to the poor of Southminster twenty pounds.

Item to the poor of little Hallenbury twenty pounds.

Item to the poor of Dunsby in the County of Lincoln twenty pounds.

Item I give to Robert Wright poulter of little Hallenbury five pound.

Item I give to widow Ask late wife of Robert Ask of London goldsmith twenty
pound which she owes me.

Item my will and meaning is that there shall no interest or increase for money
be taken after my decease so as he or they by whom any sums of money are or
shall be owing do pay the principal debt within one half year next after
my decease.

Item I give and bequeath to the poor prisoners within the Prisons of Ludgate
Newgate the two Compters in London the Kings bench and the Marshalsea the
sum of two hundred pounds to be paid and divided among the same prisoners by
even and equal portions.

Item I give to Susan Price at the day of her marriage forty pounds.

Item I give to one Collins of the Town of Cursall in Essex five pounds.

Item I give to my good friends Mistress Heyward and Mris. Low either of them
ten pounds.

Item I give to Margret Woodhall my Goddaughter the sum of twenty pounds.

Item I give to al other my God-children five pounds apeece.

Item I give and bequeath to the Master and fellows as the Corporation of
Jesus Coledge in Cambridge the sum of five hundred marks of lawful money of
England to be employed used and bestowed for or in some perpetuity for and to
the use benefit and behalf of the said College Master Fellows and Scholars
in such sort manner and form as by the discrecion of the Bishop of Elie for
the time being the Vicechancellor of Cambrige for the time being the Master
and Fellows of the said College for the time being, and my executors
hereafter named or the suruiuor or suruiuors of them if they be living when
the bestowing of the said sum shall come in question shall be thought best and
most convenient.

Item I give and bequeath to the Master and Fellows as the Corporation of
Magdalene College in Cambridge the sum of five hundred pounds to be employed
used or bestowed for or in some perpetuity for and to the use benefit and
behalf of the said College Master and Fellows and Scholars there in such
sort manner and form as by the discretion priuity and consent of the
Vicechauncellor in Cambridge for the time being the Master of Trinity College
in Cambridge for the time being and the Master and Fellows of the said
Magdalene College for the time being shall be thought best and most convenient.

And I will that all my great Chain of gold and all my Iewelles of what kind
soever they be shall be sold by mine Executors and superuisors hereafter named
toward the better and speedier payment of my legacies and performance of this
my last will and testament.

And my will and meaning is that all the legacies by me in this my testament
and last will given and bequeathed and for the payment of much whereof there is
no certain time set down shall be paid within two years next after my decease
at the furthest.

Also I give for and toward the building of mine intended Hospital Chapel
and Schoolehouse the sum of five thousand pounds if I do not live to see it
performed in my life time.

And I desire in the name of GOD my Feoffes and my executor or executors within
two years after my decease or sooner if they may conveniently (if it please
not GOD I live to see and cause the same my determination to be performed and
accomplished) to see and cause the same to be performed and accomplished

Also I give the residue of the years which I shall have at the time of my
decease in one close called the Withies lying within the town and fields of
Cottingham in the County of York to the Mayor and Aldermen of Beuerley or to
the governor of the same town and his assistants for the time being to this
end and purpose that they shall distribute or cause to be distributed the
yearly profit arising of the same over and above the yearly Rent payable to
the Kings Majesty amongst the poorest people dwelling within the said town of
Beuerley.

Also I give to the Mayor and Alder-men of the city of Lincoln for the time
being all such proffits and revenues as shall arise and grow of the parsonage
of Glentham within the county of Lincoln and all the residue of the years
that shall remain after my decease to this intent that they shall distribute
and bestow or cause to be distributed and bestowed the same amongst twenty of
the poorest people that shall then be dwelling in the said city with the
consent and priuity of the Deane of the Cathederall Church of Lincoln or the
Recorder of the same for the time being (they the said Mayor Aldermen Deane and
Recorder foreseeing that the Parsonage be letten for their most benefit.)

Item I give into the Tresory or Storehouse of mine intended Hospital to begin
their stock with and to defend the rights of the house one thousand pounds of
lawful English money.

And I give to every one of my Feoffees whom I have put in trust about my
intended Hospital (to whom I have not given any thing in this my last will)
the sum of twenty six pounds thirty shillings and four pence of lawful
money of England.

Item I give to Amy Popham if it please GOD she live to keep house three
Fether-beds and so many pair of Holland sheets with the boulsters to them and
so many hangings of tapestry as furnish her a bedchamber The rest of my
houshouldstuffe I will shall be sold by mine executors for the speedier payment
of my leagacies and performance formance of this my last will.

Item I give to the widow Tassell of Balsham the sum of five pounds of
Lawful money of England and to Thomas Lawrence the elder of the same town five
pounds of like lawful money of England.

Item I give and bequeath unto the brother of Perciuall Graung my late servant
deceased the sum of twenty pounds of lawful money of England.

And of this my last will and testament I make and ordain Richard Sutton of
London Esquire and John Law one of the procurators of the Arches London my
Executors charging them as they will answer at the last day of judgment that
they or one of them in the absence of the other endeavor themselves with all
earnestness and diligence to see this my will performed according to my true
meaning and charitable intent.

And I make overseers of this my last will and testament the Reverend Father in
GOD George Abbot Archbishop of Canterbury unto whom I give and bequeath the
sum of forty marks of lawful money of England or a piece of plate of that
value at his election and choice.

And also Lancelot Androes Almonizer to the Kings Majesty my other superuisor
and ouerseer of this my last will and testament unto whom I give and bequeath
the sum of twenty pounds of like lawful money of England or a piece of place
of that value at his election and choice.

Item my will and full intent and meaning is that if any person or persons
whosoever to whom I have in and by this my last will and testament given and
bequeathed any leagacy or sum or sums of money shall any ways gainsay
impugn contradict or impeach this my last will and testament that then all and
every one so impugning contradicting impeaching or gainesaying this my last
will and testament and every of their children and kinsfolks to whom I have
in and by this my last will and testament given and bequeathed any leagacy or
sum or sums of money shall have no part nor portion of any such gift
leagacy or bequest but shall utterly loose the same and be vterly barred
thereof as if no such Legacy gift or bequest had bin given unto him her or them
by this my last will and testament (any thing before in these presents
mentioned or contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding)

Item I give and bequeath to Richard Sutton one of my Executors before named
the sum of one hundred pounds, and to mistress Law over and besides the
Legacy before to her given I give the sum of forty pounds to make her a
gown withal.

Item I give to Master Hutton the Vicar of Littlebury twenty pounds. To the
Town of Camps Castle where I dwell to be distributed amongst the poor of the
same Parish ten pounds.

Also to the poor of the town of Elcombe to be equally distributed amongst
them the sum of ten pounds.

Item I give and bequeath those my manors of Littlebury and Hadstock in the
County of Essex to the right honorable the Lord Thomas Howard Earl of Suffolk
and to his heirs for ever upon Condition that he do well and truly pay or cause
to be paid to my Executors before named or to the suruiuor of them the sum
of Ten thousand pounds of law full money of England within one year next
after my decease. And if he shall refuse to pay the said sum of ten
thousand pounds for the said Manors then I give and bequeath the said Manors
of Littlebury and Hadstock to my said Executors and to their Heirs for ever.
And then I will and devise that the said Manors of Littlebury and Hadstock
shall be sold by my said Executors or the suruiuor of them to the uttermost
price and value that they may be sold for and the money coming of the sale
thereof together with as much more as shall make up the same sum the full some
of twenty thousand pounds I will shall be employed and bestowed by my said
Executors or the suruiuor of them with the advice of my Superuisors before named
in some good works and charitable uses for mine intended Hospital and for
poor people or otherwise as they in their wisdoms and discretions shall think
fit.

Item I give to Master Flud Parson of Newington the sum of thirteen pound
six shillings eigt pence: And to the wife of Benjamin King of Southminster
six pound thirteen shillings fourepence.

Item I give to Thomas Averell if it shall be found that he has dealt
faithfully and plainly with me in my business the sum of ten pounds
which he owerh me.

Item I give unto the wife of Master Ingry of Littlebury three pound six
shillings eight pence.

Item I give to Sir Henry Hubberd Knight the Kings Majesty's Attorney general
a piece of plate of the value of ten pound: And to Master Locksmith his Clarke
the sum of ten pound.

Item I give to the poor of the parish of Hackney ten pound.

Item I give to Bridget Law the sum of ten pound: And to the Lady Altham
daughter to Master Auditor Sutton the sum of twenty pounds.

Item I give to Sir Edward Phillips Master of the Rolls a piece of plate of
the value of twenty pound: And to Sir James Altham one of the Barrons of the
Exchequor one piece of plate of the value of twenty pound.

Item I give to my late wives kinsman Guy Goddolphin the sum of ten pound.

Item I give to the right honorable my very good Lord the Earl of Suffolk the
sum of four hundred pounds. All the rest of my goods chattles and debtes not
before given and disposed I give and bequeath to my entented Hospital to be
employed and bestowed on and about the same according to the discretion of the
Feoffes of my said Hospital or the greater part of them In witness hereof I have
hereunto set my hand and seal the twenty eight day of the month of November
above written THOMAS SSTTON. Memorandum that the same testator did acknowledge
this his will written and contained in these three and twenty leaves to be his
last will and testament and that his hand and seal set thereunto is his own
hand and seal and that he had heard it read and was acquainted with the
contents of it the said twenty eight of November above written in presence of
us John Law Leonard Houghton Alexander Longworth Thomas Hall The mark of
Richard Pearce The mark of Thomas Johnson Primo Decembris. 1611 idem
recognitum pertestatorem coram Io. Crook. Quarto Decembris 1611 recognit. to
be the Testators last will. Before me Hen. Thoresby.

A Codicill to be anexed to the last Will and testament of Thomas Sutton
Esquire made and declared the day whereon he dyed being the twelfth of December
one thousand six hundred and eleven.

Item he gave and bequeathed to Master Judge Crook one of the Judges of the
Kings Bench at Westminster the sum of ten pounds And to Master Henry
Thoresby one of the Masters of the Court of Chancery the like sum of ten
pound: And to Mistress Sutton of London widow the sum of three pound six
shillings eight pence to make her a Ring.

Also he gave to Master Hutton Clarke and Vicar of Littlebury the aduowsion or
next presentation to the parsonage of Dunsby in the County of Lincoln.

Also he did then publish and declare before Master Flud Parson of
Stoke-Newington in the County of Middlesex Robert Petit Alexander Longworth
John Parsons and Thomas Johnson his cook that he had made his will and thereof
had made and ordaind Richard Sutton of London Esquire and John Law his
Executors.

FINIS.

