THE TRAGEDY OF HOFFMAN OR A Revenge for a Father.

As it has bin diverse times acted with great applause, at the Phoenix in
Druery-lane.

LONDON, Printed by I. N. for Hugh Perry, and are to be sold at his shop, at
the sign of the Harrow in Brittaines-burse. 1631.

TO HIS MVCH Honored Friend, Master Richard Kiluert.
Sir
I Know you, and in that your worth, which I honor more, then greatness in a
Patron: this Tragedy happening into my hands, I have now adventured it unto the
Press, and wanting both a Parent to own it, and a Patron to protect it, am
feign to Act the Fathers part, and have adventured to address it unto your
Worthy self; under whose wings it flies for a new birth: it has passed the
Stage already with good applause, and I doubt not, but from you it shall
receive a kind welcome, who have always bin a true Favorer of Arts and
Learning; and from your self I have received so many noble courtesies, that I
shall always rest

Yours to command HVGH PERRY.

The Tragedy of Hoffman.
Enter Hoffman. Hoffman. HEnce Clouds of melancholy
^le be no longer subject to your sismes,
But thou dear soul, whose nerves and artires
^n dead resoundings summon up revenge,
And thou shall hate, be but appeased sweet h^arse
The dead remembrance of my living father
strikes open a curtain where appears a body. And with a heart as air, swift
as thought
I Will excuse justly in such a cause
Where truth leads, what coward would not fight
Ill acts move some, but myne's a cause is right
thunder and lightning. See the powers of heaven in apparitions
And fight full aspects as in^en^ed
That ^ thus tardy am to do an act
which justice and a fathers death exites,
Like threatening methors antedates destruction.
thunder Again I come, I come, I come,
Be silent thou ^^^igies of fair virtue
That like a goodly syen wear't plucked up
By murderous, winds, infectious blasts and gusts
I will not leave thee, until like thy self,
I Have made thy enemies, then hand in hand
We Will walk to paradise -- again more blessed
I Will to yon promonts top, and their survey,
What shipwrackt passengers the belgique sea
Casts from her fomy entrails by mischance.
Roar sea and winds, and with celestial fires,
Quicken high projects, with your highest desires.

Enter Lorrique. Lo. Yet this is somewhat like, but brambles, you are to busy,
were I at Luningberge, and you caught me thus, I should go near to ask you
at whose suit, but now I am out of sent, And fear no ^eriants, for I think
these woods and waters are common wealths that need no such subjects nay they
keep not a Constable at sea, but a man's ouerwhelmd without order. -- Well, dry
land I love thee, though thou swarm with millions of deuourers, yet have thou
no such swallow as the sea.


Hoff. Thou lie, there lives upon the earth more ^easts
With wide devouring throats, then can be found
Of ravenous fishes in the Ocean:
The huge Leuiathan is but a shrimpe
Compared with our Balena on the land

Lo. I am of your mind; but the Whale has a wide mouth
To swallow fleeting waters, and poor fish,
But we have Epicures and Cormorants,
Whom neither sea, nor land can hardly serve
They feed them fat, while arms and honor starve,
Desert looks pale as death, like those bare bones.

Lo. Ha -- amazd.

Hoff. See thou them trembling, slave here were Arms?
That served the troath less state of Luningberge.

Lo. So do I sir serve the dukes son of the state,

Hoff. Ha, ha, I laugh to see how dastard fear
Hastens the death doomd wretch to his distress,
Say did thou serve the duke of Luningberge.

Lo. His son Otho sir, ^'me a poor follower of his
And my master is ayring of himself at your Cell,

Hoff. Is he that escaped the wrack young Luningberg?

Lo. I sir, the same sir, you are in the right sir.

Hoff. Revenge I kiss thee, vengeance you are at liberty,
Would thou having lost a father as I have,
Whose very name dissolues my eyes to tears
Could duty and thy love so different prove,
Not to avenge his death whose better part
Was thine, thou his, when he fell part of thee
Fell with him each drop, being part thine own
And would not be revenged;

Lor. Yes on the murderer,

Hoff. On him, or any man that is a^^ied
Has but one ^unce of blood, of which he is part
He was my father, my heart still bleeds
Nor can my wounds be stopped, till an incision,
I Have made to bury my dead father in:
Therefore without protraction, sighing, or excuses
Swear to be true, to aid assist me, not to stir
Or contradict me in any enterprise
I shall now undertake, or heareafter.

Lor I swear.

Hoff. Were I persuaded that thou could shed tears,
As does the Egyptian serpents near the Nile;
If thou would kiss and kill, embrace and stabbe,
Then thou should live, for my inuictiue brain
Has cast a glorious project of revenge
Even as thou kneel'st, will thou turn villain speak.

Lor. Oh sir when was I otherwise, from my creation nothing else, I was made of
no other stuff, villainy is my only patrimony: though I be an irreligious
slave, yet I bear a religious name, though I want courage, yet in talk, I Will
put them all down, though I have nothing in me that is good:

Yet i will --

Hoff. Forbear thy Lord is coming i will go in
And royally provide for such a Prince,
Say thou have met the kindest host alive,
One that adores him, with no less zeal
Then rich men gold, or true religious heaven
Dissemble cunningly, and thou shall prove
the minion of my thoughts, friend to my love.
Exit.
Lor. Well sir never fear me this is an excellent fellow
A true vil^aine fitter for me then better company,
This is Hannce Hoffmans son.
that stole down his fathers Anotamy from the gallows at Leningberge, I'tis
the same upon the dead scull there is the iron Crown that burnt his brains out,
what will come of this, I neither know nor care: but here comes my lord. Enter
Otho. How chers my most noble, my most honorable, my most gracious; yea my most
grieved prince.


Otho A fearful storm

Lor. And full of horror.

Otho Trust me Lorrique besides the inlie grief
That swallows my content when I perceive
How greedily the feirce vnpitying sea, and waves,
Devoured our friends another trouble greeues my vexed eyes
With gashtly apperitions, strange aspects
Which either I do certainly behold
Or else my soul deuining some sad fate
Fills my maginary powers with shapes
Hidious and horrid.

Lor. My lord let your heart have no commerce with that
Mart of idle imaginations, rouse up your nobleness
To apprehend comfort, kindness ease and what otherwise
Entertained so sollitary a place as this, can the
Ancient subject of the state of Leningberg collect
It Is I take it the son to that Viz-admirall that
Turned a terrible pirate.

Otho Let us turn back into the sea again
Yealding our bodies to the ruthles sound
That has divided us and our late friends
Rather then see choice Hoffman.

Lor, Corrage brave Otho, he will use thee kindly.
Enter Hoffman. Here he comes, sweet host here is the dukes heir of
Leningberge do homage and after entertain him and me his
Follower with the most conspictious pleasures
That lies in thy poor hability.

Hoff. Before I speak to my most sacred Lord
I join my soft lips to the ^ollid earth
And with an honored bennison I bless
The hour, the place, the time of your arrive
For now my sauadge life, lead amongst beasts
Shall Be turned ciuell by your grarious help

Otho I see thy true hearts love drope down in tears
And this embrace shows I am free from fears
My disturbed blood runs smoothly through my veins
And I am bold to call thee friend, bold to entreat
Food for by wrack I have lost ship, friends and meat.

Hoff. You that attend my Lord enter the cave
Bring forth the homely Cakes these hands prepared
While I entreat his excellence sit down
Villain bring nothing buta burning Crown.
Exit.
Otho What Is that thou bidst him bring, a burning Crown

Hoff. Still you suspect my harmless inocence
What though your father with the power state
And your just uncle duke of Brusia
After my father had in thirty fights
Filled all their treasures with somens spoils
And paid poor soldiers from his treasury
What though for this his merrits he was named
A prescript out law for a little debt
Compeld to fly into the Belgique sound
And live a pirate.

Otho Prithee speak no more
Thou raysest new doubts in my troubled heart
By repetition of thy fathers wrongs

Hoff. Then he was wronged you grant but not by you,
You virtuous gentleman
Sat like a just judge of the vnder-shades,
And with an unchanged Rhadamantine look,
Beheld the fiesh mangled with many scars
Pared from the bones of my offended father
And when he was a bare anatomy,
You saw him chained unto the common gallows,

Otho Hoffman.

Hoff. Nay hear me patiently kind Lord
My innocent youth as guilty of his sin,
Was in a dungeon hidden from the sun,
And there I was condemned to endless night
Except I past my vow never to steal
My fathers fleshles bones from that base tree
I know nor who it was, I guess your mother,
She kneeld and wept for me, (but you did not)
Beseeching from that vow I might be freed
Then did I swear if Nations foreign power
Compelled me to take down those naked bones
I never would release them from those chains
Never intombe them, but immediately
Remove them from that gallows to a tree
I kept mine oath: look Luningberg; it is done
Behold a father hanged up by his son

Otho Oh horrible aspect murderer stand off
I know thou meanst me wrong

Hoff. My Lord behold these precious twines of light
Burnt out by day eclipst when as the sun
For shame obscured himself this deed was done
Where none but schrich owls sung, thou receptacle
thou organ of the soul;
Rest, go rest, and you most lovely Couplets
Legs and arms reside, for ever here
This is my last farewell, what do you weep?

Otho Oh Lorrique I am betrayed, slave touch me not

Hoff. Not touch thee? yes, and thus trip down thy pride.
You pla'ct my father in a Chair of state:
This earth shall be your throne, villain come forth
Enter Lorrique. And as thou mean to save thy forfeit life,
Fix on thy Masters head my burning Crown,
While in these Cords, I in eternal bands
Bind fast his base and coward trembling hands.

Otho Lorrique, art thou turned villain to my life.

Lor. I Will turn any thing sir rather then nothing, I was taken life promised to
betray you, and I love life so well, that I would not loose it for a Kingdom,
for a Kings Crown, an Empire.


Hoff. On with the Crown.

Otho Oh tortor above measure.

Hoff. My father felt this pain* when thou had pleasure.

Otho Thy father dyed for piracy.

Ho. Oh peace, had he bi^^iudge himself, he would have showed
He had bin clearer then the Crystal morn!
But wretches sentenced never find defense,
How ever guiltless be their innocence,
No more did he, no more shall thou, no ruth
Pitied his winter age, none helps thy youth.

Otho Oh Lorrique tortor, I feel an Aetna burn
Within my brains, and all my body else
Is like a hill of Ice, all these Belgique seas
That now, surround us cannot quench this flame
Death like a tyrant seazeth me unawares,
My sin^wes shrink like leaves parcht with the sun
My blood dissolues, nerves and tendons fail
Each part's disioynted, and my breath expires
Mountsoule to heaven, my body burns in fire.

Lor. He Is gone.

Hoff. Go let him come Lorrique
This but the prologue to the'nsuing play.
The first step to revenge, this seane is done
Father I offer thee thy inurtherers ^onne.

Exe^nt, Flourish. Enter ^erdinand, Rodor^^k, Lodowick, Mathias, Lucibet, ^erom,
Stilt, attendants. Ferd. Princes of Saxony and Austria,
Though your own wor^^sare of sufficient weight
To justify the honorable love borne by Lodowick to bright Lucybell,
Yet since your parents live and as I hear
There is between them some dissension,
Blame us not for detaining yo^ thus long
Till we had notice how the business stood

Lodo. Your royal entertain great Ferdinand,
Exceeding expectation in our stay,
Bind us to thanks, and if my brother please
To hold his challenge for a Turnament
In praise of Lucibellas excellence,
No doubt our father and the Austrian duke
Will be in person at so royal sport.

Ferd. We trust they will.

Rodo. I do assure your grace
The Austrian and the duke of Saxony
By true report of pilgrims at my cell
From either of there courts set hetherward
Some six days since.

Ferd. Thanks Rodorick for this news
They are more welcome then the sad discourse
Of Leningberg our nephews timeles wrake
Which adds sorrow to the mourning g^iefes
Abound in us for our Duchess death.

Ie. I truly Princes, my father has had but hard luck since your coming to
his court, for ought I know you are bred of ill weather, come before you are
sent for, yet if my most gracious father say you are welcome, I his more
gracious son take you by the hands, though I can tell you my mothers death
comes somewhat near my heart, but I am a prince, and princes have power more
then common people to subdue their passions.


Mat. We know your worthiness is experienced in all true wisdom.


Ier. True, I am no fool, I have bin at Wittenberg, where wit grows.


Ferd. Peace thou unshapen honor, my states shame,
My ages co^siue, and my black sins curse,
Oh had thou never bin, I had bin then,
A happy childlesse man, now among men,
I am the most unhappy, one that knows
No end of mine, and of my peoples woes.
I tell you Princess, and most gracious maid;
I do not wear these sable ornaments
For Isabel^ (...) death, though she were dear,
Nor are my eyelids overflowed with tears,
For Otho of Luningberg, wrackt in the Soun,
Though he were a^^ my hope: but here is my care,
A wit^esse fool must needs be Prussias h^ire.

Ier. Well, and you were not my father, -- s'nailes, and I would not draw
rather then put up the fool, would I might never win this lady at tilt and
turnament: ^s Knights, I defy you both, for her; even you Lodowick, that loves
her, and your brother that loves you: look to me, Stilt, and I have practiced
these two days: s'nailes god forgive me to swear, she shall not be carried
away so.


Mat. We are glad to hear your grace so ^esolute.


Ier. As I am a Prince, and a D^kes heir, though I say it my self, I am as
full of resolution as the prowdest of you all


Luci. I thank Prince Lodowick he has bound my youth
To be the conquerers prize, and if my stars
Allott me to be yours, I will be proud,
For how so ere you seem not fashioned
Like me, and cunning Courtiers; I protest,
By some small love I bear thee in mine eye,
Your worthy beauty, wealth and dignity.

Ier. Heart you would not unhorse Hercules for her father, i will practice again
at Dantzike, you say in the Dukes meade; i will meet thee Mathias: there is my
gloue^ For a gauntle^, though my father count me a fool, you shall find me
none.

Exit.
Ferd. Would I might never find thee any thing,
For thou indeed art nothing in ^steeme,
My sad soul sinkes with sorrow at thy sight,

Enter Lorrique. Lor. Health to the right gracious, generous, virtuous, and
valorous Ferdinand Duke of Prussia.


Ferd. Hermet do thou not know this young man's face?
Is It not Lorique, that met us at thy cell
With letters from our brother Luningberg?

Rodo. It is that gentleman.

Lor. I am no l^sse.

Ferd. thou saydst thou wast my nephews play fellow,
Appointed to await his virtuous person,
How is it then thou were so ill advised
To take the land away, and forsake thy Lord?
Whom I have never seen, nor never may,
Though in his life my hope and comfort lay.

Lor. Be it known right gracious: Lorrique had never so little grace, as to
leave his loved lord for weather or water, for torture or fire, for death or
for life, since I first came to move in a pilgrims proportion; much disguised,
being so proper a man: but only for those six words; that I was sent wholly to
give notice of his coming.


Ferd. But thou have left him now sunk in the sea.


Lor. I left the ship sunk, and his highness sau'd^, for when all hope had
left Master and pilot, sailer and swabber, I caused my Lord to leap into the
cock, and for fear she should be sunk with too much company; I caper'd out*
and cut the cable: rowse, quoth the ship against the rocks, roomer cry I in the
cock, my Lord wept for the company: I laughed to comfort him; last by the power
of heaven, goodness of stars, kindness of winds, mercy of the waves, our
cock and we were cast a shore under Reeshopscurre, we clamberd up, but having
escaped drowning, were in danger of killing.


Ferd. What there betided you?


Lor, Marry (...) Lord a young villain, son of a damned pirate, a maid
rauisher.


Ferd. Be brief, what was he?


Lor. Clois Hoffman.


Fer. Oh my heart! did the false rebel hurt his sovereigns son?


Lor. Noe my Lord, the prince so hought and hoft him, that he had no other
help but to his heels, and then I, my good Lord, being ro^footed, ^utstript
him in running, tript him by strength, and in fine, finely cut's throat.


Ferd. Where is the villains body?


Lor. Marry even heaued over the scarr, and sent a swimming toward Burtholme,
his old habitation; if it be not intercepted by some Scale, Sharke, Sturgeon,
or such like.


Ferd. Where is our nephew?


Lor. He intends to stay at the same hermitage, where I saluted your
excellence, with news of my lords excellencies intent, to visit you* for that
his apparel is somewhat sea-sicke, and he wants shift.


Ferd. A chariot, and rich robes attend Lorrique.
And his rewa^d, be thirteen hundred dollers,
For he has driven dolor from our heart.
Princes, and Princess, in your kindest love,
Attend our person to the hermitage,
where we shall meet the heir of two great States,
Rich Luningberg, and warlike Prussias,
Otho living, we will disinherit our fond son:
And bless all Dantzike, by our son elect,
Hermet you have at home, a guest of ours,
Your little cell, is a great princes court;
Had you bin there to entertain young Otho,
He would have took your welcome thankfully,
Where now he mournes, for want of company.

Rodo. I will go on before my gracious Lord.

Ferd, Nay I am jealous of my approaching joy,
And fearful, any eye but mine, should gain
The pleasure of my glad divining soul;
Forward come all, in my delight take part,
He that is now glad, adds joy to gladness heart.
Exeunt Enter Clois Hoffman. If there live ere a surgeon that dare say
He could do better: i will play Mercury,
And like fond Marsias flea the Quacksaluer^
There were a sort of filthy Mountebankes,
Exp^rt in nothing but in idle words,
Made a days work^, with their incision knives
On my oppressed poor father: silly man,
Thrusting there dastard fingers in his flesh,
That durst not while he lived, behold his face;
I have fitted my anatomy
In a fair^ chain to; father this youth scorned
When he was set in an ascending throne,
To have you stand by him; would he could see,
How the case alters, you shall hang by him,
And hang before him to, for all his pride,
Come image of bare death, join side, to side,
With my long injured fathers naked bones;
He was the prologue to a Tragedy,
That if my destinies deny me not,
Shall pass those of Thyestes, Tereus,
Iocasta, or Duke Iasons jealous wife;
So shut our stage up, there is one act done
Ended in Othos death; 'twas somewhat single;
I Will fill the other fuller, if Lorrique,
That I have late sworn to be murders slave,
Swears he will protest me to be Othos,
Whom Prussia his uncle unknown loves;
If I be taken for him well: Oh then!
Sweet vengeance make me happiest of all men:
Prussia, I come as comets against change:
As apparitions before mortal ends;
If thou accept me for thy nephewe, so;
Uncle, i will uncle thee of thy proud life.
Father farewell, i will to the hermitage,
Where if I be received for Luningberg,
I will have thy dry bones, sanguin'd all over
With thy foes blood, Rhamnusia help thy priest,
My wrong thou know, my willingness thou see.
Exit.
Actus secundus.
Enter Ierom and Stilt, Ier. Come Stilt, bestirre your stumpes; you know I must
be a tilter.


Stilt. I my lord, I know you should be one, but I hope you are not so madd.


Ier. what do thou count it madness to run a tilt.


Stilt. I my Lord, for you that cannot sit a hobby, you will hardly manage your
tilthorse.


Ier. Why? they say Stilt, that stone Mares are gentler, see if thou can get
me one of them.


Stilt. Not before next grass; I could help you now to a stone mule, a stone
ass.


Ier. Well, i will try one course with thee at the half pike, and then go, come
draw thy pike.


Stilt. That Is not your fit word; you must say, advance your pike, and you must
be here sir, and here, you will never learn for all my teaching.


Ier. I have answered you Stilt, that Princes have no need to be taught, and I
have even determined with my self, not to run at tilt, least I hazard my
horse and harness: therefore i will to the court, and only see my new cousin,
that they said was drowned: and then retire to my (astle at Helsen, and there
write a new poem, that I have taken pains in, almost these ten years: It is
in praise of picketoothes.


Stilt. That will be excellent my Lord, the barbers will buy those poems
abominably.


Ier. Nay sir, i will get a patent from the Duke, my father, for the Cum
Priuilegio for that poem, Ad imprimendum solum; besides thou shall have a
priniledge, that no man shall sell tooth pickes without thy seal: my father
says I am a fool, but I think I bestow my time to look out for setting a
new nappe upon his thredbare Common wealth: Who Is that knockes? who dares
disturb our honorable meditation? hark Stilt, do thou see no noise?


Stilt. No, but I hear a noise.


Ierom. A hall then; my father and my new cosen: stand aside, that I may set
my countenance, my beard brush and mirror, Stilt, that set my countenance right
to the mirror of Knighthood, for your mirror of magistrates is somewhat to
sober* how like me?


Stilt. Oh excellent! heers your casting bottle.


Ier. Sprinkle, good Stilt, sprinkle, for my late practice has brought me
into strange favor: ha mother of me, thou had almost blinded the eyes of
excellence; but omnia been, let them approach now, and I appear not like a
Prince, let my father casheere me, as some say he will.


Stilt. Casheere you? no, do but manage your body, and have here, and here
your congies, and then quid sequitur, Stilt knows, and all the court shall see.


Hoboyes. Enter Ferdinand leading Clois Hoffman: Mathias, and L^dowick leading
Lucibella: Lorrique, with other lords attending: coming near the chair of
state, Ferdinand Ascends, places Hoffman at his feet, sets a Coronet on his
head, A Herald proclaims. Her. Ferdinand by the divine grace, prince of
Heidelberg lord of Pomer, and Duke of Prussia, for sundry reasons him moving,
the quiet state of his people especially: which as a witl^sse and insufficient
prince, disinherits Ierom Heidelberg his known son, and adopteth Otho of
Iuningberg his sisters son, as heir, immediately to succeed after his death
in all his provinces. God save Duke Ferdinand, and Otho his heir.


Flourish. Ferd. Amen, Heaven witness, how my heart is pleased,
With the conceit of Prussias after-peace,
By this election.

Ier. Why? but hear you father*

Ferd. Away, disturb us not, let us in and feast,
For all our country in our choice is blessed.

Flourish. Exeunt. Ier. Why, but Stilt, what is now to be done Stilt?


Stilt. Nay that is more then I know: this matter will trouble us more then all
your poem of picktooths, s'nailes: you were better be vnknighted then
vnprinc'd, I have lost all my hope of preferment, if this hold.


Ier. Noe more Stilt, I have it here; it is in my head, and out it shall not
come, till red revenge in robes of fire, and madding mischief run and rave:
they say I am a fool Stilt, but follow me; i will seek out my notes of
Machiauel, they say he is an odd politician.


Stilt. I faith he is so odd, that he has driven even honesty from all men's
hearts.


Ier. Well, sword come forth, and courage enter in,
Breast break with grief; yet hold to be revenged:
Follow me Stilt; widows unborn shall weep,
And beardlesse boys with armor on their backs
Shall bear us out, Stilt we will tread on stilts,
Through the purple pauement of the court,
Which shall be, let me see, what shall it be?
No court, but even cave of misery.
There Is an excellent speech Stilt, follow me, pursue me, will accquire,
And either die, or compass my desire.

Stilt. Oh brave master, not a Lord: O, Stilt will stalk, and make the earth a
stage,

But he will have thee lord in spite of rage.

Exeunt. Enter Rodorigo, and Austria's Duke, some followers. Rod. Sir since you
are content, you here shall find,
A sparing supper, but a bounteous mind:
Bad lodging, but a heart as free, and generous,
As that which is fed with generous blood,

Aust. Your hermitage is furnished for a prince.

Rodo. Last night this roof covered the sacred heads
Of five most noble, fair, and gracious Princes,
Duke Ferdinand himself, and Otho his nephew,
The sons of Saxon, and ^he Austrian Princess.

Aust. Oh god! that girl, which fled my Court and love,
Making love color for her heedles flight,

Rodo. Pardon great prince: are you the Austrian duke?

Aust. Hermet I am, Saxons proud wanton sonns
Were entertaind like Priam's Firebrand
At Sparta: all our State gladly 'appear'd
Like chierfull Lacedemons, to receive
Those Demons that with magic of their tongues,
Bewitch't my Lucibells my Helen's ears.

Knocking and calling within. Rodo. Who traueleth so late? who knockes so hard?
Turn to the east end of the Chapel, pray;
We are ready to attend you.

Enter duke of Saxony. Sax. Which is the way to Dantzike?

Rodo. There is no way to Dantzike you can find
Without a guide thus late, come near I pray,

Sax. look to our horses, by your leave master Hermet,
We are soon bidden, and will prove bold guests:
God save you sir.

Aust. That should be Saxons tongue.

Sax. Indeed I am the Duke of Saxony.

Aust. Then art thou father to lascivious sons,
That have made Austrea childles.

Sax. O subtle duke, thy craft appears in framing thy excuse,
Thou do accuse my young sons innocence:
I sent them to get knowledge, learn the tongues,
Nor to be metamorphis'^ with the view
Of flattering beauty, peradventure painted.

Aust. No; I defy thee ^ohn of Saxony;
My Lucibell for beauty needs no art,
Nor do I think the virtues of her mind
Ever inclind to this ign^ble course
But by the charms and forcings of thy sons.

Sax. Oh would thou durst maintain thy words proud Duke.

Rodo. I hope great Princes, neither of you dare
Commit a deed so sacrilegious: This holy cell
Is dedicated to the son of peace;
The foot of war never profaned this floor,
Nor does wrath here with his cons^ming voice
Affright these buildings; charity with prayer,
Humility with abstinence combined,
Are here the guardians of a grieved mind.

Aust. Father we obey thy (...) voice;
Duke John of Saxony, receive my faith;
Ti^l our ears hear the true course thy sons
Have taken with my fond and misled child.
I proclaim truce, Why do thou ^ullen stand?
If thou mean peace, give me thy Princely hand.

Sax. Thus do I plight thee troth, and promise peace,

Aust. Nay, but thy eyes agree not with thy heart;
In vows of combination, there is a grace
That shows the intention in the outward face,
Look cherefully, or I expect no leagu^.

Sax. First give me leave to view a while the person,
Of this He^mer, Austria note him well,
Is he not like your brother Rodorick?

Aust. He Is like him, but I heard he lost his life
Long since in Persia, by the Sophies wars.

Rod. I heard so much my Lords, but that report
Was purely feigned, spread by my erring tongue,
As double as my heart, when I was young*
I am that Rodorick that aspired your throne;
That vile false brother who with rebel breath,
Drawn sword, and treacherous heart threatened your death*

Sax. My brother I nay, then in faith old John lay by
Thy sorrowing thoughts, turn to thy wonted vein,
And be madd John of Saxony again.
Mad Rodorick, art alive? my mothers so ^nne
Her joy and her last birth; oh she coniur^d me
To use thee thus, and yet I banished thee:
Body of me; I was unkind I know,
But thou deseru'st it then; but let it go:
Say thou will leave this life thus truly idle,
And live a Statesman, thou shall share in reign,
Commanding all but me thy sovereign.

Rod. I thank your Highness; I will think on it:
But for my sins this sufferance is more fit.

Sax. Tut, title, tatle, tell not me of sin.
Now Austria once again thy Princely hand:
I Will look thee in the face, and smile, and swear,
If any of my sons have wronged thy child,
I Will help thee in revenging it my self;
But if as I believe they^ mean, but honor,
As it appears by these iusts proclaimed.
Then thou shall be content to name him thine,
And thy fair daughter i will account as mine.

Aust. Agreed.

Sax. Ah Austria! it was a world when you and I
Ran these Carreers; but now we are stiff and dry.

Aust. I am glad you are so pleasant my good Lord.

Sax. It Was my old mood, but I was soon turned sad*
With over grieuing for this long lost lad;
And now the Boy is grown, as old as I,
His very face as full of gravity.

Rod. Please your Graces enter,
I know the servants that attend one me
By the appointment of Duke Ferdinand
By this have covered.

Sax. Why then let us in: brother I trust, and brother
Hold you this hand, Rodorick hold thou the other,
By heaven my heart with happiness is crow'nd,
In that my long lost brother now is found:

Exeunt, Enter Clois Hoffman solus. Hoff. so run on fate, my destinies are good,
Revenge has made me great by shedding blood:
I am supposed the heir of Luningberg,
By which I am of Prussia Prince elect.
Good: who is wronged by this? Only a fool:
And it is not fit that idiots should bear rule.

Enter Lorrique. Lo. My Lord I have as you inioyn'd, intic't Saxons elder son
to talk with you: and here he comes with his most excellent, amorous, and
admirable Lady.


Hoff. Have thou the Hermets weeds for my disguise?


Lor. All ready, fit, fit' in the next chamber, your beard is point-vice, not a
hair amiss.


Hoff Faithful Lorrique in thy unfaithfulness:
I kiss thy cheek, and give thee in that kiss
The mo^tie of all my earthly bliss.
Exit.
Lor. Good: I am half a Monarke: half a fiend
Blood I begun in and in blood must end
yet this Clois is an honest villain, has conscience in his killing of men:
he kills none but his fathers enemies, and there issue, it is admirable, it is
excellent, it is well it is meritorious, where? in heaven? no, hell.


Enter Lodowick and Lucibella. Lod. Now friend, where is prince Otho?

Lor. Sad, sir, and grieved.

Luci. Why? prithee why?

Lor. Alas I know not why.
The hermet Rodorigo talked with him
Somewhat of you, and somewhat of the Duke,
About surprising you and murdering Lodowick:
Or such a thing, nay sure 'twas such a thing.

Luci. Surprising me and murdering Lodowicke.

Lod. By whom? by what complot?

Lor. Sure by the Duke, the Duke's an odd old lad:
I know, this nigh^ there is set a double guard,
And there is some trick in that: but patience:
Here comes the Hermet: holy reverent man!
Enter Clois Hoffman like a her^^^. Somewhat important, wings his aged feet
With speedy nimblenesse: heaven grant that all be well*

Clois. Princes in pity of your youth, your love,
Your virtues, and what not, that may move ruth,
I offer you the tender of your lives,
Which yet you may preserve: but if you stay,
Death and destruction waits your delay.

Lod, Who has conspired our deaths? speak reuere^^ man.

Clo. The Duke of Prussia, doting on this face;
Worthy indeed of wonder, being so fair,
This night has plotted, first to murder you;
The guard are set that you may not escape,
Within, without, and round about the court;
Only one way, through Prince Otho his lodging
Is left; here is the key, and for more proof
Of my great zeal and care, on with these robes.
Within are Grecian habits for your heads;
Nay if you love life do not stand amazed,
But take the path toward my hermitage,
Yet I aduize you, that you go not in;
There may be plots to, for ought I know;
But turn down by the river, there is a way
Leads to a little Chapel; in that porch
Stay, till I visit you with better news;

Lod. I will but call my brother, and then go.

Clo. That were a going never to return:
I Will send him after you, be well assured.

Luci. Oh god! the Duke of Prussia grown thus false,
such shows of freindship, and so little faith.

Lod. Come Lucibella lets embrace this mean,
Duke Ferdinand shall with a sorrowing heart,
Repent this base dishonorable plot:
Father, our fortunes if they sort aright,
shall with continual thankfulness require
This virtuous and this charitable care:
Farewell: we will wait thee in the Chapel porch
Bring Prince Mathias our kind brother thither,
And thou shall add good works to charity:
Once more farewell Lorrique; there is for thee,
Commend me to thy Lord, tell him this wrong
Of his false uncle, shall mere full revenge:
But do to him our duties. Come chaste, fair,
We must not now by (...) and turnameut
Maintain thy honor: for thy champion Knight,
Is for'st by treason to unwilling flight.
Exit.
Clo. so run to mischief: Oh my dear Lorrique^
When I have summed up my account of death,
And robbed those fathers of there life's and joy,
That robbed me of my joy, my fathers life,
Thus thy hand claspt in mine, we will walk and meditate,
And boast in the reuenges I have wrought;
That done; i will seat thee by m^ throne of state,
And make thee rival in those governments,
That by thy secrecy thou li^^'^t me to;
Shall be a Duke at least.

Lor. I thank your Grace, but pray resolve me,
what you now intend,
To these three Princes Lodowick, and Mathias,
And the thrice beauteous Princess Lucibell.

Hoff. Death certain: call in Mathias, if my plot prove good, (...) make one
brother shed the others blood.


Lor. I am nimble as your thought, devise, i will execute what you command.

Exit.
Clo. A pre^ious villain: a good villain too*
W^ll if he be no worse; that is do worse,
And honey me in my death-stinging thoughts,
I will prefer him: he shall be preferred
To hanging peradventure; why not? it is well
Enter Lorriqne. His sufferance here may save his soul from hell.
He comes; what news my faithful servant? where is the Prince.

Lor. He Is talking with the lady Lucibell,
And when I said your Highness sent for him,
He 'gan with courtly salutations,
To take his leave and to attend your grace.

Clo. Well god-a-mercy friend, thou got'st me grace:
But more of that at leisure: take this gown;
My cloak, a chair; I must turn melancholy.
Enter Mathias. Second what ere I say, approve my words,
That we may move Mathias to mad rage.

Mat. God save your excellence: what sad, dull, heavy?
Or are you now in meditation
Which part to take to morrow at the Tilt?
The mead is ringd with tents of stranger Knights,
Whose rich devices, and caparisons
Exceed the Persian Monark's, when he met
Destruction and pale death sent from the sword
Of Philips son, and his stout Macedons
Cheerely Prince Otho there is such a warlike sight
That would stir up a leaden heart to fight.

Clo. For what?

Mat. For honor and fair Luicbell.

Clo. Oh Prince Mathias! it is ill combined
When honor is with fickle beauty joined.
Where is your most Princely brother?

Mat. I cannot tell I left him with his loved Lucibell.

Clo. But she has got another love,
Dishonored all this rich assembly,
Left the m^moriall of such infamy,
As cannot die while men have memory.

Mat. How? p^ay you how? what has the princess done?

Clo. she with a Grecian is but new fled hence,
Belike some other love of hers before:
Our tilt and turnament is spoild and crossed.
The fair we should defend, her faith has lost.

Mat. Fled with a Grecian? saw you them go Prince Otho?

Clo. I, I, I saw them go.

Mat. And would not stay them?

Clo. My true servant knows,
How at the sight of such inconstancy
My gentle heart was smitt with inward grief
And I sunk down with sorrow.

Mat. god's death; what path? which way? that I may track her harlot-steps,
Fled now: gone now: i will go seek Lodowicke

Clo. Nay then you add an irreligious work,
To there lascivious act; follow your self,
I and my man will bear your company
Lorrique, as I think, thou nam'dst a chapel,
A Hermet, some such thing: I have lost the form.

Lo. I heard her say, she could not travel far,
He told her, they would rest the dead of night*
Near to a chapel, by a hermitage.

Mat. Where is that chapel? where is that hermitage?
If you love honor Princely Luningberg,
Lets to that chapel: if you know the way,
That I may kill our shame, ere it s^e day.

Clo. I Will guide you to the chapel, aid your arm*
In your revenge, against that Grecian,
But for the Lady spare her, she is fair.

Mat. I will do what I can; oh hell of life!
Who, but a fool would strive to win a wife?
shall we call Lodowick?

Clo. no^, it would smite his soul in sunder, split his heart,
If he should hear of such adulterate wrong,
Cover the fault or punish as you please:
Yet I would save her feign, for she deserue^
pity for beanty.

Mat. Nothing, noe for nothing.
She is as harlots, fair, like gilded tombs
Goodly without; within all rottennes:
she is like a painted fire upon a hill,
set to allure the frost-nipt passengers,
And starve them after hope: she is indeed^
As all such strumpets are, Angel in show,
Devil in heart: Come, come if you love me go.
Exit
Clo. Follow Lorrique; we are in the right way.
Exit.
Lor. To hell I fear: tush let all fear go by,
Whoo'l shun a bad way with good company.
Exit.
Actus tertus.
Enter Lodowick and Lucibell. Lod. Are you not faint diuinest Lucibell?

Luci. Noe, the clear moon strowes silver in our path,
And with her moist eyes weeps a gentle dew
Upon the the spotted pauement of the earth,
Which softens every flower whereon I tread
Besides; all travel in your company
Seems but a walk made in some goodly bower,
Where loves fair mother strips her paramoure.

Lod. This is the Chapel, and behold a bank,
Covered with sleeping flowers, that miss the Sun:
Shall We repose us till Mathias come?

Luci. The Hermet will soon bring him, let us sit down*
Nature, or art has taught these boughs to spread,
In manner of an arbor over the bank.

Lod. No, they bow down as vailes to shadow you*
And the fi^sh flowers beguiled by the light
Of your celestial eyes, open there leaves,
And when they entertain the lord of day
You bring them comfort like the Sun in May.

Luci. Come* come, you men will flatter beyond mean:
Will you sit down? and talk of the late wrong
Intended by the Duke of Prussia?

Lod. Fairest forget it, leave till we are clear freed hence,
I will defy him, and cause all the knights
Assembled for our purposed turnament,
To turn there keen swords against his catiue head.

Luci. Prithee no more, I feel thy blood turn hot,
And wrath inflames thy spirit, let it cease;
Forgive this fault, convert this war to peace.

Lod. O breath sweet touch with what a heavenly charm
Do your soft fingers my wa^-^houghts disarme,
Prussia had reason to attempt my life
Enchanted by the magic of these looks,
That cast a luster on the blushing stars.
Pardon chaste Queen of beauty, make me proud
To rest my toild head on your tender knee,
My chin with sleep is to my bosom bowed;
Fair if you please a little rest with me.

Luci. No, i will be Centinell; i will watch for fear
Of venomous worms, or wolves, or woluish thieves:
My hand shall fan your eyes, like the film'd winge
Of drowsy morpheus; and my voice shall sing
In a low compass for a Lucibell.
Sleep sweet, perhaps i will sleep for company.

Lod. I thank you; I am drowsy, sing I pray;
Or sleep: do what you please, I am heavy, I;
God night to all our care: oh! I am blessed
By this soft pillow where my head does rest.
He sleeps, By my troth I am sleepy too: I cannot sing,
My heart is troubled with some heavy thing.
Rest one these violets, whilst I prepare,
In thy soft slumber to receive a share:
Blush not chaste Moon to see a virgin lie
So near a Prince, it is noe immodestie:
For when the thoughts are pure, noe time, noe place,
Has power to work fair chastities disgrace;
Lodowick I claspe thee thus, so arm clip arm,
So sorrow fold them that wish true love harm.

Sleeps. Enter Lorrique, Mathias, Clois Hoffman. Mat. Art sure tha'st found
them?

Lor. Look, are these they?

Mat. Adulterer: stiumpet.

Lod. Oh!

Luci. Oh!

Clo. Unhuman deed to kill both.

Mat. Both have abu^'d our glory, both shall bleed,

Luci. how now! what have ye done? my Lodowick bleeds
Some savage beast has fixed his ruthles fange
In my soft body: Lodowick, I faint*
Dear wake; my Lodowick: alas what means
Your breast to be thus wet? Is It blood or sweat*

Lod. Who troubles me?

Mat. Brother.

Lod. Who is that? Mathias.

Mat. I, accursed I,

Lod. Where Is the good Hermet? thank him for his love*
Yet tell him; Ferdinand of Prussia
Has a long arm; some murderer of his
has killed us sleeping.

Luci. Killed thee? oh no! I trust the careful destinies deny
So hard a fate: it is I alone am killed.
Come Lodowick, and close up my night-vaild eyes
That never may again behold the day.

Hoff. What means Mathias?

He offers to Kill himself. Mat. Hold me not Prince Otho.
I will revenge my self upon my self*
For Parricide for damned parricide:
I have killed my brother sleeping in the arms
Of the diuinest form that e're held breath.
I have killed loves Queen defaced with my foul hand,
The goodliest frame that ever nature built
And driven the graces from the mansion
Wherein they have continued from their birth;
She now being dead, she will dwell no more on earth.

Lod. What moved you to it brother?

Mat. Jealous rage, suspicion by Prince Otho,
That Lucibell had fled with a base Greek,
Oh me accursed! I am borne to shame.

Clo. But I am wretcheder, that from the lou^
Devoted to the house of Saxony,
Have thus begot this monster cruelty:
I lay within an arbor, whence I saw
The princess, and your self in this disguise
Departing secretly my uncles court:
I judged you for a Greek as you appeared.
Told Prince Mathias of your secret flight;
And he led on by fury followed you
Where thus deceased by night and your attire,
Has robbed your heart of life, his own of joy.

Mat. Forgive me brother, pardon fairest maid,
And ere the icy hand of ashie death
Fo^d your fair bodies in this sable veil;
Discover why you put on this disguise.

Lod. To escape the lustful Duke of Prussia,
Who purposed this night to murder me,
And ravish her whom death has made his pray
My Lucibell, whose lights are mask't with clouds
That never will be cleard.

Hoff. My uncle, fie, who buz'd into your head
This damned lie?

Lod. it is no lie.

Luci. Noe lie: it is true, it is true,
The reverent Hermet Rodorick told it us.

Hoff. The Hermet is a villain damned in hell
Before the worlds creation, if he sai't
My Princely uncle purposed such a thought.
Look to the Princess, there is life in her:
Cheer up your heart Prince Lodowicke, courage man.
Your being of comfort may recover her,
While I bring forth the Hermet and disprooue
This false assertion: Rodorick is a slave
A vile and irreligious hypocrite,
No Hermet, but a devil if he dare
Affirm such falsehood of Duke Ferdinand.

Enter Rodorigo, Saxony, and Austria. Rodo. Rodorick is not as you report him
sir,
Nor did he ere^belie Duke Ferdinand.

Hoff. No did? why then did you maliciously
Advise Prince Lodowick and fair Lucibell
To fly the Prussian court this dismal night.

Rodo. Who I? I spoke not with them,

Lodo. Yes ye did.

Sax. Where was it that he spoke with you? tell us where?

Lodo. At Dantzike in the Duke of Prussias court.

Sax. Who heard him besides you?

Lod. The Princess Lucibell.

Luci. As heaven shall help my fleeting soul, I did.

Aust. why speaks my dukedomes hope in hollow sounds?
Look up fair child here is Saxony and I
Thy father, Lucibella look on me;
I am not angry that thou fled'st away
But come to grace thy nuptials; prithee speak.

Luci. Father I thank you: Lodowick reach me thy hand
How cold thou art; death now assailes our hearts,
Having triumph't over the outward parts;
Farewell a while, we die but part, to meet
Where joys are certain, pleasures endless, sweet.
Father, this latest boon of you I crave,
Let him, and me, lie in one bed, and grave.

Moritur. Aust. Oh me! oh miserable wretched me.

Lod. Houer a little longer blessed soul, glide not away too fast: mine now
forsaks his earthly mansion and on hopes gilt wings will gladly mount with
thine, where Angels sing celestial ditties to the King of Kings. brother adieu,
your rashness I forgive, pardon me father, pardon; Austria your daughter is
become a bride for death: the dismal even before her wedding day. Hermet God
pardon thee: thy double tongue has caused this error: but in peace farewell.
He that lifts us to Heaven keep thee from Hell.


Moritur. Rod. Oh strange conjecture! what should move this Prince
To charge me with such horrid cruelty?

Mat. I Will tell thee hypocrite.

Sax Stay Mathias stay,
(...) is thy uncle Rodorigo, and besides,
My hon or and Duke Austria's shall be gagged,
He never parted from our company in his own hermitag^
Since day declinde, and glimmering twilight vsher'd in the night.

Hoff. Not from his hermitage?

Aust. Noe not he.

Hoff. ^'st possible?

Aust. By Heaven he did not.

Hoff. Then there is villainy, practice, and villainy
Mathias has bin wronged and drawn to kill
His natural brother, with him to destroy
The rarest piece of natures workmanship,
No doubt by practice and base villainy
The Hermet not at court? strange! wondrous!

Sax. Oh for my fonne, and Austria's worthy child.

Aust. Thou weep'st in scorn, and very tear of thine
Cou^rs a smile: Saxony, I defy
All truce, all league of love, guard thee proud Duke;
Thy sons have made me childlesse; I Will have thee
Con^ort in death with my wronged girl and me.

Hoff. Help Prince Mathias: Hermet, oh the Heavens!
The Austrian Duke sinkes down upon the earth.

Aust. Proud John of Saxony: have thou no wound?

Sax. Not any Austria; neither touched I thee.

Aust. Somebody touched me home: vain world farewell
Dying I fall on my dead Lucibell.

Saxo. Sir what are you that take on you to part?
It Is by your weapon that the Duke is fallen.

Hoff. If I thought so, i would fall upon the point,
But I am innocent of such an ill:
Kill my good kinsman, Duke of Austria;
Then were Prince Otho of Luningberg set down
In sad dispaires black book to rave and die;
But I am free from such imprety.

Sax^. Are you Prince Otho of Luningberg?

Rodo. He is, and heir apparent to Duke Ferdinan^

Sax. May be the Moon deceaues me, and my grief^
As well in the distinguishing of sounds,
As sight: I have heard of young Luningberg,
And seen him to at Hoffmans overthrow,
He looked not like you, neither spoke like you.

Mat. Father, it is he: Lorrique his man attends him,
That fellow which is all composed of mirth
Of mirth? of death: why should I think of mirth
After so foul a murder? come lend hands
To give this Princely body funeral rites,
That I may sacrifice this hand and heart
For my peace offerings on their sepulchers.

Sax. Nay, boy, thou shall not leave old Saxony
Childles for all this sorrow: Prince, and if Otho
Help in my son with noble Austria,
Lodowick shall be my burden: brother yours
The lovely but the lucklesse Lucibell.
So tread a heavy measure; now lets go
To interre the dead, our hearts being dead with woe.

Exeunt carrying the dead bodie^ Rod. There Is life in Lucibell, for I feel
Rodo. last with Lucibell. A breath, more odoriferous then balm
Thirle through the corrall pora^s of her lips,
Apparent signs of life, her pu^ses beat;
Oh if I could but yet recover her,
It Would satisfy the State of Austria,
That else would be disturbed for want of heirs
Heaven be propitious, guide my artlesse hand,
To preserve fainting life in this clear form.
Grant this thou soul of all Divinity,
And I will strive what ever mortal may
Enter Hoffman and Saxony. To serve thee on my knees both night and day.
Tarry Prince Otho and see their bodies balm'd,

Hoff. I pray you think me not in passion dull;
I must withdraw, and weep, my heart is full.
Oh reverent man, thou bearst the richest fruit;
That ever fell in the vnripired spring,
Go lay her soft, she had ill fatero fall;
But rich or fair or strong, death swallows all,
Hol^! Lorrique, leave our horse; draw near.
Enter Lorrique. Help me to sing a hymn unto the fates
Composed of laughing interiections.

Lor. Why my good Lord? what accidents
Have chanced, that tickle so your spleen?

Hoff. Oh my dear self: thou trusty treasurer of my reuenge^
Kneel down, and at my bidding kiss the earth;
And on her cold ear whisper this strict charge:
That she provide the best of her perfumes,
The fat of Lambs raped from the bleating Ewes,
The sweetest smelling wood she can devise;
For I must offer up a sacrifice,
To blessed occasion that has seconded
With opportune means my desire of wreake*

Lor. Now I have kis't the earth, let me partake
In your great joy, that seems to exceed.
Are Lodowick, and the Princess murdered?

Hoff. It Is done, go, hie thee to Prince Ferdinand;
Tell him how misaduenture and mistrust
Has killed Prince Lodowick and bright Lucibell:
By Prince Mathias hand: add to that chance,
Another unexpected accident:
Say that the Dukes of Austria and Saxony,
Being by the Hermet Rodorick intertain'd,
And hearing outcries in the dead of night,
Came and beheld the tragic spectacle,
Which sight did so inrage the Austrian Duke,
That he, assailed the Saxon, but fell slain,
On his (...) daughter, now defloured by death.

Lor. Is Austria then slain by Saxony?

Hoff. Come, come, he is dead, either by him or me,
Noe matter, he is gone: there is more to go.
Run with the news; away.
Exit.
Enter Stilt, and a rabble of poor soldiers: old Stilt his father, with hi^
scarf like a Captain. A s^uruy march. Stilt. Father, set you the army in
qeraye, while I invoke:
The General Foulkes: Fibs, forman, and
Friends all, Officers ail, help to marshall; Prince
Ierom my Lord shall remunerate that, is shall be
Full of thanksgiving, while nature is able to
Nourish, or sustain; Father you have order to stay the rest, be sententious,
and full of circumstance I advise you; and remember this, that more then
mortality fights on our side; For we have treason and iniquity to maintain our
quarrel.


Old Stilt. Hah! what say my son? treason and iniquity?


Stilt. Reason, and equity I meant Father; there is little controuersity in the
words: but like a Captain courageous, I pray go forward, remember the place
you are, in noe more, but this; the days of old, no more, but that; and the
glory Father; Knighthood at least, to the utter defacing of you and your
posterity, Noe more but so.

Exit.
O. Stilt. Well, go thy ways: thou art able to put fire into a Flint stone;
thou have as rheumatique a tongue to persuade as any is between Pole and
Pomer; but thou art even kitt after kind, I am thy father, and was infamous for
my exprobations, to discourage a dissembly of tall soldiers before thou w^rt
borne, and I have made them stand to it tooth and nail; how say you, most
valiant and reprobate Country men: have ye not heard I have bin a stinger, a
tickler, a wormer.


Fibs. Yet; noble, ancient Captain Stilt, ye have removed men's hearts I have
heard that of my father (God rest his soul,) when ye were but one of the
common all soldiers that served old Sarloys in Norway.


O. Stilt. I then was, and Sarloys was; a gentleman would not have given his
head for the washing; but he is cut of, as all valiant caualeroes shall; and
they be no more negligent of themselves; But to the purpose: we are dissembled
together, and fallen into ba^tayle beray in the behalf Prince Ierom a virtuous
Prince, a wise Prince, and a most respectlesse Prince; my son Timothies master,
and the unlawful heir of this land. Now sir the old Duke has put out a
declamation, and says our rising is noe other then a resurrection, for the
Prince inspires not against his father; but the Duke inspires against his son,
using him most naturally, charitably, and abhominably, to put him from
intercession of the crown; wherefore as ye be true men, and obstinate
subjects to the State uncover your heads, and cast up your caps and cry a
Ierom, a Ierom,

Om, A Ierom, a Ierom, a Ierom.


Enter Ierom, and Stilt. Ier. Most noble Countrymen I cannot but cond le in
joy, and smile in tears to see you assembled in my right, but this is the
lamentation that I poor Prince must make, who for my fathers proclamation am
like for to loose my head; except you stand to me, for they are coming on
with bows, bills, and guns, against us: but if you be valiant, and stand to me
lustily, allth' earth 'shall roar but we will have victory.


Enter with Drum, and Colors, Duke Ferdinand, Hoffman Lorrique, Captaiue to
lead the drum the soldiers march and make a stand; All on Ieroms side cast up
their caps and cry a Ierom. Fer. Upon those traitors valiant gentlemen:
Let not that bea^^ the multitude confront,
With garlicke-breath and their confused cries
The Majesty of me their awful Duke,
Strike their Typhoean body down to fire
That dare against us, their sovereign conspire.

Ier. Come, come, you shall have your hands full, and you
Come where we have to do, stand to it Stilt.

Stilt. stand to it? here is the father and the son will stand, though all the
rest fly away.


O Stilt. I warrant you Prince, when the battle comes to joining, my son and
I will be invisible, and they overcome us, i will give you leave to say I have no
pith in me; upon vm true Prince upon vm.


An Alarm: Hoffman kneeles between the Armies. Stilt. I thought it would come
to that;
I thought we should bring
The false Prince on his knees.

Fer. What means my Dukedomes hope to turn thus base? arise, and smite thy
fo^s.


S^rl. I see them not my most honored uncle; pity I beseech
These silly people, that offend as babes,
Not understanding, how they do ^ffend:
And s^ffer me chief agent in this wrong,
To plead their pardons with a peaceful tongue.

Stilt. We scorn pardons, Peace and pity; We Will
have a Prince of our own choosing, Prince Ierom.

O. Stilt. I, I, Prince lorom or no body; be not obstacle old Duke, let not
your own flesh and blood be inherited of your Dukedom, and a stranger
displaced in his retority: for and you do, we will take no comparison of you
and your army, but fall upon you like temperance and lightning.


Fer. Upon your peril; gentlemen assail.

Sarl. If any bosom meet the brunt of war,
Mine shall be first opposed; these honest men
That rise in arms for my young Cozens right
Shall be Protected whilst Prince Charles can stand.

ler. Why see now what a thing Majesty is;
Stilt and the rest of my good people; my cousen)
Charles looking but in the face of our excellence
Cannot choose but take our part.

Stilt. Nay but trust him not my Lord; take heed of him,
Aware your enemies at any hand.

Fer. Why should you make this intercession
For these base abiects, whose presumptuous hearts
Have drawn their rebel bodies against their head:
Entreat not for them, they are all but dead.

Sarl. Forbear a little worthy Countrymen.

Stilt. Nay we deny that, wear none of your Countrymen; you are an ar^ant
arrant Alien.


O. Stilt. True son uncere peregrination, and one that was not borne within our
Dukes damnation, and therefore not to be remitted to any vpstantiall degree of
office amongst us: that is the fine, that is the confusion of all.


Sarl. But hear me.


Ier. I, I* pray hear him; nay I charge you all upon pain of death that you
hear my cozen.


Stilt. he Well we will are him: come on, speak, what wlil ye say?


Sarl. O I beseech you save your lives and goods,
For the Dukes squadrons armed with wrath and death,
Watch but the signal when to ceaze on you,
That can noe more with stand their approved strengthes
Then sparrowes can contend with towering hawks:
Or against the Eagles ayer^:
This act of yours by gathering to a head,
Is treason capital, and without grace
Your lives are forfeit to extremest law.

O Stilt. Mas he says true son; but what is the remedy?

Stilt. None at all father, now we are in, we must go through stitch.


Sarl. Yes, there is remedy: cast your weapons down,
And arm your selves with mercy of your Prince
Who like a gracious shepherd ready stands
To take his lost sheep home in gentle hands.
As for your Prince, I will for him entreat
That he may be restored again in love,
And unto offices of dignity, as either Taster,
Sewer, Cupbearer, the place himself thinks
Fittest for his state, and for my part when
That unhappy time of Princely Ferdinands
Sad death shall, come: --
Which moment: --
But should I as I say behold that hour,
Although I am elected for your Prince,
Yet would I not remove this gentleman,
Bat rather serve him as his councellor.

Ier. Give me your hand of that Cozen; well said, now get a pardon for me, and
my merry men all; and then let me be my fathers Taster, being the office
belonging to his eldest son; I Being the same, and then you shall see me
behave my self, not as a rebel, or reprobate, but as a most reasonable
Prince, and sufficient subject.


Stilt. Well since my Lord has said the word, bring that of spoke he to pass
and ye shall have my word too, and old Stilt my fathers, being a man of good
reproach I tell you, and condemnation in his country.


O. Stilt. I that I am my Lord, I have lived in name and shame ^hese
threescore, and seven winters, all my neighbors can ^are me testament, and
accord.


Sarl. Well, rest ye quiet; Sovereign on my knees
I beg your Highness grant to there request:
Suppose them silly, simple, and your own;
To shed their blood were just, yet rigorous,
The praise of Kings is to prove gracious.

Fer. True soul of honor, substance of my self,
Thy merit wins thee mercy, go in peace,
Lay by your unjust arms, live by your sweat,
And in content the bread of quiet eat.

Om. Godsaue Duke Ferdinand.

Exuni Ier. Pray Father, forgive me, and my man,
And my man's father by our single selves;
For we have bin the capital offenders.

O. Stilt^ I truly my Lord, we raised the resurrection,

Fer. I pardon all; give thee my Tasters place:
Honor this Prince that has thus won you grace.

O. S. Y-S. God save Duke Ferdinand, and Prince Otho.

Ier. I and me too.

O. Stilt. And Prince Ierom too; well son, i will leave thee a Courtier still, and
get me home to my own desolation, where i will labor to compel away excessity:
and so fareyee well.

Exit.
Fer. This business over: worthy nephew Charles,
Let us go visi^ the sad Saxon Duke,
The mourning Hermet,
That through affection wrought his brothers fall.

Sarl. I Will wait your Highness to that house of woe,
Where sad mischance sits in a purple chair,
And vnderncath her beetle cloudy brows
smiles at unlocked for mischsefes; oh there
Does grief unpainted, in true shape appear.

Fer. Shrill trumpets sound a flourish
For the cries of war are drowned.
Exit
Ier, Nay but cozen cozen, is it not necessary I wait
Upon mine own father? and stilt upon me?

Sarl. It Is most expedient, be obsequious.
Noe doubt his ^xcellence will l^^e that well.

Enter Lorrique like a French Doctor. Lor. Dieu vou guard Mounsieur.

Sarl. Welcome my friend, have any suit to me?

Lor. Away Mounsieur, if you be the grand Princ^
Legitimate of Prussia, I have for tender
To your Excellence de service of one poor
Gentle home of Champaigne.

Sarl. I am not he you look for gentlemen,
My cozen is the true and lawful Prince.

Ier. I sir I am the legitimate, and am able to entertayne
A gentleman though I say it and he be of any quality,

Sarl, Lorrique, now or never play thy part:
This Act is even our Tragedies best heart.

Lor. Let me alone for plots, and villainy,
Only commend me to this fool the Prince.

Ier. I tell thee, I am the Prince, my cozen knows it,
That Is my cozen, this is stilt my man.

Lor. A vostree service Mounsieur most Genereux.

Sarl. Noe doubt he is some cunning gentleman
Your Grace may do a deed befitting you
To entertain this stranger.

Ier. It shall bedone cozen; i will talk with him a little
And follow you, go commend me to my father
Tell him I am coming, and Stilt, and this stranger, be mindful cozen, as
you will answer to my Princely indiguation.


Sarl. Well sir, I will be careful, never doubt;
Now scarlet Mistress from thick sable clouds
Thrust forth thy blood-staind hands, applaud my plot,
That giddy wonderers may amazed stand
While death smytes down suspectles Ferdinand.
Exit.
Stilt. Sweet Prince I scarce understand this fellow well, but I like his
conceit in not trusting Prince otho; you must give him the remove that is flat.


Lor. I be, gar, he be chose again you, he give you good word so be dat, but
he will have one fisgig or dia by gar for company on in principality be no
possible.


Ier. Well, I apprehend thee, I have a certain Princely feeling in my self
that he loves me not.


Stilt. Hold ye there my Lord, I am but a poor fellow and have but a simple
living left me; yet my brother were he a very natural brother of mine own,
should he b^e dopted, I would dopt him, and herrite him, i will fit him.


Ier. I but how Stilt, but how?


Lor. By gar my Lord, I will tell you fine knacks, for make him kick up his
heels, and cry we, or be gar I be hang, and so shall I be to, and for de
grand love I bear you, for de Lady Issabella's sake your most tres-excellent
Lady mother,


Ier. Did, thou know her French doctor? did thou?


Silt. I as beggars do the Ladies that are their Almesgigiuers.


Lor. By gar you lie, like Iacknape, I love de Lady.

With a boon coeur, and for her sake here take dissame, and dis same, put dis
in de cup, where de competitor Prince otho shall drink; by gar it will poison
him bravely.


Stilt. That were excellent my Lord, and it could be done, and nobody know
on it.


Ier. I, but he always drinks in my Fathers cup.


Lor. I so let be, let de Duke drink a de same.


Ier. What poison my father? noe, I like not that so well.


Lor. You shall drink too, and I too and when we be sick, as we shall baue
as shall have a petit rumble in de belly; dan take a dis same, and give your
sadra dis: but your cousin none of it, and bygar nobody shall be dead, and
kicka, and cry oh, but Otho.


Stilt. That Is excellent, master;


Ier. This is the poison then, and this is the medicine?


Lor. I dat be true.


Ier. Well Physician, attend in my chamber here, till Stilt and I return; and
if I pepper him not, say I am not worthy to be called a Duke, but a drawlatch.


Stilt. Farewellawe, and iebbit a vow; and we speed by thy practice we will
crush a cup of thine own country wine.


Lor. Go speed to spoil your selves.
Doctor lie there, Lorrique, like thy self appear
So now i will post vuto the Hermitage, and smile
While silly fools act treason act through my guile.
Exit.
Actus quartus.
Enter Ferdinand and Sarlois, open a curtain: Kneel Saxony, the Hermet and
Mathias: tapers burning. Sarl. See Princely uncle black dormitory,
Where Austria and Prince Lodowick are laid
On the cold bed of earth, where they must sleep
Till earth and air, and sea consume by fire.

Fer. Their rest be peace, their rising glorious;
Sad mourners, give your partners leave to kneel,
And make their offertorie on this tomb,
That does contain the honourablest earth
That ever went upright in Germany,

Sax. Welcome Duke Ferdinand, come, come, keele, kneel*
Thus should each friend another sorrow feel.

Sarl. Is Lucibella in this monument?

Red. Noe, she is recouer'd from deaths violence;
But through her wounds and grief distract of sense.

Sarl. Heaven help her, here she comes;

Enter Lucibella mad. Rod. Kneel still, I p^ay.

Mat. Oh me accursed I why live I this black day*

Luc. Oh a sword, I pray you kill me not,
For I am going to the rivers side.
To fetch white lillies, and b^ew daffadils
To stick in Lodowicks bosom, where it bled,
And in mine own; my true love is not dead,
Noe you are deceiud in him, my father is:
Reason he should, he made me run away*
And Lodowick too, and you Mathias too;
Alack for woe, yet what a the remedy?
We must run all away: yet all must dye.
It Is so, I wrought it in a sampler,
'Twas heart in hand, and true loves knots and words,
All true stitch by my troth: the posie thus:
No flight dear love but death, shall sever us;
Nor that did not neither; he lies here does he not?

Rod. Yes lovely madam, pray be patient.

Luc. Iso I am, but pray tell me true,
Could you be patient, or you, or you, or you,
To loose a father and a husband too:
Ye could, I cannot; open, door here hoe!
Tell Lodowick, Lucibell would speak with him;
I have news from heaven for him, he must not die,
I have robbed Prometheus of his moving fire:
Open the door, I must come in, and will,
I Will beat my self to air, but I Will come in.

Sarl. Alas her tender hands smiting the ston^
Beweepe their mistress rage in tears of blood.

Ferd. Fair Lady be of comfort, it is in vain
To invoke the dead to life again.

Sax. I gentle Daughter be content, I pray*
Their fate is come, and ours is not, far off.

Mat. Here is a hand over my fate has power*
And I now sink under the stroke of death,
But that a purer spirit fills my breast
And guides me from the footsteps of despair,

Sarl. A heavenly motion full of charity,
Your self to kill you self were such a sin
As most divines hold deadly.

Luc. I but a knave may kill one by a trick,
Or lay a plot, or so, or cog, or prate,
Make strife, make a man's father hang him,
Or his brother, how think you goodly Prince,
God give you joy of your adoption;
May nor tricks be vsd?

Sarl. Alas poor Lady.

Luc. I that's true, I am poor, and yet have things,
And gold ring, and amidst the leaves greenea
Lord how dee, well I thank god, why that's well,
And you my Lord, and you too; never a one weep,
Must I shed all the tears? well he is gone,
And he dwells here ye said, ho i will dwell with him,
Death, dastard, Devil, robber of my life
Thou base adulterer, that partst man and wife
Come I defy thy darts.

Fer. O sweet for bear.
For pitties sake a while her rage restrain
Last she do violence upon herself.

Luc. O never fear me, there is somewhat cri^^
Within menoe: tells me there is knaves abroad
Bids me be quiet, lay me down and sleep
Good night good gentlefolkes, brother your hand,
And yours good father, you are my father now,
Do but stand here, l'fe sun a little course
At base, or barley-breake, or some such toye,
To catch the fellow, and come back again,
Nay look thee now, let go, or by my troth
I Will tell my Lodowick how ye use his love:
So now god-buye, now god-night indeed:
Lie further Lodowick* take not all the room,
Be not a churl, thy Lucibell does come.
Exit
Sax. Follow her brother, follow son Mathies,
Be careful guardians of the troubled maid;
While I con^erre with Princely Ferdinand
About an embassy to Austria,
With true reports of there disasterous haps.

Mat. Well, I will be her guardian and her guide,
By me her senses have bin weakened,
But i will contend with charitable pain,
To serve her, till they be restord again.
Exit
Sarl. A virtuous, noble resolution.

Fer. Worthy Prince Rodorigo, when tempestuous woe
Abates her violent storm, I shall have time
To chide you for unkindness, that have lived
In solitary life with us so long.
Believe me Saxon Prince you did us wrong:

Rod. Would I might never live in noe worse state;
For contemplation is the path to heaven.
My new conversing in the world is proved
Lucklesse and full of sorrow; fare-ye-well
My heavens, alone, all company seems hell.
Exit.
Fer. My nephew call for winemy soul is dry
I am sad at sight of so much misery.

Enter I erom and Stilt, with cup, towell, and wine. Sarl. Is the Dukes taster
there?

Ier. I am at hand with my office.

Sarl. Fill for the Duke good cozen, taste it first.

Ier. I have no mind to it Stilt, for all my antidote.

Stilt. I warrant you Master let Prince Otho drink next,

Ier. Here cozen, will you begin to my father?

Sarl. I thank you kindly, i will not be so bold,
It is your office; fill unto my Lord.

Ier. Well god be with it, it is gone down, and now i will send the medicine after;
Father pray drink to my cozen for he is so mannerly that he will not drink
before you.


Stilt. Pray ye do my Lord, for Prince Otho is best worthy of all this
company to drink of that cup, which and he do, I hope he shall nere drink
more.


Fer, Good for tune after all this sorrow Saxony.


Sax. O worthy Ferdinand, fortune and I are parted, she has played the minion
with me, turned all her favors in to frowns, and in scorn robbed me of all
my hopes, and in one hour over turned me from the top of her proud wheel.


Fer. Build not on fortune, she is a sickle dame
And those that trust unto her sphere are fools.
Fill for his Excellence.

Ier. Here cozen for your Excellence, pray drink you to the Duke of Saxony.


Sarl. Not I kind cozen, I list not to drink.

Ier. Gods Lady, I think Stilt, we are all undone, for I feel a iumbling
worse and worse.


Stilt. O give the Duke some of the medicine


Fer. What medicine talk thou of? what ails my son?


Ier. O lord, father, and ye mean to be a lives man take some of this.


Fer. Why? this is deadly poison vnprepar'd.


Ier. True, but it was prepared for you and me by an excellent fellow, a
french Doctor?


Stilt. I, he is one that had great cqre of you.


For, Villain what was he? drink not Saxony
I doubt I am by treason poisoned.

Sarl. Heaven keep that fortune from my dread Lord.


Enter Lorrique hastily. Ler. Treason ye Princes, treason to the lives
Of Ferdinand the Duke of Prussia
My Princely master! Otho of Luningberg

Sarl. Who should intend us treason?


Lor. This fond Prince.


Ier. Never to you Father, but to my cozen Charles* indeed I meant to poison
him, but I have pepperd my self.


Sarl. I never gave thee cause.


Stilt. That Is nothing to the purpose, but my Lord took occasion by the
council of a French Doctor.


Sarl. Physicians for the Duke, ^y vncie faints.


Stilt. Surgeons for the Prince, my master falls.


Fer. Call no Physicians, for I feel't too late,
The subtle poison mingled with my blood
'Nums all the passages, and^ nimble death
Fleetes on his p^rple currents to my heart.

Ier. Father, I am dying too, oh now I depart,
Be good to Stilt my man, he was accessory
to all this.

Stils. I truly: was I sir therefore I hope you will be good to me, I helped to
mingle the poison as the French Doctor, and my master charged me.


Fer. What Is that French Doctor?


Sarl. What Is become of him?


Stilt. We left him in the court in my masters chamber.


Ier. I sir woe worth him, farewell Stilt, farewell fathers
I ask you pardon with repentant eyes;
Fall stars, O Stilt, for thus thy master dies.

mortiur Fer. Take hence that maytor for the fool his man.


Stilt. I pray provide for me sit;


Fer. Let him be tortured, then upon a wheel
broke like a traitor and a murderer.

Stilt, O lord sir. I meant you noe hurt, but to Prince Charles


Sarl. Away, distur be us not with idle talk.


Stilt. Provide quoth a^ and you call this providing, pray let me, provide for
my self, alas my poor father, he will creep upon crutches into his grave
when, he hears his proper'st Stilt is cut off by the stumpes.


Fer. Hence with that fellow.


Stilt. Pray, not so hasty, you would scarce be so forward, and you were
going as I am, to the gallows.


Exeunt guard with Stilt. Sarl. How cheares my royal uncle ^

Fer. Likea ship that having long contended with
The waves, is at last with one proud billow
Smit into the ruthlesse swallow of the sea.
For thee alas I perceive this plot was lay de;
But heaven had greater mercy-on ^hy youth,
And one my people, that shall find true rest
Being with a Prince so wise and virtuous blessed.
Farewell most noble John of Saxony,
Bear thy unmatched grief with a mind bent
Against the force of all temptations;
By my example Princely brother, see,
How vain our lives and all our glories be.

Sax. God for thy mercy! treason upon treason,
How now young Otho what art thou poisoned too?

Sarl. Would God I were, but my sad stars reserve
This simple building for extreamer ruin:
Oh that French doctor.

Lor. I that worst of hell.
Noe torment shall content us in his death.

Sax. Nay soft and fair, let him be taken first;
How now sad brother, are you come to see
This Tragic end of worthy Ferdinand?

Enter Rodorigo. Rod. I heard of it too soon, and come too late.

Sax Well brother leave the Duke, and wait on me*
Mathias, and the heartgreiu'd Lucibell
Shall go with us to Wittenberg, and shun
That fatal land filled with destruction.

Rod. But Lucibella like a chased hind
Flys through the thickets, and neglects the briars,
After her runs your Princely son Mathias,
As much disturbd, though not so much distract,
Vowing to follow her, and if he can,
Defend her from dispairing actions.

Sax. And we will follow them, Prince Otho adue
Care goes with us, yet we leave grief with you,
Interre your uncle, punish traitors crimes,
Look to your person* hese are dangerous times,

Exit Saxony and Rodorige. Sarl. Lords take this body, bear it to the court,
And all the way sound a sad heavy march,
Which you may truly keep, then peeple tread
A mournesfull march indeed,
Go on before, i will stay a while, and weep
My tributary tears paid on the ground
Where my true joy your Princemy uncle fell:
I Will follow to drive from you all distress
And comfort you, though I be comfortles.
Art not thou plumpt with laughter my Lorrique,

Exeunt with the body. A marck. Lor. All this excellent, but worthy Lord,
There is an accident this instant chanc'st
Able to overthrow in one poor hour
As Well your hopes as these assurances.

Sarl. What Is that Lorrique? what can fortune do
That may divert my strai^e of policy.

Lor. You know all Prussia take you for the son
Of beauteous Martha,

Sarl. I they suppose me to be Otho her son,
And son to that false Duke whom I will kill
Or curse my stars

Lor. His star is sunk already, death and he
Have vowed an endless league of amity.

Sarl. Had I Briareus hands, i would strine with heaven
For executing wrath before the hour,
But wishes are in vain, he is gone.

Flourish. Enter as many as may be spared, with lights, and make a lan^
kneeling while Martha the Duchess like a mourner with her train passes
through. Mar. Our son is somewhat slack as we conceive
By this delaying, while our heart is feared,
And our eyes dimmed with expectation
As are the lights of such as on the beach
With many a longing, yet a little proof
Stand waiting the return of those they love.

Enter Lorrique, falls on's knees. Lord. His Excellence no doubt has great
affairs
But his familiar friend Lorrique is come.

Mar. kneel not Lorrique, I prithee glad my heart
With thy tongues true report of my son Otho
Whom since his Princely Father is decea'st
I am come from oppressed with grief
In person to salute him for our Duke.

Lor. Your mother like affection, and high care,
His H^igh^es does return with dut^ous thanks
Defiring pardon of your excellence,
In that he did not first salute your grace:
But dis^^al accidents and bloody deeds,
Poisoning streasons, so disturb this state
Chiefly this gentle mind since the late death
Of your right princely brother Ferdinand
That like the careful Captain of a band
He is compeld to be the last in field;
Yet he protests by me, and I for him:
That no soft rest shall enter his grecu'd eyes
Till he behold your presence, more desired
Then the large Empire of the wide earth;
Only he prays that you would take your rest
For in your soft content his heart is blessed.

Mar. Spread me a Carpet on the humble earth:
My hand shall be the pillow to my head.
This stepmy bolster, and this place my bed.

Lor. Your Highness will take harm*

Mar. Nay, never fear.
A heart with sorrow filled sleeps any where,
Will our son come to night?

Lor. Madam he will.

Mar. See our train lodgd, and then Lorrique attend
For captain of the guard; that wayt on us,
Go all away, no body stay with me
Except our son, come if we chance to call,
Trouble us not, god night unto you all.
All with doing duty depart, and she sits down having a candle by her, and
reads. Quo fugiat mortale genm? nil denique tutum est,
Crudelis nam morsomnia falce secat?
Nil durum, nil non mortis penetrabile telis,
Omnia vi demit, mors vio ^nesa sua.
It Is true, the wise, the fool, the rich, the poor
The fair, and the deformed fall; their life turns
Air: the King and Captain are in this alike
None has free hold of life, but they are still
When death heavens steward comes, tennents at will.
I lay me down, and rest in thee my trust,
If I wake never more, till all flesh rise
I sleep a happy sleep, sin in me dies.

Enter Hoffman, and Lorrique. Hoff. Art sure she is a sleep!

Lor, I cannot tell, be not too hasty.

Hoff. She stirs not, she is fast.
Sleep sweet fair Duchess, for thou sleep'st thy last:
Endymions love, muffle in clouds thy face,
And all ye yellow tapers of the heaven
Veil your clear brightness in Cimerian mistmis;
Let not one light my black deed beautiste;
For with one stroke virtue and honor dies.
And yet we must not kill her in this kind:
Weapons draw blood, blood shed will plainly prove
The worthy Dntchesse, worthles of this death
Was murdered, and the guard are witnesses,
None entered but our selves.

Lor. Then strangle her, here is a towell fit.

Hoff. Good: kneel and help, compass her neck about,
Alas poor Lady thou sleep'st here secure
And never dream'st of what thou shall endure.

Lor. Nay, good my Lord dispatch.

Hoff. What ruthlesse hind
Shall I wrong nature that did never compose
One of her sex so perfect? prithee stay,
Suppose we kill her thus about her neck,
Circles of purple blood will change the hue
Of this white porphirie and the red lines
Mixed with a deadly black, will tell the world
She dyed by violence, then it will be inquired
And we held ever hateful for the act.

Lor. Then place beneath her nostrils this small box
Containing such a powder that has power,
Being set on fire to suffocate each sense
Without the sight of wound, or show of wrong.

Hoff. That Is excellent, fetch fire, or do not, stay:
The candle shall suffice, yet that burns dim;
And drops his waxen tears as if it mourned
To be an agent in a deed so dark.

Lor. Will you confound your self by dotage speak,
S'wounds i will confound her, and she linger thus.

Hoff. Thou were as good, and better, -- note my words:
Run unto the top of dreadful scarre,
And thence fall headlong on the under rocks,
Or set, thy breast against a cannon fired,
When iron death flies thence on flaming wings,
Or with thy shoulders, Atlas like attempt,
To bear the ruins of a falling tower,
Or swim the Ocean; or run quick to hell;
(as dead assure thy self no better place)
Then once look frowning on this angels face
Confound her? black confusion be my grave
Whisper one such word more, thou dyest base slave.

Lor. I have done, i will honor her if you command.

Hoff. She stirs, and when she wakes observe me well,
Sooth up what ere, I say, touching Prince Otho.

Mar. Prince Otho, is our son come? who is there Lorrique?

Lor. What shall I answer her?

Mar. Whose that thou talkst with?

Hoff. The most indebted servant to your Grace
Of any creature underneath the Moon.

Mar. I prithee friend be brief, what is thy name?
I know thee not, what business have thou here?
Art thou a messenger come from our son?
If so acquaint us with the news thou bring'st.

Hoff. I saw your Highness son, Lorrique here knows, the last of any living.


Mar. Living? heaven help,
I trust my son h'as no commerce with death.

Hoff. Your son noe doubt is well, in blessed state.

Mar. My heart is smitten through thy answer,
Lorrique, where is thy gracious Lord?

Lor. In heaven I hope.

Hoff. True madam, he did perish in the wrack
When he came first by sea from Lubecke haven.

Mar. What false impostor then has mocked my care?
Abused my Princely brother Ferdinand?
Gotten his Dukedom in my dead sons name?

Hoff. I grant him an impostor, therein false
But when your Highness hears the circumstance,
I know your wisdom and meek piety
Will Judge him well deserving in your eyes.

Mar. What can be said now I have lost my son?
Or how can this base two-tongu'd hypocrite
Excuse concealing of his masters death.
Unhappy Martha, in thy age undone,
Robbed of a husban'd, cheated of a son.

Hoff. Hear me with patience for that pitties sake
You showed my captive body, by the tears
You shed, when my poor father dragd to death
Endured all violence at their hands:
By all the mercies powrd on him and me
That like cool rain somewhat allayd the heat
Of our sad torment, and red sufferings;
Here me but speak a little to repay
With gratitude the favors I received.

Mar. Art thou the lucklesse son of that sad man
Lord of Burtholme some time admiral?

Hoff. I was his only son, whom you set free,
Therefore submissiuely I kneel and crave,
You would with patience hear your servant speak;

Mar. Be brief, my swollen heart is at point to break.

Hoff. I stood upon the top of the high scarre,
Where I beheld the splitted ship let in
Devouring ruin in the shape of waves,
Some got on Rafts, but were as soon cast off
As they wear seated; many strid the mast,
But the seas working was so violent,
That nothing could preserve them from their fury,
They did and were intombed in the deep.
Except some two the surges washed a shore
Prince Charles being one, who on Lorriques back
Hung w^^h claspt hands, that never could unfold,

Mar. Why not as well as he Lorrique does live,
Or how was he found claspt upon his back
Except he had had life to fold his hands.

Hoff. Madam, your Highness errs in that conceit,
For men that dye by drowning, in their death,
Hold surely what they claspe, while they have breath.

Lor. Well he held me, and sunk me too.

Hoff. I Will witness, when I had recouerd him
The Princes head being split against a Rock
Past all recover, Lorrique in desperate rage,
Sought sundry means to spoil his new-gain'd; life*
Exclay minge for his master: cursing heaven,
For being unjust to you, though not to him,
For robbing you of comfort in your son
Oh gracious Lady said this grieved man
Could I but work a means to called me her grief.
Some reasonable course to keep black care
From her white bosom; I were happy then;
But knowing this, her heart will sink with woe
And I, am rankt with miserablest men,

Lor. I gods my witness, these were my laments,
Till Hoffman being as willing, as my self;
Did for his love to you, that pitied him.
Take on him to be called by your sons name,
Which now he must refuse except your Grace
Attept his service in Prince Otho's place,

Mar. If this that you protest be true, your care
Was like a long reprieue, the date worn out;
The execution of my woe is come,
And I must suffer it with patience:
Where have you laid the body of my son?

Hoff. Within the chapel of an hermitage,
Some half a mile hence.

Mar. I Will build me there a Cell,
Made like a tomb, till death, therein i will dwell:
Yet for thy wrongs young man attend my words
Snce neither Ferdinand, nor Saxony,
Have any heirs, to sway their several states;
I Will work what lies in ^e to make thee Duke,
And since thou art accepted for my son,
Attempting it only to do me good
I here adopt thee: mine christen thee Otho,
Mine eyes are now the font, the water tears,
That do baptize thee in thy borrowed name.

Hoff. I thank your Highness, and of just heaven crave
The ground I wrong you in, may turn my grave.

Mar. Lights to our chamber, now our fears are past,
What we long doubted, is proved true at last.
Attend us son.

Exe^nit Martha and Lorrique Hoff. We Will wait upon your Grace.
Son, this is somewhat, this will bear the eyes
Of the rude vulgar, but this serves not me;
Dukedomes I will have them my sword shall win,
If any interposer cross my will,
But new made mother, there is another fire
Burns in this liver lust, and hot desire,
which you must quench; must? I and shall; I know
Women will like how ever they say noe;
And since my heart is knit unto her eyes
If she, being sanctimonious, hate my ^uit,
In love this course i will take, if she deny;
Force her: true, so: si non blanditijs, vi.
Exit.
Actus quintus.
Enter Saxony, Rodorique, Mathias: severally. Mat. Have you not found her yet?

Sax. Not I,

Rod. Nor I.

Mat. Then I beleeeue borne by her fits of rage
She has done violence to her bright same,
And fallen upon the bosom of the Balt.

Sax. What reason leads ye to believe it, son?

Mat. I did perceive her some half hour since
Clambring upon the steepenes of the rock,
But whether up or down I could not guess
By reason of the distance.

Enter Lucibella with rich clothes, Rod. Stand aside, she comes, let her not
escape us now.

Sax. What has she got apparel? I and rich,
Poor soul, she in her idle lunacy
Has took it from some house where it will be mist.

Mat. Lets circle her about, least spying us
she run away with wonted nimblenesse,
Fairest well met.

Luc. Well overtaken sir.

Sax. What have ye here?

Luc. And you too heartely.

Rod I am sure you know.

Luc. Why that is well, I like that, that you are well and you, and you: god
buy.


Sax. Nay, nay you must not go, we will hold you now.

Luc. Why that is well, done, Pray come, see my house
I have a fine house now, and goodly knacks
And gay apparel; look ye here, this is brave;
And two lean porters starved for lack of meat,
Pray let go minearmes, look here they be.

Om. Oh horrid sight!

Luc. Nay, never start I pray; is it not like I keep
A princely house, when I have such fat porters at my gate;

Sax: What should this mean? why in this wood
So thick, so solitary, and remote
From common road of men, should these hang thus*
Brother your Hermitage is not far hence,
When knew you any execution here?

Rod. I never knew any, and these bones are green,
This less anatomy has not hung long
The bigger, by the moss and drynes seems
Of more coutinuance.

Mat What Is on there heads?

Luc. why golden Crowns, my porters shall be Kings*
And hide there barebones with these gay weeds.

Sarx. I do remember the Admiral

Hoffman, that kept the Island of Burtholme
Was by the Duke of Prussia adiudg'd
To have his head feared with a burning crown,
And after made a bare Anatomy,
Which by his son was from the gallows stolue;

Luc I, that same son of his, but where lives he

Sax. No doubt, he does possess some cave hard by.

Luc. Come, go with me, i will show you where he dwells,
Or some body; I know not who it is;
Here, look, look here, here is a way goes down,
Down, down a down, hey down, down.
I sung that song, while Lodowicke sl^pt with me.

Rod. This is some Cave, let us boldly enter in,
And learn the mystery of that sad sight,
Come Lady, guide us in, yon know the way.

Luc. True, that's the way, you cannot miss the path;
The way to death and black destruction
Is the wide way; no body is now at home,
Or tarry, peradventure here comes some will tell you more.

Enter Martha, and Lorrique: Mat. Stand close, this is Lorrique, I do not know
the
Lady comes with him.

Sax. I have seen that countenance.

Rod. Stand close, I pray, my heart divines,
Some strange and horrid act will be reueald.

Luc. Nay that is most true, a fellow with a red cap told me so
And bad me keep these clothes, and give them
To a fair Lady in a mourning gown;
Let go my arms; I will not run away
I thank you now, now you shall see me stay,
By my troth I will, by my maidenhead I will.

Mar. Lorrique return into the beaten path,
I ask't thee for a solitary plot,
And thou have brought me to the dismal'st grove
That ever eye beheld, noe woodnimphes here
Seek with their agill steps to outstrip the Roe,
Nor does the sunsucke from the queachy plot
The ranknes and the venom of the Earth
It seems frequentlesse for the use of men:
Some basiliskes, or poisonous serpents den!

Lor. It is indeed an vndelight full walk;
But if I do not err in my belief,
I think the ground, the trees, the rocks, the springs,
Have since my Princely Master Charles his wrack
Appeared more dismal, then they did before,
I^ memory of his vntimelesse fall.
For hereabouts, hereabouts the place,
Where his ^ayre body lay deformed by death
Here Hoffmans son, and I enbalm'd him
After we had concluded to de^caue
Your sacred person, and Duke Ferdinand
By causing Hoffman to assume his name.

Sax. This is very strange.

Luc. Nay tarry, you shall hear all the knavery anon.

Mar. And where is the Chapel that you laid him in?

Lor. I'ts an old Chapel, near the Hermitage:

Mar. But was the Hermet at his burial?

Lor. Noe, Hoffman and I only dig'd the grave
Played Priest and Clarke, to keep his burial close?

Rod. Most admirable!

Sax. Nay, pray you peace.

Mar. Alas! poor son, the soul of my delights;
Thou in thy end were robbed of Funeral rites,
None sung thy requiem, noe friend closed thine eyes,
Nor laid the hallowed earth upon thy lips,
Thou were not houseled, neither did the bells ring
Blessed peales, nor towle thy funeral knell,
Thou wo^^st to death, as those that sink to hell;
Where is the apparel that I bad him wear
Against the force of witches and their spells.

Lor. We buried it with him it was his shroude,
The desert woods noe fitter means allowd.

Luc. I think he lies.
Now by my troth, that gentleman smells knave.

Mar. Swear one thing to me, ere we leave this place;
Whether young Hoffman did the most he might to save my son.

Lor. By heaven it seems he did, but all was vain
The flinty rocks had cut his tender scull,
And the rough water washed away his brain.

Luc. Liar, liar, lick dish.

Mar. How now what woman's this? what men are these?

Luc. Apoore maiden mistress, has a suite to you,
And it is a good suite, very good apparel.
Lo, here I come a woing my ding, ding,
Lo, here we come a suing, my darling,
Lo, here I come a praying, to biaea, bidea.
How do you Lady, well I thank God, will you buy a barganei pray, i'ts fine
apparel.


Mar. Run my lives blood, comfort my troubled heart,
That trembles at the sight of this attire:
Lorrique, look on them, know thou not these clothes?
Nor the distracted bringer? prithee speak.

Lor. Ay me, accursed and damned; I know them both;
The bringer is the Austrian Lucibell^

Luc. I, you say true, I am the very same,

Lor. The apparel was my Lords, your Princely son's.

Mar. This is not seawet, if my son were drowned
Then why thus dry is his apparel found?

Lor, O me accursed, o miserable me?
Fall heaven, and hide my shame, gape earth, rise sea,
Swallow, orewhelme me, wherefore should I live,
The most perfidious wretch that ever breathed,
And base consenter to my dear Lords death.

Lu^. Nay, look you here, do you see these poor starved ghosts; can you tell
whose they be?

Mar. Alas! what are they? what are you that seem
In civil habits to hide ruthlesse hearts;
Lorrique, what are they? what will thou attempt?
Help Gentlemen, if ye be Gentlemen,
And stay this fellow from dispayring ill.

Lor. I was ordained unto perdition, stay me not;
For when ye know the mischiefs I have done,
(at least, consented to, through coward fear)
You would not stop me, if I skipt in quick
To that black, bottomless and ruthlesse, gulf,
Where everlasting sorrows like linkt chains
Fetter the wretched in eternal night.

Mar. what have thou done?

Luc. Knavery I warrant you, tell truth and shame the
Devil my boy, do, and thou shall have a fine thing by and by.

Sax. I take your Highness for that reverend Duchess
Late wife unto the Duke of Prussia.

Mar I am the wretched childlesse widow sir.

Lor. Princess hear me, and I will briefly tell
How you came childlesse, you brotherlesse,
You husbandlesse, and fatherless, all, all,
I Will tell you, having ended, act my fall.

Man. Well, forward;

Lor. Be it so, I have deserved a greater cruelty,
To be kept living when I long to dye.

Mar. I charge thee setting by all circumstance,
Thou utter what thou know: my heart is steel,
Nor can it suffer more then it does feel.

Lor. Then thus, Prince Charles and I escaped the wrack,
Came safe a shore to this accursed plot,
Where we met Hoffman, who upon yon tree
Preserved his fathers bare anatomy,
The biggest of them two were those strong bones
That acted mighty deeds.
Hoffman the son full of revenge and hate,
Against every hand that wrought his fathers hurt,
Yet gilded ore his envy with fair shows,
And entertained us with as friendly terms
As falsehood could invent; and it is well known*
Bitter deceit uses the sweetest speech.
At length he took advantage, bound my Lord,
And in a chain tied him to yonder rock,
While with a burning Crown he feared in twain
The purple Veins, strong sinews, arteries, uerues,
And every cartilage about the head,
In which sad torment the mild Prince fell dead.

Mar. Did Hoffman this? and thou conceal'st the deed?

Lor. Pardon my fear, Dread Madam.

Mar. well, go on, I am confident to hear all cruelty,
And am resolved to act some, if noe hand
Will else attempt the murderers and, but mine.

Lor. Be patient; you will find associates:
For there are many murderers more behind.

Mar. what did he with the body of my son?

Lor. Buried the slesh, the bones are they that hang
Close by his fathers.

Mar. Let them hang a while
Hope of revenge in wrath does make me smile.

Luc. Pray let him tell the rest.

Lor. This acted, Hoffman forced me to conceal
The murder of my Lord, and threatened more
Then death by many torments, till I swore
To call him Otho, and say he was your son*
I swore and kept my oath.

Rod. O Heaven.

Sax. O Devil.

Luc. Nay, I pray you peace.

Lor. Thensent he me for you, and you he sent,
Or as I best remember, lead you on
Unto the Chapel porch, where he himself
Appointed them to stay, and there you know
What happened in your wrath.

Luc. To me a sleep,
And to my harmless Lodowick in my arms.

Mat. On on, that deed is writ among the acts of guilt:
A brothers sword a brothers life blood spilt.

Sax. Proceed, what is next? killed he not Austria?

Ler. He did.

Luc. O villain did he kill my Father?
And make my brother kill my husband too?

Sax. Go forward.

Lor. After all those hated murders
He taught the foolish prince in the disguise
Of a French Doctor to prepare a poison,
Which was the death of Princely Ferdinand:
Next plot he purposed your graces death,
And had opposd my strength of my tears,
You had bin murdered as you lay a sleep.

Sax. Let Us hear no more, seek out the hated wretch,
And with due torture let his life be forced
From his despised body.

Rod. Do I pray.

Sax. All the Land will help,
And each man be a justice in this act.

Mar. Well, I that never knewreuenges power,
Have entertaind her newly in my breast:
Determine what is to do.

Luc. Even what you will; would I were with my Lod^wick a sleep
In the Elizian fields, where no fears dwell;
For earth appears as vile to me as hell.

Lor. Let me be Prologue to your scene of wrath,
And as the Roman Cateline resolved
His doubtful followers by exhausting blood
From the live body, so draw mine, cast mine
Upon the troubled and offended earth;
Offer blood fit for an infernal sacrifice,
Wine is not powered but on celestial offerings:
Therefore I advise you
As you hope to thrive in your revenge, smite me.
That have bin pander to this injury.

Mar. Thou merit'st death indeed.

Mat. Stay judge him not, let me a little plead in his excuse,
And this one sentence serves; a manaompel'd
To evil acts, cannot be justly held
A wilful malefactor; the law still
Looks upon the deed, never on the will:
Besides although I grant the matter small
And very safe to raise a multitude,
That by their power might ceaze the m^rderer,
Yet two especial reasons cross that course:
First: many having notice of our plot,
One babbling tongue may utter out intent,
And Hoffman being warned is surely armed
Having the fort and treasure in his power,
And be his cause more then notorious ill,
He may with gold maintain it at his will
Escape us, for no doubt he is full of sleights:
Besides, Revenge should have proportion,
By slye deceit he acted every wrong,
And by deceit I would have him intrapt;
Then the re^enge were fit, just, and square,
And it would more vex him that is all composed
Of craft and subtilty to be outstript
In his own fashion, then a hundred deaths.
Therefore by my advice pardon Lorrique
Upon condition, that he lay some plot
To intercept the other.

Om. We are agreede.

Lor. Your mercy does all bounds of hope exceed,
And if you will repose that trust in me,
By all the protestations truth can make,
Before the Sun have run his mid-dayes course,
I will to morrow! yield him to your hands.

Sax. Show us the means.

Lor. The means is in the Duchess policy.
If she can smooth the murder but a while.

Mar. I Will turn deceit to overthrow his fraud.

Lor. Then with fair words his flatteries e^tertayne,
And when he does importune you for love,
Desire him first to show you the first place,
Where he beheld Prince Charles after the wrack
Say you have earnestly entreated me,
But I have lead you in a labyrinth
Of noe effect; he full of heat and ^ust,
Glad of occasion will no doubt alone
Conduct you to this fatal horrid cave,
Thy king by force, or fair means, to attain
His false hearts longing, and your honors stayne;
But being in the height of his base pride,
The Duke, the Hermet, Lodowick and my self,
Will change his pleasures into wretched
And redeemelesle misery.

Sax. The plot is good, Madam, are you agreed?

Mar. To any thing how ever desperate.

Luc. I but by your leave, Lady, and Lords all, what if
This knave that has bin, play the knave still,
And tell tales out of school; how then?

Lor. I know not what to swear by; but noe soul
Longs for the sight of endless happiness,
With more desire, then mine thirsts for his death:
By all the gods that shall give ill men li^e,
I am resolved chief agent in his end.

Mat. We credit thee, join hands, and ring him round,
Kneel, on his head lay our right hands, and swear
Vengeance against Hoffman.

Om. Vengeance, vengeance, fall
On him, or sudden death upon us all.

Sax Come, part, we to the cave,
You to the Court:
Justice dig murders grave.

Exit Lorrique and Martha. Luc. Nay, I Will come, my wits are mine again
Now faith grows firm to punish faithless men.

Exeunt. Enter Hoffman, and all the train that attended the Duchess first.
Hoff. Not to be found? hell which way is she gone?

Lord. Her Highness charged us to call you her son,
The mystery we know not, but we know,
You are not Princely Otho of Luningberg.

Hoff. Noe matter what I am; tell me the way she went
With that Lorrique; speak, or by heaven
Hell shall receive you all.

Enter Martha, and Lorrique. Lord. Be not in raged she comes,
And with her comes trusty Lorrique.

Hoff. Madam, I feared you, and my heart was sick,
With doubt some ouer-desperate accident
Had drawn you to the melancholy paths,
That lie within the verge of this rough scarre.

Mar. Your doubt was but an Embrio; I indeed
Desired Lorrique to bring me to the place
Where you beheld the shipwreck of my son;
And he has led me up and down the wood,
But never brought me to the fatal beach,

Hoff. It were not fit you should see the sad place,
That still seems dismal since the Princes death.

Lord. Dead? is our sovereign Lord the Prince dead?

Mar. Inquire no more of that, I will anon
Resolve you of his fate, this time for bear,
Esteem this gentleman your Lord and Prince.

Lor. We hold him so, since you command us so.

Hoff. Will you go forward, Madam?

Mar. Willingly, so you will promise me to walk to morrow
And see the Earth that gently did receive
My sons wrack't body from the churlish foam.

Hoff. I Will wayt upon your Grace, set forward there,
Tricks, and devices! longings! well it is good:
I Will swim to my desires, through seas of blood.

Exeunt. Lor. Fox you will be taken, hunter you are fallen
Into the pit you dig'd; I laughed to see
How I outstrip the Prince of villainy.
Hoffman for me told such a smoothing tale,
That had not this strange accident befalne
In finding of the cave; I had bin held
More d^ere then ever, in the Duchess eyes:
But now she will hold me hard, what ere she say,
Yet is her word past that she will pardon me,
And I have wealth hoor'd up which i will bear
To some strange place: rich men live any where.

Enter Hoffman. Hoff. What? are you gadding sir? what mooues your flight?
Coin not excuses in your crouching come,
What cause have you to ^^ie and seek strange hoords
For your wealth gotten by my liberal gift?

Lor. And my desert, my Lord.

Hoff. Well be it your desert;
But what is the cause you will fly this country?

Lor. As I live, my Lord, I have noe such intent*
But with your leave, I was debating things,
As if it should chance thus, and thus, why then
'Twere better be far of, but otherwise
My love and life, low at your service lie.

Hoff. You are a villain damned as low as hell;
An hypocrite, a fawning hypocrite:
I know thy heart, come Spaniell up, arise,
And think not with your antickes and your lies
To go beyond me, you have played the slave,
Betrayed me to the Datchesse, told her all,
Disappoynting all my hopes with your base tongue,
Ore^^rn'd the height of my intendments,
For which i will hurl thee from my mountain wrack,
Into the lowest Cauerne of pale death.

Lor. Alas my Lord for bear, let me be heard.

Hoff. Thou have betrayed me, therefore never talk.

Lor. By heaven --

Hoff. O hell! why should thou think on heaven.

Lor. Stay, and believe me, think you I am mad,
So great a foe to my own happy chance,
When things are sorted to so good an end,
That all is hid, and we held in regard:
After such horrid, and perfidious acts,
Now to betray my self; be reasonable,
And think how shallow such an act would seem
In me, chief agent in so many ills.

Hoff. Thou have a tong^e as glib and smooth to lies,
As full of false inventions, and base fraud,
As prone to circumuent believing souls,
As ever heretic or traitor vsd,
Whose speeches are as honey, their acts gall,
Their words raise up, but their hands ruin all.

Lor. By virtues glorious soul.

Hoff. Blasphemer peace, swear not by that thou hat'st;
Virtue, and thou have no more sympathy,
Then day with night, Heaven with Hell.
Thou know, I know thy Villanyes excel

Lor. Why then by vil^any, by blood, by sleightes,
By all the horrors tortures can present,
By Hell, and by reuenges purple hand
The Duchess had no conference with me,
But only a desire to see the place
That first received her son, whom she believes
The unrelenting waves and flinty rocks,
Had seuer'd from sweet life after the wrack.

Hoff. May I believe thee?

Lor. Have I fayld you yet?
Measure my former acts, and you shall find
My foul allied to yours, wholly estranged
From all I ^uer loved.

Hoff. Noe more, have done.
Tha'st won me to continue thee my friend;
But I can tell thee somewhat troubles me,
Some dreadful misaduenture my soul doubts,
And I conceive it with noe common thought,
But a most potent apprehension;
For it confounds imaginary sense,
Sometimes inflames my blood, another while
'Nums all the Currents that should comfort life,
And I remain as 'twere a senceles stone.

Lor. Come, come, I know the cause, you are in love,
And to be so, is to be any thing.
Do you not love the Duchess?

Hoff. Yes, I do.

Lor. Why there is the matter, then, be ruld by me,
To morrow morning she desires to see
The shore, that first received her sea-wrackt son,
And to be vnaccompained she loves;
Except some one or two, you and I:
Now when you have her near your dismal I cave,
Force her, I dot man, make no scruple do it,
Else you shall never win her to your bed:
Do a man's part, please her before she go,
Or if you see, that she turns violent,
Shut her perpetual prisoner in that den;
Make her a Philomel, prove Tereus:
Do It, never fear it.

Hoff, Why she will be mist.

Lor. By whom? by fools* gross, dull, thick sighted fools,
whom every mist can blind, I Will sway them all,
With exclamation that the grieved Duchess
when she beheld the sea that drowned her son,
S^ood for a while like weeping Niobe,
As if she had bin stone: and when we strived
With mi^de persuasions to make less her woe
She madd^r then the wife of Athamas
Leap't suddenly into the troubled sea,
Whose surges greedy of so rich a prey,
Swallowed her up, while we in vain exclaym'd
Against Heaven and hell, against fortune and her fate,

Hoff. Oh my good vi^laine! how I hug thy plots,
This shall be done, she is mine: run swi^t slow hours,
Make a short night hasten on day apace,
Rough arms wax soft soft beauty to embrace.

Lor. Why so, now your fear will q^ickly end,

Hoff. Thou will not talk of this?

Lor. Will I be hanged?
Nee're take me for a blab, you will find me none.

Hoff. I have a another secret, but --

Lor. Come what is it? come, this breast is yours,
My heart's your treasury.

Hoff. Thou must be secret, it is a thing of weight concerns thee near.


Lor. Were it as near as life, come, pray speak.

Hoff. Hark in thine ear, I would not have the air
Be privy to this purpose, will thou swear?

Lor. What? to be secret? if the least jot I tell
Let all my hopes sink suddenly to hell.

Hoff. Thou have thy wish, down villain, keep this close.

Lor, Unthankful murderer, is this my meede?
Oh slave, tha'st killed thy heart in wounding mine,
This is my day, to morrow shall be thine.

Hoff. Go fool; now thou art dead, I need not fear.
Yet as thou were my servant just and true,
I Will hide thee in the ditch: give dogs there due,
He that will prove a mercenary slave
To murder, seldom finds so good a grave,
He Is gone, I can now spare him, Lorrique farewell;
Commend me to our friends thou meet'st in hell:
Next plot for Mathias and old Saxony,
There ends shall finish our black tragedy.
Exit.
Enter Saxony, and Mathias. Sax. How little care had we to let her 'scape,
Especially on this so needful time,
When we are vowed to wayt upon revenge.

Mat. Noe doubt our uncles care will keep her safe,
Nor is she in her fits so violent
As she was wont, look where my
Uncle comes, sustayning with one hand
A dying man, and one the other side,
Fair Lucibell supports the fainting body.

Enter Rodorique, and Lucibell leading Lorrique. Luc. Look you here, you
maruai'ld why I went,
Why this man drew me unto him, can you help
Him now. Hoffman has hought him too.

Saz. Brother who is it you bring thus ash pale;
Is It not Lorrique;

Lor. I am, and it is in vain to strive for longer hope.
I cannot, only be provident; I greatly fear
The murdrous traitor out of mere suspect
Will plot some stra^agem against the life
Of the chaste Duchess, help her what you can,
Against the violence of that wicked man.

Rod Have thou not told him, what we do intend?

Lor. Noe, as heaven help me in my wretched end,
Be confident of that, now I must fall
Never again to rise, you know his wrongs:
Be careful Princes to revenge them all.

Luc, Well, farewell fellow, thou art now paid home
For all thy counce^ling in knavery,
Good Lord! what very fools are very knaves!
There cunning bodies often want due graves.

Sax. Son, daughter, brother, follow my advice,
Let us noe longer keep this hateful plot,
Least we be circumuented.

Rod. True, it is to put on open arms.

Mat. It Is now too late, we are beset
With soldiers, we must fight, and since it must be;
Let Us to it valiantly.

Enter Duchess: Lord, with soldiers. Lord. Princes prepare not to resist
your foes,
We are as firm as life unto your blood.
The Duchess Martha greetes old Saxony,
Prince Mathias, Rodorick, and fair Lucibell:
To me she has discovered the damnd plots
Of that perfidious Hoffman, and has sent
These armed soldiers, to attend on you.

Sax. We thank her Highness, but we think in vain
Both you and we attend; Lorrique lies slain
By Hoffmans slye suspicion; best be joined
To appr^hend him publicly.

Lord. There is no need, our Duchess has apparrel'd
Her speech in a green livery,
She salutes him fair, but her heart
Like his actions, is attired
In red, and blew, and sable ornaments.

Sax. But 'tell us where they are?

Lord, At hand she comes, with him alone her plot is,
She comes in happy time for all your good.

Mat Cease words, use deeds
Revenge draws nigh.

Sax. Come set his body like a scarcrow,
This bush shro^d you, this you,
Stand close true soldiers, for revenge.

Luc. I: do, do, do, I pray you heartely do, stand close.

Enter Hoffman and Duchess. Hoff. I wonder much why you ask me for Lorrique,
What is Lorrique to you, or what to me?
I tell you he is damned, enquire no more,
His name ^s hatefuller then death.

Mar. Heaven! what alterations these!
Can I believe you love me as you swore,
When you are so inconstant to your friend?

Hoff. He is noe friend of mine whom you affect,
Pardon me Madam, such a fury reigns
Over my boiling blood, that I envy
Any one on whom you cast anamorous eye.

Mar. What grown so loving? marry heaven defend,
We shall deceive you if you dote on us,
Fot I have sworn to lead a widows life,
And never more to be termed married wife.

Hoff. I, but you must.

Mar. Must? use not force, I pray.

Hoff. Yield to my love, and then with meekest word^
And the most humble actions, i will entreat
Your sacred beauty; deny me? i will turn fire,
More wild then wrath, come then agree,
If not to marry, yet in unseen sports
To quench these Lawless heates that burn in me.

Mar. What my adopted son become my lover?
And make a want on minion of his mother?
Now fie upon you fie you are too obsceane
If like your words, your thoughts appear unclean.

Hoff. By heaven I do not jest, go to, believe me,
It Is well you laugh; smile on, I like this:
Say, will you yield?

Mar. At the first? fie noe.
That were an abject course, but let us walk
Into some covert, there are pretty caves,
Lucky to lovers suites, for Virgil sings;
That Dido being driven by a sharp storm
Into a Lybian cave, was there enticed
By siluer-tongu'd Aeneas to affect;
And should you serve me so, I were undone,
Disgraced in Germany by every Boore,
Who in their rymes would jest at Marthas name
Calling her mynion to her cozen son.

Hoff. Fayrer then Dido, or loves amorous Queen;
I know a cave, where in the bright days eyes
Looked never but a skance through a small creek,
Or little cranny of the fretted scarre;
There I have sometimes lived, there are fit seats,
To sit and chat, and coll, and kiffe, and steal
Loves hidd^n pleasures, come, are you disposd
To venture entrance? if yo^ be, assay,
It Is death to quick desire, use no delay.

Mar. Virtue and modesty bids me say noe,
Yet trust me Hoffman tha'rt so sweet a man,
And so beloved of me, that I must go.

Hoff. I am crowned the King of pleasure.

Mar. Hateful slave, thou go to meet destruction in the cave.


Hoff. God's Death who stands here?
What Is that? Lorriques pale ghost?
I am amazed: nay slave stand of:
Thy weapons sure, the prize is ours.

Mar. Come forth dear friends, murder is in our powers

Sax. Yield thee, base son of shame.

Hoff. How now what is here? am I betrayed?
By dotage, by the falsehood of a face?
Oh wretched fool fallen by a woman's hand
From high reuenges sphere, the bliss of souls.

Sax. Cut out the murderers tongue.

Hoff. What do you mean?
Whom have I murdered; wherefore bind ye me;

Mar. They are Justices to punish thy bare bones,
Look with thy bloodshed eyes on these bare bones,
And tell me that which dead Lorrique confessed
Who is it thou villained that least? who wast?

Hoff. Why Otho thy sons, and that is my fathers by him.

Mar. O mercil^sse and cruel murderer
To leave me childl^sse.

Luc. And me husbandlesse.

Mat. Me brotherlesse. oh smooth tongued hypocrite
How thou did draw me to my brothers death.

Sax. Talk noe more to him, he seeks dignity,
Reason he should receive his desperate hire,
And wear his crown made flaming hot with fire:
Bring forth the burning crown there.

Enter a Lord with the Crown Hoff, Do old dog, thou helpst to worry my dead
Father
And must thou kill me too? it is well, it is fit,
I that had sworn unto my fathers soul
To be revenged on Austria, Saxony,
Prussia, Luningberg, and all there heirs:
Had prosper'd in the downfall of some five;
Had only three to offer to the fiends,
And then must fall in love; oh wretched eyes
That have betrayed my heart; be you accursed;
And as the melting drops run from my brows,
So fall they on the strings that guide your heart
Whereby their oylye heat may crack them first,
I so, boil on thou foolish idle brain,
For giving entertainment to loves thoughts.
A man resolved in blood, bound by a vow
For noe less vengeance, then his fathers death,
Yet become amorous of his foes wife!
Oh sin against all conceit! worthy this shame
And all the tortures that the world can name.

Mar. Call upon heaven, base wretch, think on thy soul.

Hoff. In charity and prayer
To no purpose without charity.

Sax. We pardon thee, and pray for thy souls health.

Hoff. So do not I for yours, nor pardon you;
You killed my father, my most warlike father,
Thus as you deal by me, you did by him;
But I deserve it that have slackt revenge
Through fickle beauty, and a woman's fraud;
But Hell the hope of all dispayring men,
That wring the poor, and eat the people up,
As greedy beasts the harvest of their spring:
That Hell, where cowards have their seats prepared*
And barbarous asses, such as have robbed souldrers of
Reward, and punish true desert with scorned death.

FINIS.

