decorative border and printer's device, McKerrow and Ferguson 210: "A
compartment with the Royal Arms at head. Crest and arms of the Cecil family and
(?)of the town of Cambridge at sides and lower corners." HONI SOIT QVI MAN ^
PEN^^ A SVBSTANTIAL AND GODLY EXPOSITION OF THE prayer commonly called the
Lords Prayer: written in Latin by that reverend and famous man, D. MARTINE
CHEMNITIVS.

Newly translated out of Latin into English.

Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge.

1598

The Printer to the Reader.
CHristian Reader, although the very name of the author of this exposition,
were a sufficient argument to commend the same unto thee, yet because I have
undertaken the publishing hereof after so many labors of our own learned and
godly countrymen faithfully performed in this kind, I thought it not amiss in
a word or two to give some reason of my fact. And first of all the excellency
of this exposition, which I commend not so much of mine own knowledge, as
upon the judgment of very godly and learned men, moved me in this sort to
communicate it to the whole country. The praise which seems peculiar unto
it, issues from a double fountain: first from the learned interpretation of
the words in their native sense, secondly from the ample and euidei^^
declaration of the true and full meaning of the Spirit of God in every
petition, which he has indeauoured to set down from the propriety of the
words in the Greek and Hebrew tongue: showing in such sort what blessings we
are to ask, and what sins we must bewail, that not only the simple by the
blessing of God upon their endeavor may in short time hereby learn to pray in
faith and in obedience, but the godly also and the learned, that have atteined
to further measure of knowledge and of grace, may increase their knowledge, and
further edify themselves in their most holy faith. Thus wishing unto thee the
Spirit of prayer which may teach thee to use the means whereby thou may pray
with the Spirit and with understanding also, I take my leave, and here end.

AN EXPOSITION OF THE LORDS PRAYER.
Our father which art, etc.
THere be not only cauills of profane men, but also conceits in the hearts of
the godly themselves which trouble them much, against the necessity and
benefit of using prayer. For first, if God know what we want before we ask,
what need is there, or what avails it, to show and solicit our suits to him
which knows them already? for such rehearsalls are wont to be troublesome
and grievous. S. Hierome answers very finely: That, in prayer we are no
shewers, but suitors: and it is one thing, to make known to him that is
ignorant; and another thing, to entreat and ask of him that knows. Yet this
answer remooueth not all difficulty. For our heavenly father does not only
know, what thing we want, but also unasked of his fatherly care and favor, is
ready and forward of his own accord to help us before we ask. And therefore
it seems, there is either no benefit or no need of praying; I answer: we do
not pray with that intent, and for that end, as though we would by our prayers
stir up God, and put him in mind of his duty, being negligent and careless
of our affairs; or otherwise as being hard and merciles, allure him by our
prayers, and bring him into an other mind. We know indeed that God is ready
of his own accord to give good things, but yet to those which do repent, and
humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, who by faith do seek, knock,
and ask. And therefore we do pour out our prayers before God, not for that
we doubt of his good will, but that we may indeed show our selves to bring
true repentance, because he has promised sorgiuenesse of sins to them which
repent, Ezekiel. 8.23. that he will assuage his judgments, and bestow his
blessings, Ier. 18.8. and give grace unto the humble, 1. Pet. 5.5. And that it
may appear that when we call upon God, and think upon his promises, we bring
with us and likewise do exercise true faith, because the Lord has promised
all good things to him that does knock and ask, Math. 7.7. and that we do
come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace
to help in time of need, Hebr. 4.16. Again, spiritual blessings can not
otherwise be received then by faith: indeed bodily or outward benefits are often
bestowed upon the wicked also: and yet that those may be profitable unto us, it
is the will of God that we should wait for them by hope, and receive them by
faith from his fatherly hand. And therefore we pray in faith, that we may show
forth our desire to receive from God not only corporal blessings, but those
especially which are spiritual, heavenly, and eternal. And that we would so
receive from God the blessings of this life, that by his blessing they may be
profitable unto us. And because God would have this glory given to himself,
to be the fountain, the author and giver of every good thing, Iam. 1.17. and
that we should wholly rely upon him: we therefore in prayer do testify, that
we neither ascribe them to any other, nor seek them elsewhere, but do wholly
hope for, expect, and require the same from God alone: for God has promised,
that he will be ready and willing to help such. Also in our prayers we do
thus lay open our wants and miseries before God, not as though we knew them
not, but that by pouring out our cares in the Lords bo^some, we may disburden
and ease our own soul. And the promise is most sweet and comfortable, Psalm.
37.5. and 55.22. 1. Pet. 5.7. Roll and cast thy ways upon the Lord, and he
will have care and bring it to pass. Chrysostom adds also this reason why
we should pray: That by often calling upon God we may become familiar with him.
Again, that we may more highly esteem, and more reverently use that which God
bestows upon us when we ask and knock.

These things are carefully to be thought upon concerning the necessity and
benefit of prayer, least that being otherways too cold and backward unto
prayer by these conceits, that God is forward to help us of his own accord, we
do suffer our selves to be withdrawn from the exercise of prayer. Neither let
us abuse that most sweet sentence of the ready good will of God toward us,
which ought rather to be an incitation and a motive to excite and confirm our
diligence and confidence in prayer. There be some which reason thus, or at
least do trouble themselves with those conceits: seeing God unasked, and
before we pray does know, yea beforehand has set down and appointed what he
will do and what he will give: we do therefore either ask in vain, that
which otherways should come to pass; or else do wickedly in praying, as
though we hoped by our prayer to turn God from his firm decree and purpose,
and so make him changeable and unconstant. To this objection some answer thus.
If that which we ask be ordained beforehand to be done, then we pray upon good
and sure confidence. If it be not, yet we go not about to hinder or stop the
course of Gods predestination; because we pray that Gods will may be done. But
Luthers exposition is more plain and safe; to wit, that we are not commanded
to busy our selves about the hidden foreknowledge of God, or to search into
his secret counsels: but we must dispose our selves according to his will
revealed unto us in his word, where he teaches that by repentance and prayer,
gods wrath is appeased, many dangers and evils are avoided, and many benefits
obtained. Ier. 18. v. 8. Ezekiel. 33. v. 11.1. King. 8. v. 56. And therefore he
has straightly charged us to pray: yea he is angry when no man sets himself by
prayer between the Lord and the land lest it be destroyed, Ezekiel. 22. v. 30.
Both these therefore do warn us to pray, first that god of his own accord is
ready to help, and knows what we want, and what himself will do.
Secondly, that it is his will and commandment we should pray. Neither must we
from the secret foreknowledge of god, frame or admit exceptions against those
things which are plainly revealed and commanded in the word. If thou can
not reconcile them, leave unto god the hidden reasons of his secret
foreknowledge, and do thou those things which are commanded and appointed to
thee in the revealed word; to wit, that thou may pray and that continually.
These things I have noted by occasion of that saying: Your heavenly father
knows whereof ye have need, even before ye ask, Math. 6. v. 8.

Our Savior Christ before this prayer gives this commandment: After this
manner pray ye: whereby he would not bind those whom he teaches to pray, unto
this set number of words as unto a work done: for that were to babble
indeed. And the Apostles themselves, as we may read in their acts, and
epistles, often prayed in other words after the delivery and receiving of
this form of prayer from our Savior Christ. And that which is the strongest
proof, Matthew and Luke setting down this Lords prayer, do not cu^iously
observe the self same words altogether. But our Savior Christ in a short
example would show unto his disciples the manner how to pray, according as his
custom was to teach a general doctrine by propounding some particular
example, where under the special we are to understand the general. And
therefore in this platform of prayer, his purpose is to show, Austine in an
Epistle to Proba, we have liberty in praying to use other words so that we
say the same things which this prayer contains: but we have not liberty to
say other, diverse or contrary things. And this it is which Matthew says, cap.
6. v. 9. thus, or after this manner pray ye. And that saying of Christ recorded
by S. Luke 11. v. 2. when ye pray, say is all one with this. But here Austine
mooues this objection: if we must not use many words in prayer for that our
heavenly father knows our want by the same reason, and for the same cause, we
should not use few words, no not those which are here appointed by our
Savior Christ. The answer is: that in regard of God, and for his cause, we
need, neither many nor few, nor any words at all in prayer, neither does the
form of prayer consist in the repetition of words. For to pray is to lift up
the mind unto god, What it is to pray.
to pour out the heart before God, and to ask something of him: but no man
does truly ask any thing, which desires not the same, and desire is an
affection of the mind. And therefore though he utter with his mouth the best
words that can be, unless there be also a lifting up of the mind, with
attention and devotion, so as the heart may truly desire that which he asks,
that man prays not indeed. But he that lifts up his mind, and with a
devout inward affection of heart, does entirely ask any thing of God, that
man does truly pray, although he express not in words his desire. One man
cannot entreat another unless he use words or gesture: but the inward and most
secret corners of the mind and heart are plainly seen of God, and therefore
David says, my growning is not hid from thee, Psalm. 38. v. 10. and Psalm. 10.
v. 17. The Lord hears the desire of the poor: thine ear harkeneth to the
preparation of their heart. And Psalm. 38.10. My whole desire is before thee.
Romans ^. v. 26. When we know not what to ask, the spirit it self makes
request for us, with sighs which cannot be expressed. And it were a foolish
thing, therefore to utter our prayer in words, as though god could not
understand the desire of our heart. And yet the Saints of god in the old
testament, and the Apostles in the new are said, to have used words in
praying. Neither does Christ without cause say thus, in Luke, [when ye pray,
say] but it was for our sakes and for our prayers. Which is carefully to be
considered, that we may learn to use vocal prayer well and profitably: for our
mind does not thoroughly consider and regard those things which we want, or are
to ask, especially if they be spiritual, and pertain to the glory of god.
And therefore the words which we use in praying, do by a kind of advertisement
lead us to that consideration, that so the desire of our heart may be rightly
informed. Now the heart in prayer ought to be penitent and humble. But because
we do for the most part rush upon this exercise of prayer, without due
consideration of our sins and unworthiness: therefore the rehearsing of words
is profitable, whereunto if the mind give heed, that we may pray with the
Spirit and with the understanding also, 1. Cor. 1.15. then will the meditation
thereof prepare the heart to serious repentance and to true humility. The
desires of our heart are commonly out of order, so as oftentimes men neither
think upon the order, nor on the end of those things they are to require: but
the words which we use in prayer do advertise us of those things we are to
think upon when we pray. And doubtless the rehearsing and meditation of Gods
promises does stir up, kindle, and increase our faith. We are often slow to
prayer, and in praying cold and drowsy, neither do we come unto God with the
devotion of mind we ought to do. But when as in praying we repeat the words,
by diligent meditation thereon, and by due consideration of the promise and
commandment, our mind is moved to lift up it self unto God, our devotion is
kindled, and being once kindled is conunued and increased. Also the diligent
marking of those things we are to ask, whereof we are put in mind by the
words of our prayer, does excite and kindle in our benumbed and frozen heart a
good affection unto prayer. For those words, because they are the words of
Christ, be the tool or instrument of the Spirit, whereby the Spirit of prayer
will be powerful and effectual in us. And therefore that which Christ here
delivers [When we pray, SAY:] does bind us so farreforth as the rehearsal
of words in praying is hereunto available, to excite, and kindle, to continue
and increase our devotion, least it should wax cold and benumbed and be
quenched altogether. And hereunto sometime longer prayers serve best, otherwise
those which are shorter. To this purpose Austin in his 121. epistle to Proba,
writes many things substantially, some whereof pertaining to this place, I
will here set down. He which forbids much babbling in prayer, because he
knows what is needful for us, does likewise command that we should always
pray and not faint: not because he would have our will made known to him,
whereof he cannot be ignorant, but to exercise our desire, whereby we may
receive that which we are about to give. For that which he would give is very
great, but we are little and strait and can not receive the same. And therefore
it is said unto us, open thy mouth: for so much the more fully shall we
receive that which is exceeding great, by how much we do more faithfully
believe it, more firmly hope for it, and more earnestly desire it.

Therefore we do always pray in faith, hope, and charity, with a continued
desire: but yet at certain times we do with words entreat the Lord, that so
we may admonish our selves, how much we have profited in this desire, and
likewise excite our selves to do the same more chearefully. That therefore
which the Apostle says [pray continually,] is nothing else but this,
continually desire a blessed life. And therefore at certain hours we do
withdraw our mind from other cares and business, whereby this desire is cooled
in some sort unto this exercise of prayer, and by the words of the prayer, do
admonish our selves to give heed to that which we desire; least that which
has begun to be warm, do wax cold altogether, and at length be wholly put
out, unless it be more often kindled. And therefore to continue in prayer some
long time, is not (as some think) to use much babbling: for much speech is one
thing, and long continued affection is another thing. It is said of the Lord
himself that he continued whole nights in prayer, and used to pray very long.
The brethren in Egypt are said to pray very often, but yet very briefly, and
in a manner to dispatch them quickly, least that earnestnes which was carefully
begu^, should by longer delay wax dull and vanish away. And by this also they
do sufficiently declare, that this earnestnes as it is not to be forced, when
it will not continue; so it is not speedily to be broken off, if it will longer
endure. For in prayer we must not use many words, and yet we must not want
much desire, if so be our zeal will persevere. To pray much, is to knock unto
him whom we pray unto with a continual and a godly lifting up of the heart:
and for the most part this business is better performed in sighs and groans,
then with words: and by weeping then by speaking. For our groaning is not hid
from him, who by his word made all things, and desires not the words of man.
But therefore must we use words in prayer, that we may be put in mind to have
regard to that we ask, not that we may think thereby to teach or move the
Lord. These things does Austin teach. And for this end does S. Paul appoint
the public rehearsal of prayer and psalms in the Church, Coloss. 3.6. Teach
and ad. monish your own selves in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs,
singing with grace in your hearts unto the Lord, that the words of Christ may
dwell in you plenteously. 1. Corinthians. 14.26. When ye come together has any one
a psalm? let him pray with the Spirit and with the understanding, that all
things may be done to edification. And because it is sometime needful that we
should use words in prayer, The excellency of the Lords prayer.
there can be no prayer more profitable then that which the Lord himself
delivered and appointed. For first of all, is not spiritual but carnal and
unlawful. How the Lords prayer must be used.
And it were not only rashness but impiety, to disdain either the shortness
or simplicity of the Lords prayer, as though thou thy self could find out
and compose a better form of praying. And yet the rehearsing of the Lords
prayer must be no vain mumbling over, as though the words uttered without
understanding had some magical force; but we must consider what the words do
signify, and put us in mind of, how far they reach, and how many things
they conteyne under them, that we may pray with the spirit and with the
understanding, 1. Cor. 14. v. 15. and may include our wants in those petitions.
For by this means (as it has bin said) those words will stir up our
devotion. Let us therefore briefly consider every point, and compare the
description of S. Matthew, with that which is set down by Luke, cap. 11. v. 2.
etc. For although according to S. Luke, Christ repeated that form of prayer at
another time and upon other occasion, then Matthew records: yet because the
form thereof is the same in both places, the comparing of them together in this
exposition will not be unprofitable.

And here we must observe, that some latin books omitting some things do repeat
this form of prayer more briefly in S. Luke, then it is described by Matthew.
For in the beginning it is only said [Father:] and this which follows in S.
Matthew [which art in heauen] is omitted. The third petition also is omitted.
[thy will be do^e in earth as it is in heaven.] This also is omitted. [But
deliver us from evil.] And Austine says expressly in his Enchiridion, cap.
115. and 116. that the lords prayer in Matthew contains seven petitions: but
in S. Luke, it has not seven but five petitions only. And he shows that
that petition, [thy will be done] is contained in the two former: and this [but
deliver us:] in that which went before it, [Lead us not into temptation.]
Whence I gather that the Latin books even in Austins time, had the Lords
prayer according to Luke as it is now read. But the Greek books do set down
that whole prayer, even so with Luke, as it is in Matthew; save only that with
Luke does want that conclusion [for thine is the kingdom.] Now it might seem
that such things as were wanting with Luke in this place, have been added from
the Greek books out of Matthew. But Austine in his book of the words of the
Lord, upon Luke cap. 28. And Ambrose in his fifth book of the Sacraments cap.
4. do so rehearse that whole prayer out of Luke as it is extant in Matthew.
Whence I gather, that the latin books differed at that time, and some of them
read it so in Luke in this place, as it is in the greek, others read it so as
it is now in the vulgar latin translation. As for the difference which is in
some words, that we will note in the exposition. And that very diversity of some
words does show, that we are not bound to a superstitious rehearsal of words
in prayer.

This prayer contains three parts: the entrance or preface, petitions, and the
conclusion, of each whereof I will speak in order.

[Our father which art in heaven.] The Preface.
Austine says, whereas in every earnest suit, we ought to procure his good
will to whom we make our request, and that is most conveniently done by the
praise and commendation of his benefits to whom we pray, therefore seeing we
neither can nor ought to boast of our own merits before God, Christ in the
beginning of this prayer has commanded us to say nothing else but [Our
father.] Hugo says, that Christ like a good orator before the petitions
prefixeth a short preface, wherein favor is sought for from the person asked,
when we say [Father:] from the person asking, when we say [Our.] And surly
these aduertisments have their use. But because it has been declared before,
that we are to use words in prayer, not so much to move the mind of God, by
rhetorical insinuations, as by rehearsing and meditating on the words to
stir up in our selves, attention, devotion, confidence, and care to frame our
prayers aright, that we may show our selves to be such suitors as the Lord
would have: therefore those words are principally to be employed for this end
and purpose. We will briefly note out in several points, those things which
are principally to be thought upon by occasion of these words.

As first, these words [Our father] do give us to understand, that prayer
ought not to be such a bare desire in a wishing manner, as men are wont to
say: would God this good might happen unto me: oh that this danger or this
evil might be removed: God bless it and prosper it: God forbid, and such
like: but we must expressly name him, of whom we desire to have our request
granted unto us. And not in general terms only, as when we say, God
grant: God forbid: but we must by name speak unto and call upon him, that our
prayer may be directed unto him [our father] as it were in communication. And
whereas the psalms do speak in the third person: God be merciful unto us:
God bless us: we must understand that prayer, to be directed either to the
mediator, that for his sake God would be merciful unto us and bless us; or
else the devotion of the mind is to be referred to the second person. For it is
the Scripture phrase to speak unto a person present in the third person, as
Genesis 33.14. Let my lord go before his servant. 1. King. 16.16. Let my lord the
King command. and chap. 25.25. Let not my lord the King I pray thee, set his
heart against Nabal. And in that usual phrase of Scripture, let the king live,
is understood: I pray God the King may live. And therefore in what words
soever the prayer be framed, the mind must always think upon God, and behold
him, that our desires and requests may be directed unto him. For this is the
form and rule of our prayer, to say [our Father.]

Secondly, these words do admonish us, that prayer or invocation is not to
be directed to any creature, but only to the heavenly father: so as we may
not direct our prayer to them, of whom we are sure their spirits do live with
God. For the name Father is also opposed unto the^. Isay. 63. v. 16. Doubtless
thou art our Father though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel know us nos:
thou Lord, art our Father and our redeemer.

Thirdly, those words do teach us, that we must so conceive of God, and
speak to god in prayer, as he has revealed his essence unto us in his word.
For the heathen when they go to pray, they think of a God that is eternal,
the Creator, almighty, but who that God is they know not. But we are taught
by these words, to make a difference between our calling upon God, and the
prayers of the heathen: and to think that we call upon that God who has thus
made known his being unto us in his word, that he is the Father, the son,
and the holy Ghost: to wit, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who sends
the spirit of his son into the hearts of the faithful, whereby we cry, Abba
father. For so the word [Father] is to be understood essentiallie in this
place, for God, or for the Divine Majesty, or for the whole Trinity, which is
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as it is written, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 6. Is
not he thy father that has bought thee, which has made thee and proportioned
thee. Isaie, 63. v. 16. Thou Lord art our father, and our redeemer, or he that
discharges us from bondage. The Son also is called by this general title,
Father of Eternity, Isay, 9.6. And the holy ghost is called the Father of the
poor.

This title therefore does admonish us when we are about to pray, to settle our
mind against all levity, inconsideration and pride, in such devotion,
reverence and humility, as those which remember themselves to pour out the
words of their prayer, not unto the air, or before any creatures, but before
the divine Majesty, whom we come unto in our prayer, Ephesians. 3. v. 14. before
whose face we do appear, Psalm. 141.2. and Psalm. 119.58. beseeching him to be
near and present in all our supplications.

Fourthly, the word Father also, may very well be understood personally, or in
relation for the person of the father, the mention and moving whereof does
necessarily include the Son whereto it has relation. And by the spirit of
the Son we cry Abba Father. So that the several persons of the Trinity in
their offices and benefits toward the Church, are offered to our consideration
in the preface of this prayer. And thus Saint Paul did understand the name
Father in prayer indiuerse places, and specially Ephesians. 3.14. For this cause do
I bend my knees unto the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. And Christ himself
expounds [Our father] when he says, Ioh. 20.17. I ascend unto my father and
your father: to my God, and to your God. Therefore this title comprizeth not
only that the father from eternity has begotten his only begotten Son but
in respect of the Father, it contains the benefits of our regeneration,
adoption, and calling to an heavenly inheritance. In respect of the Son the
mediator, it contains the merit, office, and the benefits of his
propitiation, reconciliation, and intercession, that it may warn us of that
which the Son promises. Ioh. 16.23. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father in
my name, he will give it you. And because a doubting and distrustful prayer
obtains nothing, Iam. 1.6. but as it is written, Mark. 11.24. I say unto you,
what soever ye shall desire when ye pray, if you shall not waver in heart, but
believe that ye shall receive it, they shall be done unto you. So that this
title [Our father] teaches us with what faith and confidence we are to pray
unto God: to wit, not in proud and Pharisaicall presumption, for our own
justice or worthiness, for the works and merits either of our selves or
others, but with an humble acknowledgement and confession of our own
unworthiness, for the merit and intercession of the only Son of God our
Mediator, for whom the father has adopted us to be sons and heirs, Ephesians.
1.5. As Daniel says in his prayer: We have sinned and done wickedly: we do
not present our supplications before thee in our own righteousness, but in thy
great tender mercies: hear us for the Lords sake. Likewise, that whereto this
title [fasher] has relation does put us in mind of most sweet consolation.
Heb. 2.17. That in things concerning God we have a merciful and a faithful
high priest. And 1. Ioh. 2.1. If we sin, we have an advocate with the father,
who is the propitiation for our sins. Hebr. 7.25. and 9.24. Ever living and
appearing in the sight of God for us, to make intercession for us which by him
do come unto God. For he has received gifts for men, Psalm. 68.19. and he
bestows the same on us, Ephesians. 4.11. So by these words, that we are not
commanded to call God a Lord, just, great, almighty, terrible, but our Father,
is stirred up in those which pray, confidence that they shall be heard and
obtain their requests. Hebr. 4.16. Let us therefore go boldly to the throne
of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need.
And most sweet is the saying of Bernard: That prayer which tastes sweet of a
fatherly name, gives me assurance that I shall obtain all my requests. For
the title Father affoardeth us this confidence, as Christ himself declares,
Ioh. 16.23. that our prayers are not either grievous or ungrateful unto God,
but the father so loves us that he is delighted with this our duty, if we
come unto him by our prayers, and his fatherly mind is careful for our
necessities, Matthew. 6. v. 32. And of his own accord is ready and forward to
hear and to help us, Luke 11.9. and psalm. 103.13. As a father has compassion
on his children, etc.

Again, this title teaches them that pray, to consider and try themselves,
whether they be indeed the sons of God, members and brethren of Christ,
ingraffed of the father. For they that go on in their sins without
repentance, and do not seek and embrace Christ by true faith, that by him
they may be reconciled unto God, cannot call God father. So very many things
does this title teach us.

Fifthly, whereas we do not only say [ Father, but our father,] this brings
us to the consideration of that which Christ says, Ioh. 20.17. I ascend unto
my father and your father: to wit, that we should conceive and think, that
God who is by nature the father of Christ, is for his sake by grace, out father
also, not by nature but by adoption. And least we should think, that he were
only the father of some few, which be endued with great virtues and excellent
gifts: therefore when we say [our father] we do include the whole body of
believers, wherein all the members are not alike. The consideration whereof
serves to beat down pride, and to work humility in the children of God that
have attained to greater measure of grace, that they may not challenge any thing
peculiar to themselves in this fatherhood, but reckon themselves among the
common flock of Gods children, saying [Our father.] It serves also to put
courage into the weaker sort, that they may not think themselves to be
excluded from that fatherhood, but make account that God is no less their
father, then the father of Marie, John Baptist, and Paul: and therefore are
they commanded to say [Our father.] For we pray unto a father that judges
without respect of persons, 1. Pet. 1.17.

Lastly, this very title does put us in mind of brotherly love: for if there be
one which is our father, Math. 23.9. then are we brethren and members one to
another, Mala. 2.10. Have we not all one father, and one God? why then does
every one despise his brother? This also teaches us to pray not only for our
own wants, but also to commend unto God in our prayer the necessities of our
whole brotherhoode, and of every member thereof saying, [Our father: give us:
forgive us.] Neither need we to doubt if so be we be members of that body,
but that the common prayers of the whole body do also include our
necessities. For therefore especially has he fitted a form of prayer, for
such an harmony or consent, as himself speaks; because he does principally
require our prayers to be common, that a few might meet together in his name,
and agree among themselves what they will ask, Math. 18.20. And yet because we
are commanded to pray in secret privately in our chamber: therefore when we say
[Our father,] it is requisite that every one does apply unto himself, that
common promise of the fatherhoode: as Thomas said well, My God and my Lord: and
as Paul says, I thank my God: and so does every ones faith by this
application well conclude, and say, God is my father, as Ier. 3.4. Therefore
from henceforth at least cry unto me, thou art my father: and after v. 19. I
did take thee for my children, and said, Thou shall call me, my father. and
Math. 6.6. Pray unto [thy father] which is in secret, and [thy father] will
reward thee.

So very many profitable instructions are propounded unto us in these few
words of this preface to the Lords prayer: which may thus also be considered,
that by the remembrance of those benefits which God has heretofore bestowed
upon us, God may as it were be moved to give, and our confidence stirred up
and confirmed to crave other more necessaries: that seeing of mere favor he
has bestowed upon us the chiefest benefit of adoption, because he will be our
father and also be so called, therefore he will give us other things needful.

Which art in heaven.] There be some that by occasion of this verb substantive
[es, art,] do discourse at large about the immutable essence, and those names
of God, I am that I am: which is, which was, and which is to come. But the
Greek words do neither require nor admit that disputation in this place: for
the words are plain, [ Our father n to orano, which art in heauen] to show,
that we do not call upon any earthly father, but on him who is, or who does
dwell in heaven, that is, an heavenly father. For so Christ himself expounds
these words, Math. 6.26. when he names an (...).
heavenly father. And whereas Heaven in Scripture is called the throne, the
seat, mansion, or dwelling place of God, and in this place we call upon our
father which is in heaven; the meaning is not, that the infinite essence of God
is circumscribed or concluded, either in these visible heavens, or in the
heaven called Empyreum, that is, the highest heavens, so as he is not present
else where: for it is written 1. King. 8. v. 27. and 2. Chro. 2. v. 6. that
heaven, and the heaven of heavens can not contain him. For he fills heaven
and earth, Ierem. 23. v. 23. yea he is present in heaven in earth, in the sea,
and in hell, Psalm. 139. v. 7. he is higher then heaven, deeper then hell,
longer then the earth, broader then the sea. That is, he is wholly present
every where, within all things and without all things, as Gregory says.
Neither do we think, when we call upon our father which is in heaven in the
preface of this prayer, that he is separated and disioyned, from us which pray,
from our wants, and from our prayers being further absent, the^ heaven is
distant from the earth. Like as the thoughts and the sayings of the wicked are
described, Job. 22. v. 13. what should God see? he walks in the circle of the
heven, and considers not our affairs. For in the 145. Psalm v. 18. it is
written. The Lord is ready at hand to them that pray, even to them that call
upon him in truth. Deuteronomy. 4. v. 29. The Lord our God is near to all our
requests. and Matthew 18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, and shall ask any thing, there am I in the middle among them. Now
whereas our father of whom we make no doubt, but that he is present to our
requests, is said to be in heaven, this the school men expound after this
sort; either that the works of God do more gloriously and highly appear in
the beutie, magnificence, harmony and workmanship of the visible or material
heavens, then in earth: or else because in those spiritual heavens (as they
call them) he does by a full communication of himself, declare, exhibit, and
show forth, all his glory, power, goodness, magnificence, not as here on
earth by certain means and couerings invisible, and by sundry lettes, but in
full show and fruition of sight face to face, to be seen and enjoyed of the
blessed Angels and of elect souls: so as the very thing, is the happiness, the
joy, salvation and the eternal life of the saints.

But I see not what comfort this meaning can affoard unto us, which pray here
on earth under the cross, and in much weakness. A more plain exposition is
this. Because the scriptures do define of heaven wherein God has his abode,
not by any local situation; but by heavenly and divine glory, majesty,
power, and fidelity. Again, that therefore God is said to be in heaven, and
to dwell in the heavens, in the place of his abode, to hear in the dwelling
place of his abode. 3. King. v. 30. because all things are under his
government, he has all things in his hand and in his power, he rules all
things in all places, he is able to do, and he does whatsoever he will, by his
wisdom he foreseeth, knows, beholds, and hears all things, and knows
the way how to help them all, by his providence he cares for all, and by his
power does order, dispose, administer and govern all things etc. Psalm. 115. v.
3. Our God is in heaven. he does whatsoever be will. Psalm. 103. v. 20. God has
prepared his seat in heaven, and his kingdom rules over all in all places of
his dominion. 3. King. 8. v. 39. thou shall hear in heaven, thou shall be
favor able, and shall forgive sins. For thou only see and know the
hearts of all the children of men. Psalm. 113. v. 5. which has his dwelling on
high, that he may behold things below, in heaven, and in earth. Psalm. 102. v.
20. The Lord has looked down from his high sanctuary: out of heaven did he
behold the earth: that he might hear the mournings of the prisoner, and loose
the children of death. Psalm. 11.4. The lords seat is in heaven, his eyes look
unto the poor, and his eye lids try the children of me^. Psalm. 20. v. 6. he
will he are from heaven by the mighty help of his right hand. Isa. 63.15.
Give heed from heaven and behold: where is now thy zeal, thy strength, and
the multitude of thy mercies. And when the Lord shows his divine glory, power
and mercy by any famous hearing, help, and deliverance, the scripture says,
then God has exalted or advanced himself above the heavens, and magnified his
mercy up to the heavens, Psalm. 57. v. 6. and 18. v. 5. and 113. v. 4. his
glory is above the heavens. Psalm. 68. v. 19. He has ascended above the heaven
of heavens.

These testimonies of scripture do plainly expound that phrase, where God is
said to be, or to dwell in heaven. The consideration hereof will also further
us to expound the doctrine of Christ's ascension or exaltation into heaven, of
his sitting at the right hand of God in heavenly places. And thus the meaning
of this preface of the Lords prayer is evident: for when we say [Our father,]
we do by says conceive the ready willing mind, and the forwardness of God
toward us. And when we add, [which art in heaven:] I We add to the good will
of God, divine power, that he is able to do and to give those things we ask,
having al things in his power. II. Divine providence, that sees and knows
our wants, that he is present to our requests and hears the same: that he
has a care of us: that he orders, disposes, administreth, and governs all
things, and more especially in his Church. III. Divine wisdom, that he knows
the way to send help and deliverance. IV. Divine rule and dominion, to wit,
that it belongs to his kingdom and office, who dwells in heaven, to hear
our prayers, to regard our affairs, to help, to deliver, etc. In a word: the
Lords prayer says, that our father whom we call upon is, or does dwell in
heaven. I. Lest we should conceive in our mind any base or earthly thing of
God, after the manner and fashion of this world, but all things heavenly and
divine. II. To show a comparison and a difference between our earthly, and
our heavenly father: as Christ expressly opposes them one to the other, Math.
23. v. 9. Call no man your father upon earth: for there is one your father,
which is in heaven. III. That by this title we may be admonished, to ask of
God heavenly things especially: and to refer those earthly things which we
ask, unto the heavenly. For we are called and borne a new to an inheritance
which is laid up in heaven, as it is written. 1. Pet. 1. v. 3. IV. That by this
title we may be taught to acknowledge our life in this world to be a pilgrimage
from God, and that our desire to this true heavenly country may be stirred up
in us, and withal that we may declare that whatsoever we ask is for this
end, to bring us to the country, where our father is in heaven. As for that
Allegory of Austine and others, that God is in heaven, that is, by grace he
dwells in the Saints, and those which pray ought to wish for themselves that
God may dwell in them, as it is not indeed impious, so in this place it is
foreign and unfit: for it belongs to the second petition, that Gods kingdom
may come unto us.

Hallowed be thy name:] II. part.
Now follow certain petitions in this prayer. For it is not a true prayer
when we do only heap up the glorious titles of God: but prayer ought to ask
some thing of God, or else give him thanks for benefits received, Philip.
4.6. and 1. Timoth. 2.1. And usually here are numbered seven petitions, which
are as it were general seals and marks, whereto we may and ought to refer,
and wherein we must include all those things that we ask. For it is written,
1. Ioh. 5.14. This is that assurance we have with God, that if we ask any
thing according to his will he hears us. and Iam. 4. v. 3. Ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may spend it on your pleasures.
And therefore out of the petitions of this Lords prayer which is the rule of
praying, we may gather, what things we are to ask in prayer, in what order,
and for what end we must ask them. For they are thus divided, that the former
regard the glory of God especially, so far forth as our salvation is joined
therewith. The rest contain our wants, our profit and salvation, whereof some
belong to the body, others to the soul: some to this worldly life, some to our
spiritual life in this world, and others to our heavenly life to come. Again,
some petitions require the giving and bestowing of blessings, either temporal,
or bodily, or spiritual, or heavenly which are to come: others do crave the
remoueall of evils eitemporall or spiritual, that those which are past, may be
forgiven and not imputed, those which are present may be taken away or
lessoned, and those which are to come may be kept back. Again in the Lords
prayer we both crave the end, to wit, the glory of God and our own
salvation, and those things which tend thereunto. The Lords prayer also shows
the order of those things we are to ask. For first those things are to be
asked which concern the glory of God and our own salvation: then such things
as belong to the necessity, benefit, and commodity of our body and of this
life, may well be asked, and ought so to be. So likewise in the turning back
of evils, such as hinder the glory of God, or our salvation must have the
first place. And then we may pray that the adversities, tribulations,
difficulties and troubles of body and of this life, may either be taken away
or lessened. But temporal or bodily benefits must be asked with that condition
or moderation, If it be the will of God; If they will further the glory of God
and our salvation: but if God shall know and judge those things to be hurtful
unto us, which we think to be good and profitable unto us when we ask them,
that he would keep them back and hinder them as evil. Also temporal
blessings must be asked for that end, that they may be ordered, directed, and
used to Gods glory, and to spiritual, heavenly and eternal blessings. And
thus from the petitions of the Lords prayer, may well be gathered, what things
we may and ought to ask, and in what manner according to the will of God.
Likewise S. Paul in certain distinct words does show and declare the kinds of
things that are to be asked in prayer, Philip. 4.6. and 1. Timoth. 2.1. (...),
est, vel (...).
for he deuideth prayer into petition, and thanksgiving. Petitions, he deuideth
into requests, whereby we crave blessings to be bestowed: into supplications,
whereby we crave evils to be turned back: into intercessions, whereby we
either make request and pray to God for others, or else direct the weapons of
our prayers against our enemies. And he adds, that things to be prayed for,
are such as concern the knowledge of God, and our salvation. Also, such as
pertain unto godliness, or to the peace and honesty of this life.

Now that we may the sooner dispatch the exposition of the several petitions,
I will here declare unto what general heads of meditations the meaning of every
petition is to be referred as we pray; according as I was wont to use them
publicly in expounding the Catechism, and in private exercises of religion.
To wit, that first of all we do consider by godly and devout meditation, what
blessings we pray for in every petition, either to be given us; or if they be
given, to be preserved and increased. Secondly, what evils in every petition
we desire to be stopped, that they may not happen, if they be to come: or
being present, to be turned back, that we may be freed and delivered from
them: and if the remooueall be begun, that the same may still go forward
more and more. Thirdly, what blessings are to be acknowledged in every
petition, that we may be thankful for the same: and that this confession and
thanksgiving may be kindled, may grow and be increased in us. Fourthly, in
every petition there must be humble confession, that those things which are
propounded, are not asked of us continually, nor earnestly and fervently, but
seldom and coldly: and that we do not sufficiently consider of the greatness
thereof: and that contrary to our request, we our selves indeed do refuse and
shake off those blessings which we crave, and the evils which in word we pray
against, by the very contrary act we fetch and draw unto our selves: that we
do not acknowledge benefits received, neither are heartily thankful for them,
but forget the same: that we regard them not, neither use them reverently with
thankfulness to the glory of God, but ungratefully through abuse do bestow
them ill.

These things are to be acknowledged and bewailed with humble confession in
every petition and withal we must think upon, and by prayer seek for
reformation. And all those things are to be applied, both in general to the
whole body of the Church, and privately unto our selves, and namely also unto
those whose necessity is known unto us. Thus shall we have large meditation
in every petition, which we will not handle in this place, because it is not my
purpose at this time; but will commend the same to every man's private devotion.

Only we will expound the words in every petit^on, and show the meaning,
withal briefly declaring how they may and ought to be applied to those four
heads or chief places.

Hallowed be thy name,] That we may find out the true meaning of this
petition, we must expound the words. There is no doubt but here is treated the
praise, honor, and renown of God. For [Name] is often taken for glory and
renown, Genesis 6.4. they are called men of Name, whose fame was renowned. Deutr.
26.19. The most high will set thee above all nations which he has made, in
praise, in Name, and in glory. The word [Hallowed] as we shall show by and by,
is often used when any thing is highly and gloriously renowned as famous. But
that we may the better consider the meaning of this petition in a godly
meditation, we will for plainnes sake divide the exposition into some parts. I.
And first in general this petition being put in the first place, does commend
unto us the desire of Gods glory, that we should chiefly and before all things
care for, and seek the glory of God. And that we should refer al things
which we ask and do, to Gods glory as to the true end, 1. Cor. 10. v. 31.
Do all to the glory of God. And because in this corruption of our nature we
are not much careful for the true glory of God, those things which we do,
which we ask, which we receive, we do either not at all, or in truth not
earnestly refer them to the glory of God, but in stead of glory, we put
contempt and r^proch upon God, we profane, we pollute, and blaspheme his name:
therefore we are commanded to pray, that God from heaven would kindle,
preserve, and increase in us, a true desire of Gods glory; and that we may be
kept, defended, and delivered from all forgetfulness, contempt, profaning,
defiling, and blaspheming the name of God and of his glory.

II. Secondly, the name of God does signify whatsoever proprieties of
perfection, attributes or virtues, God has revealed and declared in his word
concerning his essence, his will, and his works: as that he is wise, just,
great, terrible, good, gentle, merciful, patient, penitent, ielous, visiting
iniquity, and such like.

The Jews because they will not pronounce the name Jehovah, Thargum
Hierosolymi. tanum.
in stead thereof use Shem. Thence the Caldie paraphrase for God himself,
puts Shem and Hashem, a name, Genesis 10.9. for the virtues or perfections of
God, are the very essence of God. Now that name of God cannot be hallowed by
any addition, infusion, access, or increase of holiness: as it is written of
us, He that is holy, let him be more holy, Apoc. 22.11. for it is holy in it
self, that is, severed and exempt from, excelling and exceeding all other
common and profane things in purity and holiness.

But as the word [hallowed] is used, Levit. 10. v. 3. for when the Lord had
slain the two sons of Aaron which offered strange fire, he says, I will
be sanctified in those which come near me. and Ezekiel. 38. v. 23. For the
vengeance taken upon Gog and Magog he says, I will be magnified and
sanctisied. I say, 5. v. 16. After the threatening of punishments, he says:
The Lord of hoasts shall be exalted in judgment, and the holy God shall be
hallowed in justice. Ezekiel. 20. v. 9. Speaking of the return of his people, he
says, I will be sanctified of you in the sight of the heathen. and chap. 28.
v. 22. of the punishment of Sidon, and the deliverance of Israel he says, I
will be sanctified in them. Chap. 36.23. Concerning the return of his people
he says: Not for you, but for mine own holy name will I do this thing, I
will sanctify mine own great name, that the heathen may know that I am the
Lora. when I shall be sanctified in you before them. And in this sense do we
pray, that God would exhibit, show forth and declare the glory and excellency
of his name, that is, of his perfections, of his attributes or virtues, whereof
we have spoken, by some notable work in his Church, or against his enemies,
like as it may be peculiarly expounded and understood of every name of god,
which thing I leave and commend to the private diligence of the Reader. So
likewise, considering that [Our Father] went before, and now follows
[Hallowed be thy name,] we may well understand by Name, the benefits of the
person, the office of the Father, the merits and benefits of the son the
Mediator: and the office and blessings of the holy ghost, which are revealed
and made known in the scripture. Those we desire to be hallowed, that is,
mercifully to be declared, made known, and showed forth toward us. So the
scripture says, we must believe in the name of the only begotten; that we
receive remission of sins, and eternal life in the name and by the name of
Christ.

If these things be severally unfolded, they will affoard very large
meditation: pomnmata.
but we only lay down the chief heads of things for memories sake.

III. By relation also we desire that the name of god may be hallowed among us,
with us, and of us, that is, that those attributes, which we said were
comprehended under the name of god, might shine forth with us, become known in
us, be spread abroad, and become renowned in all the world. According as the
scripture says. I will be sanctified before the nations, that they may know
that I am the lord. And the contrary, whereby we are forbidden to pollute, to
profane, or blaspheme the name of god, shows most plainly, what it is to
hallow or sanctify it. We pray therefore that god would give us grace, to
acknowledge, to consider, reverently to set forth and advance those virtues and
works of god, in thought word and deed. As it is written Psalm. 48.11.
According to thy name so is thy praise. Which also may and ought to be enlarged
in this exposition and meditation, unto all the essential and personal
virtues of god. Again, we do hear desire, that we may with holiness and
reverence think, and speak of the works and judgments of god, that we be
not evil or envious ce^suters, so as we should wrongfully or profanely judge
of his providence and chastisements toward us, and of his long suffering
toward our enemies, by complaining and murmuring against the same; or else
abuse his goodness, his gentleness and patience. Numb. 20. v. 12. when Moses
and Aaron doubted of obtaining water, and the people murmured, the lord says:
ye have not believed me, that ye might sanctify me before the children of
Israel. 1. Pet. 3.5. Be not afraid in time of persequution, but sanctify the
Lord in your hearts.

IV. Seeing the name of god concerning his essence, his will, his works, and
judgments is made known to us in the word, we do pray that the name of god,
that is, his word, may be given and preached unto us, purely, sincerely, in
true and sound understanding, holily, that is, without corruption or
deprauation: that sincere and faithful ministers may be given us for the
edification of the Church, which may discharge their duty faithfully, and be
furnished with necessary gifts; And that we may be mercifully kept and
preserved from all corrupting and deprauing of the word of god, from woolues
and hirelings.

V. Answerable to this, we must acknowledge the giving of the word, for the
holy and singular blessing of god, we must reverently receive it, with
diligence and devotion hear, think and meditate on the same. We must also
sanctify and adorn the same with a godly life, lest by us the name and
doctrine of god be polluted and evil spoken of. 1. Tim. 6. v. 1. And that other
by our godly conversation, may be drawn to love and embrace this doctrine.
Math. 5. v. 16. that they may see our good works and glorify your father.
Romans 2. v. 23. By breaking the law thou dishonourest God, and for you is the
name of god blasphemed.

Now let all these parts be applied to the four general heads before set
down. To wit, I. What blessings we desire to be given us, to be preserved and
increased. II. From what evils we desire to be kept and delivered. III. What
benefits we must acknowledge to be bestowed on us, and what thanks we ought to
render again for the same. IV. What manner of confefsion of sins we must make
from thence. And let these be applied in special unto the whole Church, and in
particular unto our selves and unto those whose want we know. So will the
meditation of this petition be very large.

Let thy kingdom come to:] In greek it is simple [come;] but because in Luke,
11. v. 20. it is written, The kingdom of God is come unto you: It is not
amiss translated [adueniat, Let come too.] Moreover the kingdom of god is
taken diverse ways. For there is a general or universal kingdom of God,
whereby he does mightily govern all creatures, Psalm. 103. v. 19. his kingdom
rules over all. and Psalm. 145.13. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom. But
this we do not properly understand, for that does mightily run over all,
nothing can hinder it, neither any creature withdraw it self from under it;
unless we understand our prayer thus; that all men may acknowledge, observe and
reverence the providence of that kingdom of God whereby he rules, governs
and disposes all things, and that they may humbly subject themselves unto it
in all things. Again, there is the kingdom of grace in the Church in this
life, and the kingdom of glory in the life to come, which is here properly to
be understood as the preface it self shows. For we say, Our father, [thy
kingdome] come. And this is called the kingdom of the father, the kingdom of
Christ, and the kingdom of heaven; and the more to commend the free gift of
God, we say not; that we come to the kingdom of God, but do pray that it may
come to us; or as Christ more plainly speaks, Luke, 11.20. that the kingdom
of God may come before hand unto us. And this is called the kingdom of the
father, the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of heaven. Now the kingdom
of grace is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy, in the
holy Ghost, Romans 14. v. 17. It consists not in speech but in truth and in
power. 1. Cor. 2. v. 5. We pray therefore that the holy ghost may be given us,
that he may be powerful in us by the word, to illuminate, to convert,
justify, sanctify, to lead, guide, confirm, and preserve us, that we may be
found in that kingdom, and there abide and persevere, lest we should fall away
thence again, and slide back into the kingdom of Satan. That God would
oppose his own kingdom against the kingdom of Satan and of the world, that
he would keep back and bind the devil, that he would suppres, bear down,
and break of the treasons, and the power of the devil and the world, and
mercifully defend and keep his church from the same: that is, as the Psalmist
says, Psalm 110.2. that he would rule by the power of his right hand in the
midst of his enemies: that he would tread down Satan under our feet. Romans
16. v. 20. keep us from the world, Ioh. 17. v. 15. that we may overcome the
world, 1. Ioh. 5.4. and Ioh. 16.33. that he would deliver us from the present
evil world, Gal. 1.4. least we should love and desire the kingdom of the
world, contemning and neglecting the kingdom of God: least sin should reign
in our mort all bodies, Romans 6.12. and iniquity bear rule over us, Psalm.
9.13. and 119. but that sin may be crucified and mortified in us, Galat.
5.24. that we may become subject to the direction of the Holy ghost, and be
transformed of him into the obedience of god, and become servants unto
righteousness. That we answer not thus: We will not have this man to reign
over us. Luke 9.14. that we cast not off his yoke from us. Psalm. 2.3. but take
it unto us: because his yoke is sweet and easy, that we may find rest unto
our souls, that travailing and being heavy laden we may fly to the throne
of his kingdom, and there have refreshing. Math. 11.29. Hebr. 4.16. that we
may first seek the kingdom of God. Math. 6.33. that we may sit down in the
kingdom of heaven and not be cast thence. Math. 8.11. that we be not offenses
in the kingdom of God, Math. 18.6. that the kingdom of God be not taken from
us, Mat. 21.43. that the kingdom of God may be within us, Luke, 17.21. That
Christ may remember us in his kingdom, Luke, 23.42. And that this kingdom may
continually be spread further abroad, may also come to other nations and
countries, and more men ever now and then, may be gathered to that kingdom.
And to be short, that we may earnestly say: Blessed be the kingdom promised to
David, which comes in the name of the Lord, Mark, 11.10. and that we may
receive that kingdom, Luke, 19.15. be made and remain citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, Ephe. 2.19. And concerning the kingdom of
glory we pray, that God would make us meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the Saints in light. Colos. 1.12. that we may inherit and possess that
kingdom by the grace of adoption. Math. 25.34. 1. Cor. 15.50. that we may be
mercifully kept and preserved from all things which may hinder us from the
entrance and possession thereof. And that, 2. Tim. 4.18. we may love, wait for
and desire the coming of the kingdom of glory, and make haste thereunto, 2.
Pet. 3.12. That we may be counted worthy the kingdom of God, 2. These. 1.5. who
has called us into his kingdom and glory, 1. These. 2.13. that an entrance may
be made unto us, into the everlasting kingdom of God. 2. Pet. 1.11. and that
we may be ready at the coming of that kingdom, Luk, 12.40.

These things we must ask in general, for the whole body of the Church, and
privately every one for himself, for those whom we know, both friends and
enemies. Likewise we must apply the same to those four chief heads before
set down. To wit, what good things we are to pray for in this petition: what
evils we are to pray against: for what benefits we are to give thanks: and
what sins of ours we must humbly acknowledge and confess in this petition.

Thy will be done:] The will of God is taken diverse ways: and therefore from
the distinction of gods will, we shall most easily come to the meaning of this
petition. Ancient writers call one will of god, the will of his good pleasure,
disposition, or decree, when as god himself wills and appoints to do any
thing. Now our will is weak even in it own strength, and is often hindered by
some other thing, whereupon we had need to pray, that god would minister
strength to that good thing that we purpose in our own heart, and remove all
impediments, so that we may perform the same in action; But we need not to
pray for that, concerning this disposing will of god, because he is almighty,
neither can it be well and in a godly manner prayed for. For god does
whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth. Psalm. 115.3. Who has withstood his
will? Romans 9.19. The will of god abides for ever. Isaie, 14.27. The Lord has
decreed it, who can disanull it? his hand is stretched out, who can turn it
away? Isay, 4.6.11. My counsel shall stand, and my whole will shall be done.

There is another revealed or signified will called [volunt as signi.] Whereby
god commanding or forbidding any thing in the law or in the Gospel, shows
and declares what he will have us to do, and to leave undone, Romans 12.2. This
is called the good will of god, his well pleasing and perfect will. So that in
this petition we acknowledge and confess that by our own strength we cannot
do and fulfill the will of god, propounded unto us either in the law or in
the gospel.

We pray therefore that god would give us the spirit of regeneration and
sanctification, which may create in us a new heart, take away our stony heart,
subdue and abolish our carnal stubbernesse and impatience, that we may think
upon, desire, will, and do, such things as please god, that we may avoid and
omit the contrary, lest we should do any thing that is contrary to the will
of god. And if we find our selves not to regard, not to approve, not to will,
not to do those things which god wills, but such as god forbids, hates,
and abhors; we pray that those things may be amended in us by his holy
spirit in true repentance, that our will may be turned from evil, and made
conformable to that which is good.

On the contrary, there is another will of the devil, of the world, and of
the flesh, altogether unlike and resisting the will of God. Those therefore we
renounce and reject in this petition; praying, that the will of the world, and
of the devil may be hindered and subdued, and the suggestions of Satan may be
broken of, that we may not obey them, nor conform our selves like unto the
world, and that the lusts and concupiscence of the flesh in us, may be
crucyfied and mortified by the spirit, that having the disobedience, the
impatience, and the wicked lust of the flesh suppressed in us, our will may
become so conformable to the will of God, that we shall desire, cover, or do
nothing, but which that is well pleasing and approved of god. That we may judge
reverently of the will of God, and submit our selves thereto, and that the
will of God may be done in us. Which good will of god the scripture contains
in these three points. I will that a sinner may be converted. Ezekiel. 33.11. It
is the will of God that we should believe in the son of God, Ioh. 6.39. This
is the will of God even your sanctification, that we should abstain from
sin. 1. These. 4.3. And therefore do we ask of god, grace, strength, and
aid, that we may begin and accomplish the same.

An other will of God they call his operative and permitting will. For
whatsoever is done in all the world and in the Church, whatsoever befalls
us, sure it is, it comes not to pass without the will of god, Math. 10.29.
either working or permitting the same. And because we do either not approove
this will of god in resoning, or else complain thereof through impatience,
murmuring and striving against the same: therefore we pray for patience, that
we may with reverence and obedience, submit, or at least endeavor to submit
our will to the will of god, and may strive against impatience, not judging
maliciously of those things which happen unto us by the will and permission of
god, but saying, as it pleases the lord, so comes it to pass. And because
we cannot do this of our own strength, therefore we pray especially that god
would give us patience, subjection and obedience: and strength and courage
against impatience. Those things also which we ask, though they seem very
convenient, meet and profitable for us, yet we must always submit them to
the will of god, Not my will but thine is fulfilled.

Others also make an optatiue will of god, wherein he shows by the very fact,
that he wishes and desires those things which are profitable and wholesome for
us; which notwithstanding we our selves do often hinder by the contrary act. As
when it is said: God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth. How often would I have gathered thee, and thou
would not? I will not the death of a sinner: but rather that he may convert
and live God would have none to perish but all men to come to repentance. Where
we pray, that this will of god may be mercifully fulfilled in us, and not
removed from us by the suggestions of Satan, by the allurements of the world,
and the concupiscence of the flesh.

In earth, as it is in heaven:] The Hebraisme in this place is more fully
expressed thus: even as it is in heaven, so also in earth. Chrysostom
thinks, that this clause is to be referred, as it were in common, unto the
former petitions. Hallowed be thy name: thy kingdom come, in earth as it is in
heaven. Now here we have very good occasion to consider of that which Paul
says, that in Christ are reconciled and set at one, things in heaven and
things in earth, and that there shall be one company of blessed angels and of
men: and we, as Christ says, shall become like unto the angels. We are
therefore taught to pray, that this conformity between the company of angels
and of men, may be begun in this life, that we may make toward and sigh after
that blessed communion. And because the Angels do readily and chearefully,
without all stubburnnesse and resistance, of mere love and obedience, execute
those things which they know God wills: as it is said, psalm. 103.20. The
angels excel in strength, that do his commandment in obeying the voice of
his word, to do his will: therefore we do pray, that this also may be begun
in us. Again we are admonished, considering we do belong to this communion,
that we should conform our selves thereunto, and not unto this world, because
we are not of this world, but belong unto an heavenly city. Now this
conformity or likeness is begun in this life: but it shall at length be
perfect in the life to come, which is eternal.

Further, as the Angels think reverently of the judgments of God, and in all
things approve of that which God wills: even so we desire, that by the grace
of god and the work of his spirit, we may do the same here upon earth. And so
this clause contains a very profitable admonition, that while we live in the
flesh here on earth, we should begin to lift up our head and our soul, to
desire and to think upon our conversation in heaven with the blessed angels,
and labor to begin our conformity therewith here on earth.

Here again this exposition is to be applied to those four heads of godly
devotion and meditation: to wit, what blessings we are to crave in this
petition: what evils we are to pray against: for what benefits we must give
thanks: what contrary sins of ours we must acknowledge and confess. And that
either in general and for the whole Church, or in particular for our selves
and for others.

Give us this day our daily bread.] That we may come to the true meaning of
this petition, first we are to expound the words. And first of all, Lechem.
the word translated bread, does properly signify ordinary bread for food,
which is cut and chawed; as when there is distinctly named bread and water, 3.
King. 13.9. Bread and wine, Genesis 14.18. wheat, bread, and meat, Genesis 45.23.
But by a Metonimie it is taken for corn whereof bread is made, Genesis 47.13.
psalm. Set before them bread and water: then it follows, and he made great
preparation for them. to eat bread with one. Exodus 18.12. Also goats milk is
called bread, Prove. 27.27. The root of Juniper is called bread. Yea fodder for
cattle is called bread, psalm. 147.9. and the fruit of trees is called bread,
Ier. 11.19. So that by the name of bread in this petition, we understand all
things that belong and are necessary to the sustenance of the body and of
this life. Our Savior Christ, Math. 6.25. Jacob, Genesis 28.20. and Paul. 1. Tim.
6.18. do contain the^ generally under the name of food and raiment. Those
things also whereby provision is gotten, as husbandry, traffic, and such
like, are comprehended under the name [bread.] Prove. 31.14. And because our
Savior Christ in this petition would co^tain al bodily things which are
requisite for the convenient leading of this life: as when Isac prays for his
wife, Genesis 25.21. the Ce^turion for his servant, Math. 8.6. Paul commands to
pray for the magistrate, that we may lead a quiet life in all godliness and
honesty, 1. Tim. 2.2. And Solomon prays for seasonable weather, and for the
fruitfulnes of the earth, 3. King. 8.36. therefore the word bread in this
petition, may well be taken in a larger sense, for all those things which are
required to the necessary, peaceable, and honest ordering of this life, in the
common wealth, in the family, in the fruitfulnes of the earth, in seasonable
weather, etc.

Further, whereas Christ calls this bread (...); it is not agreed on among
all, what that word does properly signify. Before Ieromes time, the latin
translation had panem quotidiaenum, our daily bread: taking the reason of their
interpretation without all doubt out of Luke, which adds (...), which daily
or every day is needful. Jerome translated it, Supersubstantiall, whom
Ambrose follows in the fifth book of the Sacraments: adding, that this is not
the bread which goes into the body, but the bread of eternal life, Ioh. 6.40.
which susteineth the substance of the soul. And because the hebrew word
Segullah signifies our own proper goods, or a peculiar treasure, which
Symmachus translated (...), chief, singular, peculiar: and the Septuagints
translate (...), he thinks (...) and (...) to be all one, to wit, that
which excels all substances or creatures. So that Cyprian, Jerome, Ambrose,
and Austin do here understand the meat of the Lords body. Yet Ambrose
adds, and Jerome concealeth not, that (...) signifies also [comming to] for
the Greeks call the day ensuing, or the morrow (...), Act. 7.26. and Xenophon
speaks thus, (...), in the instant or present year. And (...), in the winter
following. For those things which are to come are called (...). And Demosthenes
against Midias, calls the next assembly following, (...). I have also sought
this word in the translation of the Seauentie, and have found it used in this
sense, Deutr. 32.2.9. Oh that they would understand (...), the time that
ensues. Hence, 1. Chron. 20.1. In the year following. Prove. 27.1. it is put
absolutely, boast not of to morrow: for thou know not (...), what the next
ensuing, that is, the day next ensuing, will bring forth; where in the Hebrew
is simply put [day:] and the Greeks translate it (...), next following or
ensuing. Jerome further adds, that he has found in the Gospel according to
the Hebrews machar, which signifies to morrow, or to come, put for (...). This
signification Erasmus embraces. And because Christ forbids us to be
careful about temporal provision for the morrow, therefore he expounds it,
that Christ commanded us to ask, not the bread of this present life, but
food for the life to come. And he gives this reason. It is not like that
Christ in so spiritual a prayer to his heavenly father, spoke of corporal
bread which the very Heathen receive from their parents. But this reason is
not good: for God will have us to cast upon him, not only our care of
spiritual things, but simply all our care, 1. Pet. 5.7. And our heavenly
father knows that we have need even of these temporal things, Math. 6.23.
He will have us to acknowledge, that it is he which gives unto us those things
which belong to our daily food: and he is angry if any shall think, that he
has received these things else where then from him, Ose. 2.8. Joel 2.23. He
has also commanded us to ask these things of him, 3. King. 8.35. Jacob, Genesis
28.20. and Solomon, Prove. 30.7. have asked those things in prayer. And seeing
the Lords prayer is a perfect form of prayer, containing all things God will
have us to ask of him; it is necessary that some place should be left for
daily bread, considering it is not contained in any other petition. Again, it
were great impiety, either to ascribe those things which belong to our daily
food to the creature, or to our own industry, or else to ask the same in
prayer of the Saints, and not to think them to be the gift of God. Therefore
the word (...) may well signify daily bread: for it is not derived in this
signification (...), a substance: but the theme thereof is the verb (...), and
(...), which signifies to come too. And as Plutarch says in the life of
Sertorius, (...), coming from house to house: so panis (...), daily bread, is
that food which comes unto us, or is given by some other, which suffices not
when we have once received it, but in this intercourse of changing times, we
must needs have it come unto us ever and anon, every day or continually. So
Luke 11.4. he calls food which goes about and comes every day from the
hand of God, (...), daily bread for the day. Hitherto belong those compositions
that Hesiod calls food sufficient and necessary for the space of a year
(...). And Plutarch in the life of Pericles, calls food for each day (...).
Again, because (...) signifies time continually ensuing, the meaning may be
this: that ever and anon as time ensues we have in this life continual need
of this bread; to teach us, that our heavenly father does feed us continually
by making new supply of bread every day. It may also thus be understood, that
this bread is not called bread sought for, but (...), that is, as Varinus
expounds it, (...), overplus bread: that we should not ascribe the same to
our own industry, but to the gift of god. Or else, that bread is not the
principal thing, which we must ask of God in prayer, but is only (...), an
overplus, or a thing that comes beside the principal. Math. 6.33. First
seek the kingdom of God, and other things shall be cast unto you besides. But
because adjectives ending in osios, are not wo^t to be formed of participles of
the feminine gender, as of (...), therefore the plainnest and the safest way is
to derive this word of osa. i. a substance, that (...) panis may be that
bread which is necessary for the sustenance of our bodily substance, and of
our life, as it were such bread as does belong (...), to uphold the substance
of this body and of this life.

So Basil in his short questions expounds this word (...), that is, (...),
such bread as is fit and profitable for our substances to preserve our daily
life. And Suidas says: Panis (...), is (...), such bread as agrees fitly to
our substance, or else such bread as we use every day. And Theophilact
expounds it of such bread, as suffices for our substance and constitution.
Euthymius repeateth the same thing; that it is bread which fitly serves for
our substance, for our life and constitution: adding moreover that Chrysostom
expounds (...), quotidianum, daily.

Furthermore, osa also signifies goods or wealth, Luke 15.12. Give me the
portion of my goods or wealth that belongs unto me. And from this signification
are derived two words (...), which as has beeue said, signifies a peculiar,
a chosen, or a proper treasure: and (...), which being opposed to (...)
signifies common, necessary, and sufficient wealth. And the Syrian
translatour expressed it by a word derived of Senack, Senack indigere S^riace.
that we should understand it of necessary bread, whereof we stand in need.
As the Baptist uses the same word, when he says, I have need to be baptized
of thee, Math. 3.14. panis (...).
And [daily bread] being taken in this sense, will very fittely agree with
that which is written, Prove. 30.8. Give me not poverty nor riches: feed me
with bread ordained or appointed for me, or with the bread of my portion. And
the Greeks do so translate the place: Give me, (...), those things which are
needful and sufficient, or which may suffice me. For godliness and a mind
contented with his portion, is great gain, 1. Tim. 6. v. 6. These things I
thought good to note in this place, which are worthy the consideration of the
learned, that the meaning of this petition may more plainly appear.

In this petition therefore we are admonished and taught, that men's affairs in
this common outward life, are not turned about rashly and by chance; that
bodily goods, and outward wealth, whatsoever belongs to the happy estate of
the common wealth and of the family, do not depend upon the wisdom,
diligence, and dexterity of men: neither are they to be imputed unto blind
fortune, unto destiny, or to the course of secundarie causes: but God himself
does dispose and govern all these things according to his good pleasure. For
unless God keep the city, and build the house, men labor in vain, Psalm.
127.1. So in Daniel we shall find, how the states of kingdoms are disposed of
God. And, Prove. 22.2. The rich and the poor meet together: the Lord is the
maker of them both. Deutr. 28.12. The Lord opens his treasures and gives
rain: and sends the winds out of his treasures, Psalm. 135.8. Neither may we
think that God has removed from himself, as things not beseeming his high
majesty, the care of bodily, temporal, and earthly blessings, and has
distributed the charge thereof among the Saints: for he does seriously affirm,
that prosperity and adversity even in these things, does come from him,
Levit. 26.3. Deutr. 28.12. And he is angry if we do not acknowledge the same,
Hose. 2.8. Joel 2.23. Our Savior Christ ascribes unto our heavenly father,
the care of our soul and body, of our life, food, and raiment, Matthew. 6.32.
Nay he says, that he has numbered the hairs of our head, Mat. 10.30. And
therefore we are commanded to crave of him in prayer the bestowing of these
blessings, and the remooueall and deliverance from calamities, and if these
things thus happen unto us, by hearty thanksgiving to acknowledge them for his
peculiar blessings. Withal we pray, that God would take from us all ungodly
care, doubting, distrust, and covetousness. That we may be undoubtedly
persuaded, that our heavenly father is both willing and able to give daily
bread unto his children, that in quietness and hope may be our strength. Thus
Moses prays for the fruits of the earth, Deutr. 26.15. In the story of the
Gospel, the diseased leapers, the blind, etc. do pray. Isaac, Genesis 25.11. and
Hannah, 1. Sam. 1.11. pray against barrenness. Paul prays for Magistrates,
1. Tim. 2.2. Jeremy for the peace of the city, Ier. 29.7. And because God will
have us to labor and to use ordinary means for the getting of such things,
we pray that he would lay such things before us, and bless them, that he would
give increase unto him that planteth, and to him that waters, 1. Cor. 3.6.
for the blessing of the Lord makes rich without adding sorrow thereto, Prove.
10.22. And because we are commanded to ask Daily bread, it teaches us that we
may not pray for delights, for store, and abundance, to serve for riot and for
pride. And in a word, according to Salomons interpretation, Prove. 30.7. we pray
that we may not be ouercharged with too much wealth, nor oppressed with
overmuch want. And Solomon there adds, that we do also pray against those
evils or sins which arise of excess either in wealth or poverty. Likewise
according to S. Paul, Philip. 4.18. and 1. Tim. 6.6. we pray for contentation,
for a godly and wholesome use of every estate, that our soul do not loath
Manna, nor we desire the flesh pots of Egypt, nor quails grudgingly, Numb.
11.5. but may refer it to his good pleasure to distribute of the fishes among
the company, so much as he will, Ioh. 6.11. for to this petition also belongs
that which went before, that the fathers will be done. Now we call this [our
bread] not for that it is gotten by our own industry, or is due unto us by
some kind of right, but because God of his goodness has ordained and
appointed the same for the sustenance of this life, and so is made ours by the
free gift of God, or else because it is necessary to every one in regard of his
calling. Again God has decreed what and how much he will dispense to every
one out of his treasures of his good pleasure. And because S. Paul opposes
against the idle, and against unlawful means to get food, the commandment
of laboring, that every one may eat his own bread, Ephesians. 4.28. 2 Thessalonians. 3.8.
we do also well understand our bread, of that which is not violently taken
from others by wrong, or gotten from others in idleness, but as it is written,
Thou shall eat the labors of thy hands. Again, when as we pray for [our
bread,] it teaches us to be careful also for the necessities of others. Yea,
that those things which are given to me and given to thee, are so bestowed upon
us, that we should impart thereof unto other, Ephesians. 4.28. for it is not mine or
thine, but [our bread.] And therefore it is the poor man's bread which thou
detainest, when thou do not bestow it on the poor. This bread we are
commanded to pray for [this day,] Math. 6.12. Luke says, for the day, and
daily: to teach us, that God has care over us every moment. And this very word
[This day] serves to be a bridle to all foolish and ungodly care for the
morrow, whereby a man may restrain and moderate that excessive desire after
the things of this life wherewith al of us are troubled. And we may not think,
when we have some goods and wealth in readiness, as it were in a treasury, that
then we need not to make this petition, but even then also must we every day
use this prayer, that we may acknowledge our store to be the gift of God, and
our selves to be the Lords beggars, as Austine says: and that those things
which are already given us may be kept safe: but especially, that out of those
things that he has given he may make daily supply of things needful for us,
with a blessing, whereby he gives strength to bread for the sustenance of this
life, and causes the use thereof to be wholesome unto us: lest that should come
to pass which is written, Levit. 26.26. Ye shall eat and not be satisfied.
Ezekiel. 4.16. I will break the staff of bread, ye shall eat with care and with
astonishment: lest we should be found in the number of those that seek for,
and receive, their goods, and their whole portion in this life, and are barred
from the inheritance of heavenly and eternal blessings, Psalm. 17.14. Luke,
16.25. Which are fatted for the day of slaughter. Ier. 12.3. The ancient
writers as may be gathered by their interpretations, read simply (...) daily,
Luke 11. But all copies have not the article (...) that it should be referred
to bread; but [(...)] that is, either so much as will suffice each day
continually, or else so much as is sufficient for this day; that it may agree
with that which Matthew has [(...), to day.] And yet with Aristotle, politic.
2. bo kath' mran, signifies daily food. Also, our Savior Christ to put us in
mind of this petition, has observed and foreshewed this custom, in that
before meat he blessed it and gave thanks, Math. 14.19. and 15.36. and Luke,
24.31. And therefore Paul says, Tim. 4.2. It is a doctrine of devils, that
bids men abstain from meats, which God has created to be received of the
faithful with thanksgiving. And nothing ought to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving: for the creature is sanctified by the word and
prayer. Where by word, he understands that word of God, by which the use and
government of the creatures, which were created for our good, was given to men
in the beginning. Genesis 1.8. and after it was lost by sin, was restored again
by the intercession of the son, Genesis 9.2. And whereby the difference of
meats is taken away in the new testament. Colos. 2.16. That all things may be
pure, Titus, 1.15 By prayer also, he understands that whereby as adopted
children we crave that our own bread may be given unto us from the bountiful
hand of our father with his blessing, that so the use thereof may please God,
and we may enjoy the same with joyful and good conscience. For this also is
the special gift of God, as Solomon says: To eat of his own bread, to
drink and to rejoice, Eccles. 3.12. and 5.17.

Thus are these things to be asked in general for the whole body of the
Church, privately for our selves, and namely for others whose necessity we
know, that so we may apply this petition to the four general heads before
set down. I. What blessings we are to ask. II. What evils we are to pray
against, that they may be removed, taken away, and we delivered from them.
III. For what benefits we are to be thankful unto God. IV. What sins of
ours we must acknowledge and confess unto god in this petition for pardon and
amendment.

Forgive us our debts.] The asking of daily bread is not therefore put before
the remission of sins in the order of prayer, as though money were to be
sought for in the first place, and godliness learned after wealth is gotten.
For our Savior Christ bids us first seek the kingdom of God, Mat. 6.33.
But because we are naturally carried to seek worldly goods, and it is the will
of god, that his benefits should take footing in us in earthly things, and
thence lift up the mind to the knowledge of god, and to the desire of
spiritual and heavenly blessings: So Ioh. 4.53. The ruler with all his family
was brought to believe in Christ, by the outward curing of his son, and Genesis
28.20. Jacob says, If God will keep me in my journey, and give me food and
raiment, the Lord shall be my god. Therefore after the petition for bread, is
straight joined the petition for remission of sins, and they are knit
together by this copulative particle [ka, and,] to teach us, that with what
earnest desire, we are naturally carried to seek worldly goods, with the like
feruency of spirit, we should desire and care for those things, which concern
the eternal salvation of our souls: and the natural desire of bodily goods
and wealth, which notwithstanding Christ in this prayer does restrain and
moderate, may also teach us this by the conjunction copulative ka that we must
pray for food to god, and refer the issue and event to his good pleasure, as
has been said.

Now those which Mathewe calls [debts,] Luke, expounds [Sinnes] that we
may know what kind of debts are understood in this place. And it is a usual
Ghaldaeisme, to use the word Chab which signifies to be indebted or bound to,
for to sin, to do wickedly. And Christ in his sermons often times puts debt
for sins, offenses, and wickedness: as in the parable Math. 18.24. In the
story of the sinful woman, Luke. 7.47. And Luke 13. v. 2. Think ye that those
on whom the tower of Silo fell, were greater debtors then the rest? Here then
this phrase is to be marked and we must consider what instructions we must
learn from this, that sins are called debts. For seeing that men do either
frame unto themselves sins, from private superstition and from the traditions
men, or else from some Pharisaicall conceit do challenge unto themselves
justice and perfection: this name [debt] does lead us unto the law or
decaloge, as it were to an obligation, which is the rule of Gods justice,
showing, what our nature ought to be, what we ought to do and what to omit, in
what manner, with what perfection and purity. As Christ says, Luke, 17.10.
we have done those things which we were commanded to do. And Romans 8.12.
we are debtors to live after the spirit. And because that is the form of our
obligation unto God: it shows us by the contrary, how many ways we run
into exceeding great debt, by doing those things, which we ought not to do, by
leaving undone those things which we ought to do, and such things as we
perform, by doing them amiss, imperfectly, and impurely. The same phrase also
signifies a fault, guiltiness, an offense, and condemnation: as there are
many examples, when as for want of paying a debt one is condemned to some
punishment: so the greeks use the word (...), and (...), which signifies to
owe: as (...), to owe a penalty or forfeiture: (...) or (...): those that are
condemned to die: or condemned in a sum of money. So Christ expounds this,
Mat. 5.25. thou shall be cast into prison, and not come thence, till thou have
paid the uttermost farthing, Math. 18.25. When he had nothing to pay his master
commanded him to be soulde with all that he had. So that this very phrase
teaches us, to ask forgiveness both of the fault and of the punishment,
contrary to the distinction of the Papists.

Now for what end the Lord does often times lay upon the Godly in this life,
after the sin is forgiven, temporal punishments, not of curses, but of
correction, we have showed else where. And because the Lord inioyneth his
Apostles, and those who have god for their father, to make this petition for
pardon of sin every day, as we pray daily for bread: it shows against the
Pelagians, that no child of God is perfect and without sin in this life, who
has not need every day to humble himself and pray for the pardon of his
sins. It shows also against the Nonatians, that they, which sin after
baptism, and reconciliation, may obtain pardon if they turn again and
repent: for they which are baptized and reconciled unto god, are commanded to
pray for the pardon of their sins: and look what we ask in his name, by his
commandment, he has promised with an oath to give the same unto us. The one
whereof, (that is, the doctrine against the Pelagians,) does put us in mind of
our own weakness every day, and serves to bring us to humility. The other,
showing that the mercy and pardon of the Father is offered unto us every day,
if we turn unto him, serves to strengthen our faith that we should not
despair. And this mercy and pardon we are commanded to seek for by prayer,
not of the angels, or of Saints, but of God himself, in the use of those
means by which God will give remission of sins. And because we are commanded
to pray for the forgiveness of our debts, in this very thing, we do humbly
confess before God, against Popish Satisfaction, that we cannot make
sufficient payment or satisfaction for our sins, but altogether have need of
free pardon for our Mediators sake. And because our sins make a separation
betvveene God and us, Isa. 59.2. therefore we crave in this petition the favor
of God, reconciliation, and acceptance. And whosoever seeks for these things,
either by satisfactions or by merits, otherwise then from the mere mercy of
the father, for the payment, satisfaction, and merit of Christ alone, does not
seek them well neither shall ever attain unto them: for we are commanded to
ask the forgiveness of our debts: and the word [(...), forgiue] is opposed to
our payment, to our recompense and satisfaction; and signifies a free gift.
For the Greeks translate the Hebrew word Salach which signifies to be
sauourable and of mercy to pardon, by the word (...). Dan. 9.9. Unto God
belong mercies and pardons. Numb. 14.19. Pardon the iniquity of the people
according to the multitude of thy mercies.

Having thus expounded these things, we may easily observe what we are to ask
in this petition. We pray therefore because our debts are innumerable,
infinite and unmeasurable, that God will not enter into judgment with them,
that he will not impure them unto us, that he will not mark them, or require
them at our hands, but for Christ his sake mercifully to pardon them, to cast
them behind his back even into the bottom of the sea. Isa. 53.6. Mich. 7.19.
And because the wages of sin are the displeasure, the wrath or anger of God,
the curse of God and condemnation, with the punishments of this curse in body
and soul, in this life, and in the life to come, even eternal death: we
therefore beseech the Lord to assuage his deserved wrath, not to kindle it
against us, or pour it out upon us; to lay aside his indignation, and embrace
us with favor and mercy, to become and to continue unto us a gracious and
merciful father, and reward us not according to our sins, neither lay upon
us the punishment of his curse, nor cast us into prison till we have made
satisfaction, Math. 5.25. and 18.34. but pardoning both the fault and the
punishment of our sins, to set us free from the bond or obligation thereto,
that we may say with Paul, Who shall accusevs? who shall condemn us? It is
God that justifies and forgiueth, who shall condemn? Romans 8.33. And seeing
they are not generally debts or sins, but [Our debts,] therefore every one
that is to pray, must consider in each commandment of the law, what sins he
has run into and committed, he must distinctly observe whether they be
sins of presumption, Psalm. 19.14. or sins of infirmity and weakness: for so
shall we rightly pray for pardon, according to the difference of our sins.
And because sin is never forgiven unless we do repent, Ier. 5.7. and we of
our selves are careless, according to our hard heart which can not repent, we
do not weigh and consider and count our sins, how many, how great and how
grievous they be, we do not earnestly grieve for our sins, nor from our
heart detest and forsake them, we do not turn from them, but delight in our
sins, and declare the same as Sodom, Isa. 3.9. we have not the sear of God
before our eyes, neither be affected with the sense of Gods wrath: therefore
when we pray for the pardon of our sins, we do withal entreat, that God by
his spirit would cast out of us all security, that sin may not sleep or lie
dead in us, but may be raised by the Law: that he would take from us our stony
and impenitent heart, and give unto us a fleshie and repentant heart, which may
acknowledge and detest it own sins, which may bewail the same and fear in
the sense and acknowledgement of the wrath of God. And likewise we do also
pray, that he would lift us up again by true faith, and preserve us from
despair: for by says we receive the forgiveness of our sins. And because
this petition of forgiveness of sins is joined by a coniunctio^ copulative
unto the fourth petition, where we pray for daily bread for the day; therefore
we are commanded to make this petition for the pardon of our sins every day,
and withal we be admonished to take heed that we do not so heap our sins,
that we shall be found in the books of Gods judgment, Dan. 7.10. without
forgiveness: but we must every day pray that our daily sins may be blotted
out, that they be not written with a pen of iron, and that we may not heap
up unto our selves wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. And because God
has appointed and ordained certain means whereby he will bestow and we must
receive the forgiveness of sins, therefore we do likewise pray, that God
would give us such a mind, whereby we may not contemn or neglect, but daily
exercise the use of the kaies of heaven, the hearing of the word, the use of
the Sacraments, and other exercises of faith and prayer: that God would not
give us up to a reprobate sense, void of all grief, not regarding our sins
or the wrath of god, Romans 1.28. Ephesians. 4.17. And lastly we pray, that we may not
be prevented by death, before our sins be remitted and forgiven: and that
before the end of this life, we may use those means whereby the pardon of our
sins may ordinarily be granted unto us. These so many and so great blessings
must we conceive in our mind when we pray [forgiue us our sins:] whereby we
may plainly see, what devotion and intention of mind is required in the very
act of prayer.

Now all these things we must ask for the whole body of the Church in
general, privately for our selves, and namely for those whose necessity we
know: for we say [ Our debts, or trespasses.] And although the three latter
petitions be deprecatorie, that is, such wherein we pray against evils, yet
they may be well applied to the four general heads set down in the
beginning, and so ought to be. For as we have showed, that in the former
petitorie that is, such petitions wherein we crave some blessings.
petitions were contained prayers against evils, thanksgiuings, and
confessions of sins, so there is the same reason in these deprecatorie, they
contain in them petitions for some blessings, tha^ksgiuings, and confessions.

As we forgive our debtors.] Luke has it thus, [ka gr uto, for we also
forgive.] Now we must not take the similitude according to Matthew, to be
equal altogether, as though God should forgive with no more perfect measure of
mercy, then we forgive others: for the flesh fights against the spirit in
us, even then when we are reconciled to our neighbor. And God himself shows
inequality between them, Ose. 11.8. I should make thee as Adama and Zeboim,
but I will not execute the fiercenes of my wrath, for I am God and not man. And
speaking of a most seruent love of a mother, Isa. 49.15. he says, Though a
mother should forget her child, yet will not I forget thee. Neither does Luke
go about to set down the cause or reason, by which and for which we deserve
the pardon of our sins. For it is the free pardon of God proceeding of his
mere love and compassion toward us, Matthew. 18. v. 27. And Paul uses the
word (...), God of his mere favor has freely pardoned you: for he opposes
not our forgiving unto God, as any price or desert, that therefore God should
forgive us, because we have forgiven others before. But he says, Ephesians. 4.32. be
ye courteous one to another, and tender hearted, freely forgiving one another,
even as God for Christ's sake freely forgave you Colos. 3.13. Forbearing and
forgiving one another: like as Christ forgave: even so do you. So that this
phrase does not import the cause, whereon the pardon of God depends, but as
Cyprian says, it is a condition and pledge thereof. For as children are most
commonly made worse by the too gentle entreating of the parents: so our corrupt
flesh, hearing that gods pardon is always ready for those which pray unto him
for it and repent, takes liberty thence to sin more freely afterward, in
hope of obtaining pardon easily. And thus do we abuse that endless benefit of
Gods free pardon, as though it were some privilege of filthiness and unlawful
liberty. Therefore Christ, by this clause here added, does bind the intent
and purpose of them that pray, as it were by a public condition and promise,
that they will hereafter beware of all sin, amend their life, and follow
after godliness. It is therefore a most weighty admonition, by way of a vow or
promise in the sight of our heavenly father, that we do not abuse this
fatherly gentleness and readiness to forgive, unto liberty of sinning: but
do promise and as it were vow ame^dment of life. And that general doctrine
concerning this good purpose of amendment of life, Christ propounds in a
special example of forgiving one another in brotherly sort, very fitly
agreeing to the words of this petition, as we have said, Math. 5.39. about
turning to the other cheek. And because the flesh being corrupt with a root
of bitterness. Heb. 12.13. and of it self full of impatience, desirous of
revenge, persisting in anger, is most far from reconciliation and
forgiveness: therefore we do also pray that this root of bitterness may be
lossened, beaten down and mortified in us by the holy Ghost: and a love of
unity, reconciliation and forgiueing may be kindled in us, that this may never
be imputed unto us, that we have not forgiven one another with all our heart,
but have had the flesh still striving against it.

And because we cannot live in this world without many sins against the Lord,
neither converse among our breethren, without many offenses one against
another: therefore Christ joined both these together in this fist petition,
that so both peace of conscience toward God, by the continual forgiveness of
sins, and brotherly charity, wherewith God is chiefly delighted might be
preserved among men by continual reconciliation and forgiving one another. And
therefore does he join brotherly pardoning with gods forgiving, as he shows
in the parable, Mat. 18.23. Which does most plainly expound this petition that
he may the more forcibly break and correct the wicked impatience and
bitterness of our heart, and that he may take from us all those reasons which
we are wont to pretend and heap up very gloriously in the defense of revenge
as it were by our own right, concerning the greatness and multitude of our
neighbors offenses, concerning our own credit, and the benefits we have
bestowed upon our neighbor, by comparing the debts which we that are servants
do owe unto god, with the debts of fellow-seruantes, where for the most part
cach one owes something unto another. For either we do ignorantly and at
unawares give the occasion unto our neighbor when he offends us: or else
being offended and hurt do sin again in impatience and bitterness.
Whereupon S. James says, Confess your sins one unto another, and pray one
for another. James, 5.16. And lest we should be offended at our neighbor for
his often offending of us, and be wearied with renewing our pardons and
reconcilings so often times, we have been taught before, that we must every
day repeat unto god that petition [Forgiue us our debts:] that we might forgive
our neighbor, not unto seaue^ times but unto seauentie seven times. And by
this form of condition and promise, [eue^ as we also forgiue] he does most
notably provoke and prick us. forward to be desirous and ready to forgive our
breethren. That we might remember our selves to falsify our faith solemnly
given and bound in this petition, unless we do forgive our neighbor; and may
also know that we pray for the vengeance of god against our selves without
compassion of forgiveness. And so, as Chrysostom says, We do not pray unto
God, but provoke God, we do not obtain favor, but we pronounce the sentence
of condemnation against our selves, and at the last judgment shall be judged
according to that sentence, when we say [eue^ as we also forgive.] For by this
means God is moved to withdraw and hold back the benefit of remission of
sins, as the parable says, Mat. 18.34. Neither does this shift any whit
help unmerciful men that (as Chrysostom. writes) some men when they pray
omit that promise: or that some do in the mean time use other prayer where
that clause is not to be had: Nay by this wile whereby they go about to deceive
God himself, they deserve the greater indignation. For that sentence of God
abides sure, If ye will not forgive men their trespasses, neither will your
heavenly father forgive you.

By debtors here according to the Chaldie phrase before expounded, we
understand those that have offended us, which have done something against us, or
as Paul expounds it, Colos. 3.13. against whom we have some quarrel. And
Saint Luke adds [we forgive every man that is indebted unto us.] For seeing
by nature we are wont to be more easy and gentle unto some, and harder
against others, and do with less sorrow and grief bear those injuries and
wrongs which are done unto us by great men, then those which are done by our
equals or inferiors: therefore he takes away all respect in this brotherly
forgiving, when he says [we forgive every one that is indebted to us.] and
here he speaks not properly and principally of civil debt, though that also
is to be forgiven, or at least borne with, if it can not be demanded and paid,
without the loss and overthrow of our neighbor, as the parable plainly
teaches us, Mat. 18.33. Therefore Austine does well advise us, more to eschew
the hatred of our brother, then other sins: for (says he) that which thou
headest offended in other senses and desires, might here be cured, when thou
say, [Forgiue us our debts.] but thine implacable hatred, and desire of
revenge spoils unto thee that, which is added, [Euen as we forgive others:]
and that being spoiled, all thy sins are retained and nothing forgiven. Now
he that did the wrong, and he that is wronged, both are enjoined to be
reconciled: Mat. 5.23. If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there
reme^brest that thy brother has ought against thee, that is, has any quarrel
against thee, as being wronged by thee: go thy way, and first be reconciled
to thy brother. For without repentance thou can not deal with God, or ask
forgiveness. And he which has the wrong done unto him is commanded. Luke
17.4. If thy brother sin against thee seven times in a day, and seaue^ ^imes
in a day turn again to thee: saying, it repeteth me, thou shall forgive him,
yea not unto seven times, but unto seventy seven times: and whatsoever is thus
loosed in earth, shall be also loosed in heaven. Mar. 18.18. But if thy brother
who has offended thee repent not, though thou forgive him, yet God in heaven
does not forgive him, seeing he repents not. So that Christ speaks of
public reconciliation, Luke 17.3. And his meaning is not, that we may or ought
to keep and exercise our anger, hatred, and bitterness, that is, not forgive
our adversary, unless he do repent and ask thee forgiveness. For the
commandment is general, Mark. 11.25. When ye shall standready to pray,
forgive if ye have any quarrel against any man, that your heavenly father may
also forgive you. Therefore in heart we do forgive our debtors privately, even
when they repent not, neither ask us forgiveness. Now this brotherly
forgiveness contains thus much, that we should either not conceive anger or
hatred against our neighbor which wrongeth us unjustly; or else that we should
lay aside, and put away anger, hatred, and enmity conceived against our
neighbor for wrong done unto us: again that we should neither take revenge
neither think upon, or endeavor to take revenge upon our neighbor; nay, not
covet or desire that either God himself or any other should lay temporal or
eternal punishment on him for wrong done unto us, unless order of justice so
require. But we must rather wish them godly amendment, that being converted
they may be saved eternally, and not be condemned: and if they have not
repented, we must desire that they may in time be chastened and corrected in
pity and compassion, with fatherly scourges of bitte and bridle, that so they
may be spared eternally. And thus we ought to love our enemies, wishing and
praying for all things that may further them unto salvation, and to pray for
them that persecute us, that this sin may not be laid unto their charge.

And lead us not into temptation] There be diverse kinds of temptations. For God
is said to tempt, but yet unto good, when as by setting before us some peril,
by sending some adversity, or by deferring help and deliverance, he tries,
exercises, and proves our amendment, our faith, hope, patience, obedience
and constancy. But temptation or allurement unto evil comes either from the
devil, or from the flesh, or from the world. And the devil properly is called
the tempter, 1 Thessalonians. 3.5. least the tempter had tempted you: to wit, when
either by inward suggestio^, or else by some outward occasions of prosperity or
adversity, either on the right hand or on the left, he goes about to draw us
from that which is good, or to seduce us unto evil. The flesh tempts unto
evil, when we are allured and drawn away by our own evil concupiscence, that
lust might conceive sin, and sin bring forth death. The world tempts
either by evil examples, as it were by laying stumbling blocks or offenses
before us, or else by wicked persuasions. And as ancient writers say; the world
flattereth, that it may deceive: or terrifieth, that it may confound us. For
every such temptation comes either by such things as are pleasant, delectable,
and to be desired, through covetousness, wicked hope and love: or else by those
things that are sorrowful, fearful and terrible, in fear, dread and flight.
And to explane the meaning of this petition, that distinction of Gregory is
very fit: that temptation is caused by suggestion, by delight, and consent.

That distinction also of ancient writers is very convenient for this purpose:
saying, that the devil uses these wiles, these crafts and deceits in
temptations to overthrow them that are wise and strong. I. When affliction
continues long, and deliverance is deferred. II. When the misery seems too
exceeding great, singular, and strange. III. When under the color of some
great good, he does closely move a man to take in hand some thing which is
either very dangerous, or else beyond our strength and calling. IV. When he
does cloak and cover vice under the name of virtue, as covetousness under the
color of providence: cruelty under the color of justice: pride is painted
under the name of abraue mind: ignorance is counted simplicity: wast or
prodigality is taken for liberality, etc. V. He abuses peace, quietness, and
rest, to bring them by little and little unto security. Now here we are not
commanded to pray that God would not make trial of us by his temptations: for
we rejoice in tribulation, knowing that affliction brings forth patience, and
patience trial, and trial hope, Romans 5.4. Iam. 1. v. 2. Count it exceeding
great joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. Neither do we pray that we may
be altogether free from the darts of satan, of the flesh, and the world. For he
that is not tempted, what does he know? says the son of Syrach, chap.
34.10. and Austin upon the 60. psalm. says, By temptation comes our increase.
For no man knovves himself but he that is tempted. No man can be crowned but
he that overcomes: nor overcome unless he strive: neither can he strine
unless he have enemies, and those that will prove him. And in the 14. book
of the city of God, he says: If we have no temptations nor troubles at all,
while we bear about the frailty of this life, we live not well. And very
well may this be understood of the prayer of Christ, John, 17.15. where he
says: I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou
keep them from evil. So that the words of this petition have not this sense:
that we may not be tempted: but [that we may not be lead into temptation:] And
as Bernard notes out of Cyprian, it is one thing to be tempted, or assaulted
with temptation: and another thing to be lead into temptation, to wit, when
we are laid open unto temptation and are exercised therewith: and another thing
to be carried into temptation, to wit, when being opressed and overwhelmed with
temptation, we fall down under it, and are overcome thereby, either consenting
or yielding wholly unto it. Or else, to be lead into temptation is to be
delighted with the suggestion of some sin: to be carried wholly into it, is
to give full consent to the temptation. Now Christ uses the word (...), which
signifies, not so much to lead into, as to carry into: as Austine also
observed, when any thing is said to be lead or carried into. The Greek
interpreters translate Hebi which comes of Bo, by the verb (...), which
signifies to bring to, to bring upon, to lead into, to carry into. And the
Hebrew word is used in the same sense about the worshipping of the calfe, Exodus
32. v. 21. Thou have brought upon thy people a great sin. Genesis 26.10. Thou
should have brought a trespass upon us. Genesis 27.12. I shall bring a curse
upon me and not a blessing, Psalm. 66.11. Thou have brought us into a snare. 3.
King. 21.29. I will not bring evil in his days.

But the phrase, To lead or carry into temptation, whereupon the meaning of
this petition depends, may best be understood by comparing together the use
thereof. The Scripture speaks thus of the assault or sending of temptations.
1. Cor. 10.13. No temptation has taken, laid hold on, or assailed you, but
such as pertain to man. Iam 1.2. [(...):] which does not barely signify to
fall into temptation, but to run into, to bite upon temptations. And that is
yet more grievous which Paul says, 1. Timoth. 6.6. [(...)] they fall into
temptations as it were into a snare, which drown men in destruction and
perdition. Luke 22. v. 40. Pray, least ye enter into temptation [(...)] that
is, least at unawares being unprovided, without armor and fight, ye be
wrapped in temptation, which may overcome you, yea drown you. Whence it is
plain, that we are lead into temptation, when we are left unto our selves,
destitute of the help of God, and are driven into, are plunged, thrust down,
or cast headlong into the wiles and mighty assaults of the devils
temptations, and are suffered to be overwhelmed therewith, as though we were
every way ensnared in a ginne. And we do not pray without naming any person
only, that we may not be lead into temptation; but speaking unto our heavenly
father, we say: [Lead not thou us into temptation.] And Austin notes that many
read this petition after this manner: Suffer us not to be lead into temptation.
But the meaning is more full, if it be read, Lead us not, etc.

And because the deceit of temptation does far exceed our weakness: for we
fight not with flesh and blood, but against the powers of darkness, and
spiritual deceits, Ephesians. 6.12. And there is great danger lest we should yield in
temptation and be overcome, and so drowned in perdition. Therefore first of all
we pray, because Satan has not liberty to tempt us so much either as he would
or could do, but so much as God permits and gives him leave, Job. 1.12.
that our heavenly father would not cast us off, and deliver us to the lust, to
the treasons and power of this te^pter, but that he would dispose of, and
moderate the temptation, and not suffer us to be tempted above that, which by
his grace and gift we are able to bear, as Paul says, 1. Cor. 10.13. II. When
Satan desires to tempt us, or to winnow us, we pray that our heavenly father
would not forsake us, and leave us alone unto our selves, neither deprive us of
his present grace and help in the fit of temptation; but that he would be
present with us and assist us, to drive away, to put back, to suppress and
bridle the devil, ministering strength and courage unto us, that being strong
in the Lord, and in the power of his might, Ephe. 6.13. We may bear the
temptation, Iam. 1.12. We may withstand it, 1. Pet. 5.10. and may not yield,
nor be overcome, nor faint in the time of temptation, Luke 8.13. or be
overwhelmed in perdition, 1. Tim. 6.9. but Ephe. 6.11. dispatching them al, may
be able to fight and stand fast, and in the time of temptation may be kept from
evil, Ioh. 17.15. And that Christ our mediator Luke, 22.32. may pray for us,
that our faith, our hope, our patience, our striving and constancy may not
fail. III. Because we our selves are secure, unprovided and drousie in time of
temptation, not considering the wiles and the power of this tempter, and our
own manifold infirmities, neither are we very much careful about the danger
of temptation: we therefore pray, that the Lord himself would raise us out of
the sleep of security, as he teaches his Apostles, Luke 22. v. 46. That we
may watch, praying with all carfulness and vehemence, lest we enter into
temptation, that God himself would arm us, giving us wisdom and strength
that, that we may well oppose the same against temptations. IV. We pray that
god would give us patience, consolation and hope. Romans 5.4. that howelong or
how grieuouslie soever god will have us to be tempted, we may be able to bear
it, being contented with the grace of god, as it was answered to Paul, 2. Cor.
12.9. V. we pray that when we are bound in the snare of temptation, and cannot
thence deliver our selves, nor find any way out, that he would give such an
issue, 1. Cor. 10.13. that me may sustain and bear it, that it may be
profitable for us, and turn to the glory of God. VI. Because he knows we
have but small strength, we pray that Christ would keep us from the dangerous
and deadly hour of temptation, as it is Apoc. 3.3. VII. We pray that God
would keep us in the time of temptation, from the presumption of Peter, and
from Saul's despair. VIII. that god in his indignation would not punish one
sin with another, and so lead us into dangerous temptation as he did David.
2. Sam. 24. 1. and 1. Chron. 21. v. 1. and that he would not give us up to the
lusts of our own heart, Psalm. 81.13. or into a reprobate sense, Romans 1.28. or
to hardness of heart that we should not grieve, Ephesians. 4.18. And this
interpretation being gathered out of the scripture it self, is the plainest
and most safe.

And these things we must pray for, in general for the whole Church, privately
for our selves, and namely for others that are tempted, craving deliverance
from evils, praying for blessings, giving thanks for benefits received, and
confessing that we do not manfully strive against temptations, that we yield
unto them, that we do not prepare our selves against temptations, that we take
not the armor of God, that we our selves minister baits unto the tempter, we
sweep and dress up the house, Luke, 11.25. we give our members as weapons unto
the tempter, Romans, 6.19. All which points we have expounded before, and here
only do briefly point out the leads of instructions, leaving to set down at
large the full meditations that this petition affoardes. Now this petition
contains, a general confession of the whole Church of the weakness and
infirmity even of the children of God in this life. For when we pray, that we
may not yield unto temptation nor be overcome thereof, we acknowledge and
confess, that by our own strength we are not able to resist any temptations:
but this is the work of gods grace which must follow forthwith, after we have
received new spiritual strength in regeneration.

But deliver us from euill] Some would have this, to be no peculiar petition by
it self: for the aduersitiue particle which is here used, has this use and
force, to join two clauses into one sentence. So as that which we do
negatiuely pray against in the former clause [Lead us not:] We do
affirmatively pray for the contrary thereto, in this aduersitiue clause. I
mean not to contend with any man about this matter: yet I think they do not
amiss in the doctrine of the Catechism, which for the better instructing of
the simple call this the seventh petition. For it is larger, and contains
more in it then the sixth petition concerning temptation. But leaving these
fruitless contentions, I come to the exposition.

The word (...) in the common greek tongue signifies both these things. I. To
defend, to protect, to keep and preserve from evil, that we fall not into it,
thus Homer uses it, Iliad. 10. Where it is joined with the word (...) which
signifies to keep, and Ilia. 15 (...), which defends thee before. II. It
signifies to take and deliver out of evil, wherein we now are. And both these
significations do very fitly agree to this petition, wherein we pray to be kept
and to be delivered from evil. The greek interpreters translate those hebrew
words which signif^e to pluck away and to deliver out of the emmies hand, by
this word (...). And so it is used for the most part in the new Testament. But
1. These. 1.10. it seems to contain both these significations being applied
to Jesus [(...)] which both delivers us and keeps us from the wrath to
come. Like as Romans 5.9. in steed thereof is used the word (...), to save. By
the life of Christ we shall be saved from wrath. And Ioh. 17.11. Christ having
respect to this petition uses the word (...), to keep: I pray not that thou
should take them out of the world, but that thou keep them from evil. So
that we do well understand both in this place, to be kept, and to be delivered
from evil, [(...).] Chrysostom reads it in the masculine gender and
expounded it of the devil himself: who is not only evil in himself, but is
the author and procurer of all evil, so far forth as it is hurtful and
deadly unto us, (...).
who is our adversary, seeking to devour us, and like a spiteful person
rejoices at our evil. And in the books of the new testament, Satan is
understood by [(...)] when it is put with an article without a substantive. And
[t poeron] in the neuter gender put absolutely, for adversity, is scarsly used
in the new testament. But most commonly it is joined with a substantive, as
evil men, an evil heart, evil works, evil thoughts. And yet the greek
interpreters call [(...)] an evil thing: understanding either sin, as Gene.
39, 9. of adultrie with his masters wife: or hindrance, danger, loss,
adversity, as 1. Kings, 25.18. To render evil for good, which in the new
restament is called (...) evil. In this petition therefore we understand,
evil of it self, in the masculine gender for the devil himself. Also in the
neuter gender, we take it, for sin, and for any hurts, dangers, adversities,
which do either presently burden the soul, or the body, our goods and good
name, or else are at hand, and hang over our head.

First herefore we pray, seeing the devil walks about like a roaring Lion,
seeking whom he may devour, that God would mercifully defend, preserve,
keep, save and protect us from him, from all his wiles and snares and
temptations, and from his cruelty: and if he have entangled and caught us in
his snares and temptations, we pray that God would pluck us thence and deliver
us. II. we pray that god would keep us from every sin or evil work, that
we sall not into sin. III. We pray that he would keep, protect, and defend
us, from the miseries of the life to come, that is from everlasting pains, and
from all dangers, losses, hindrances, and adversities of this life, of soul
and body, of goods and good name: that he would stop, repel, and turn back
these things as they be evils: or if we be already laden with these evils, we
pray that in his mercy he would free and deliver us from them. And those things
we propound unto God under the name of evil, that is, if he know, and
perceive, and judge them to be evil unto us, that is, not profitable and
wholesome, but dangerous and deadly. IV. Because we desire, many things to be
given us, which we judge good and profitable for us, as also to be preserved
and delivered from many things, which we scarsly know whether they would be
profitable unto us or not: therefore we add in the conclusion of this prayer;
If we ask any thing which he knows and perceiues would not be wholesome but
hurtful for us, that he would keep and deliver us from evil. V. If God see
that it is not good and profitable for us, that he should take from us the
messenger of Satan which buffetteth us, or else that we should be kept and
delivered from adversity, then we pray that he would give us patience,
obedience, consolation and hope, that we may acknowledge his fatherly care over
us, least that which God sends upon us for our good, become hurtful unto us.
Like as in former times, they used to pray in adversity with very witty and
godly brevity: vt Deus aut liberet, aut mitiget, aut data patientia salvet:
that God would either deliver them, or assuage their misery, or preserve them
by giving them patience. VI. Because these protections and deliverances from
evil in this life, are not full and perfect but only in part; for there do
daily arise new assaults of the devil, of sin and adversities as they are
laid before us: therefore we pray that at the length we may be fully, perfectly,
and wholly delivered and set free from all assaults and temptations of the
devil, of sin, of dangers and adversities whatsoever. And because this
cannot befall us in this world and in this life, which is a warrefare, and as
the Greeks translate it [(...)] that is, the rouing of a pirate: therefore we
ask eternal life in this prayer which we believe in the Creed, that we may
be translated out of this world, where the devil is prince, where the earth in
this vale of misery brings forth thorns and brambles of affliction, into an
other world of eternal life, where we shall be free and safe from all evils,
that we may not always thus be subject and lie open to the darrs, and
temptations, and assaults of the devil, the world, the flesh and calamities.
So Paul says, Romans 7.24. Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from
this body of death? 2. Tim. 4.16. he shows a godly and excellent affection,
when he says: At my defense all men for sooke me, but the Lord assisted me and
I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion: and the Lord will deliver me from
all evil, and will keep me or preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom, to
whom be praise for ever and ever: Amen. In which words he delivers the very
last petition and conclusion of the Lords prayer. VII. We are taught in this
petition to lift up our heads, to think upon, and to desire an other blessed
life to come which is eternal, where shall be full deliverance from all evil.
And because we are too much occupied and plunged in the matters and affairs of
this life and of this world; we do also request, that God would inspire,
excite, kindle, beget and preserve in us this meditation and desire: that we
covet to be dissolved, that is, to leave this life, and to pass to another
blessed life. And because every kind of death is not the end of misery, for
the death of the wicked is the beginning of their torments, Luke 16.22. but the
death of the godly is a deliverance from all evil, and a beginning of
everlasting happiness: therefore when we say, Deliver us from evil, we do also
desire, that our heavenly father would keep us from evil death, that we may
not die the death of the uncircumcised, Ezekiel. 28.10. or the death of sinners,
which is worst of all, Psalm. 34.22. that we may not die careless in our
sins, unprepared without repentance, Ioh. 8.24. But that he would grant unto
us a godly and saving end of this life, that we may die in the Lord, Apoc.
14.13. that whether we live or die we may be the lords, Romans 14.8. whether we
abide in the pilgrimage of this life, or be called home to our own country by
death, yet still we may please the Lord, 2. Corin. 5.9. Furthermore we pray
that God would put into us a care and desire to provide betime for our selves
those things which are necessary to dying well, that we may be prepared for
death, least we want oil in our lamps when the bridegroom comes and calls
for us, Math. 25.3. And that in the last hour of this life we may have true
repentance, the word, the Sacraments, faith, hope, the spirit of grace and of
prayer, that when we are to die we may be found in Christ, Philip. 3.9.
having that righteousness which is of God through the faith of Christ, that so
we may rightly commend our soul into the hands of our Father. And if we be
not found sufficiently prepared, we pray that he would not suffer us to be
prevented by sudde^ death at unawares, but would mercifully grant us space for
such preparation, that our death may be a deliverance from all evil, and a
passage out of this vale of miseries to eternal life. So that in this petition
we beseech the Lord mercifully to be present with us in that last and dangerous
conflict, wherein our adversary goes about most busily, marking whether he
can snatch us away and devour us, that so we may be kept and delivered from
all evil. And that he would strengthen us, that we may not fear to die, not
be afraid of death, nor taste thereof: but may depart in peace, and so when we
die may be truly delivered from all evil.

These things we must pray for in this petition, both generally and in
particular, craving blessings of the Lord, praying against evils, giving thanks
for benefits received, and confessing our own sins.

For thine is the kingdom, The conclusion.
etc.] The latin copies want this clause, which is not in S. Luke: neither have
latin writers expounded it, as Cyprian, Ambrose, Jerome, and Austin. But all
Greek copies have it constantly: and the Syrian interpreter translated it:
Chrysostom also expounds it. Likewise Paul, 2. Tim. 4.17. rehearsing the
last petition of Deliverance from all evil, adds this clause, to whom be
glory for ever and ever. And this clause does very fi^ly conclude the whole
prayer. For it does specially put God in mind of his promise, and as it were of
his office, showing the cause wherefore we ask those things of God, and hope
that he will give them unto us.

For thine is the kingdom.] Here he understands not Gods universal kingdom
over all creatures; but that which is called the kingdom of heaven, the
kingdom of God and of Christ in the church. And these things which we ask are
the blessings of this kingdom, which God has therefore ordained for our
necessity, against the devil, the world, and the flesh, that for so much as we
cannot have from our selves those things we ask in prayer, neither can attain
unto the^ by our selves, we might yet receive the^ from his hand in his own
kingdom. And it belongs to the office of our king in this kingdom, that he
should keep and defend us against the devil, the world, and the flesh; and
that he should bestow those blessings on them that believe and pray unto him,
as he has commanded us to ask, and wherein he has promised to grant our
requests.

This prayer then in these words does put God in mind of his commandment, of
his promise, and of his office in his kingdom: and withal shows the cause,
why a man asks these things, and seeks for them not to any other but to God
alone.

Thine is the power.] These words teach us, that god has these things which
we ask, in his hand and in his power, although the power of the world and of
the devil be great, and that he only can give these things unto us perfectly
and for our good. Therefore do we crave these things of him alone.

And glory.] In this word, faith shows unto God, that this is a glorious
thing unto him, and does greatly turn to the glory, and praise, and renown
of his mercy, power, and bountifulnes, if he shall hear us, and shall grant
unto us those things which we ask according to his commandment and promise,
as citizens of his kingdom. So that in this clause we pray, that God for
Christ's sake, whose kingdom properly this is, of his grace, whereby he
governs this kingdom, would hear us and grant our requests, for the
setting forth of the bounty, of the power and glory of this kingdom.

Secondly, this clause also serves to stir up and to confirm the faith of
them that pray in assurance that they shall be heard. For seeing [thine is the
kingdome] which is therefore ordained, because in it he will bestow such
benefits, he has commanded us to ask them in his kingdom, and has promised
to here us: therefore in these words faith shows it self certain of gods good
will toward us, and with all professes, that in prayer it relieth not on any
merits or worthiness of it own, but on the favor of God alone for Christ's
sake: for it is the kingdom of Christ and of grace. Then to the will of God he
adds power for he says: [ Thine is the power. So that being assured, that
god is both willing, and able to perform those things which we ask: faith
therefore neither can nor ought to doubt of Gods hearing of us. And because we
say: [Thine is the glory:] therefore faith makes account, that god who is
faithful in performing the glory of his truth, of his grace, and of his
power, will surely accomplish those things which we ask, lest the heathen say;
where is now their god.

Thirdly this clause shows us, how we are to use those benefits which we
desire in prayer, for what end we are to ask them, and whither we are to
refer them, and withal here we do promise, to what end we will refer them,
and how we will use them, or what thankfulness we do promise to God. To
wit, as it is said, Psalm, 145.10. They shall show the glory of thy kingdom,
and speak of thy power: to cause thy power to be known to the sons of men,
and the glorious renown of thy kingdom. Now what is that glory of Gods
kingdom, and how it is to be renowned, that whole psalm teaches from the
beginning to the end. Aman in hiphil signifies to trust, or to believe. Whence
comes Amen. and Emunah faith, and truth.
And thus does this clause or conclusion of the Lords prayer teach us very many
things.

Amen:] This is an hebrew word, derived of a verb which signifies to believe,
and to trust: whence also do come the names of faith, and truth in the
hebrewe tongue. It is very significant, and therefore is used in other tongues.
And because in this particle [ame^.] the nature of justifying says in applying
the promise and in prayer, is notably set out: we are therefore diligently to
mark the signification thereof which, that I may the better expound, I will
propound example; of it distinctly. This particle [amen] is especially thus
used.

In cursings, Deutron. 27.15.16. etc. Cursed is he etc. and the people shall
say, Ame^. Numb. 5.22. If thou have not defiled the bed, etc. But if thou have
defiled it, etc. god make thee accursed, etc. and the woman shall answer, amen,
amen. And Rabbi David says, this was spoken by way of prayer, or by way of
assuming, whereby they took unto themselves and upon themselves those curses
if they had offended.

II. It is used for the most part in prayer or invocation, in blessing and
thanksgiving, 1. Cor. 14.16. when prayers and thanksgiuings are rehearsed, the
Church answers, Amen. Psalm. 41.14. Amen, amen, Nehem. 8.6. Ezra blessed the
Lord, and all the people lifted up their hands, and answered Amen, amen. Tobi.
9.12. they all say, Amen to the blessing upon the marriage. Apoc. 7.12. they
worshipped God, saying, Ame^. praise, and glory, and wisdom, and thanks, and
honor, and power, and might be unto our God for evermore, Amen. And so it is a
note of wishing and desiring: to wit, that faith in a true desire of heart
wishes, and by true hope expects, that those things which we ask in prayer
may be done and performed. Thus in the story of Samosatenus with Eusebius, and
with Ambrose in the 4. book of the sacraments, when as in the administration
of the Lords supper, the bread of the Lord is given to every one with these
words: Take, eat, this is the body of Christ given for thee, for the
remission of sins: Then every communicant answered Amen. And 3. Kings, 1.36.
there is a notable explication of this particle, Amen. For when David had
commanded that Solomon should be anointed king to succeed him, and had further
commanded them to say, God save king Solomon: Benias answered and said, Amen:
Let the Lord God of my Lord the king say so. Munster says, it is the
imparatiue passive of the first conjugation for Heamen, that the meaning of it
should be this; let this be true, let this be ratified, and confirmed of the
Lord. The Chaldie dictionarie says, it is the future tense, having the first
letter cut off, Ieamen: This is warranted 2. Chr. 1.9. Ieamen deuere^a, etc.
Let thy word be verified, etc.
let this be confirmed or stablished. The Greeks regarding the root have most
notably translated that place, 3. King. 1.36. (...): So be it, the Lord God
ratify and do the word of my lord the King.

III. This particle [Amen] is also used, when faith receives a promise
propounded. So 1. Chron. 16.36. after the rehearsal of the promises of God,
this is added: And let all the people say, Amen. Ier. 11. v. 5. The Lord
repeateth this promise: I will be your God, and you shall be my people, that I
may confirm mine oath, etc. and I answered says Jeremy, Amen, O Lord and
Ierem. 28.6. when Hananie prophesied of prosperity: Jeremy says, Amen: and
adds a large exposition of that word, Amen: The Lord so do, the Lord
confirm thy words, that it may be so as thou have prophesied Luke 1. Marie
has notably expressed the signification of this particle Amen: Be it unto me
according to thy word. And these significations come all to one almost: which
yet for plainer explications sake, I thought good thus to distinguish, that the
properties of faith in applying the promise, and in prayer, might the better be
considered by the use of this particle, Amen.

IV. Amen, is used for a note of affirmation and asseveration: as 2. Cor. 1.20.
The promises of God are not yea, and nay, (to wit, as though in them one
thing might be said in word, and an other thing thought in the heart: or else
might be promised in words, and in deed be not performed) but in Christ they
are yea, and Amen: where the Hebrew word Amen, is expounded by the Greek
particle na, which is a note of affirming and asseuering. Isa. 65.16. He that
shall bless himself in the earth, shall bless himself in God Amen: and he
that swears shall swear in God Amen. Whereas the greek word na, so the word
Amen also is a note of swearing when any thing is affirmed and avouched, as
though an oath were added thereto: and this last signification agrees to those
places in the gospels where Christ says, Ame^, I say unto you. And because the
root Ama^ with those words that are derived thereof, has the signification of
truth, certenty, stability, constancy, etc. therefore if it be referred to the
person speaking, it bears this sense: I speak not at randum, rashly or
lightly: but truly, certainly, earnestly, and constantly: and that is, I say, I
affirm and avouch as though I added an oath; or if it be referred to that
which is spoken, it has this sense: that which I say, is no wavering thought,
or doubtful opinion, but it is true, certain, sure, and stable which I say:
which is neither changed nor altered, but is undoubtedly so decreed in the
will of God, and shall indeed be so accomplished. And the doubling of the word
Amen, Amen, does enforce the asseueration, and may well be expressed in our
suparlatiue degree, which the hebrews want: It is most sure and firm that I
say.

Furthermore this particle amen, in the greek translation of the old
testament, is sometime expressed by the verb (...), fiat, be it so, Deutron.
27.15. and 26. Psalm. 41.14.3. Kings, 1.36. Numb. 5.22. Sometime it is
translated by the word (...), truly, Ier. 28.6. sometime the hebrew word is
used still, 1. Chron. 16.36. let the people say ame^, so Ier, 11.5. Nehem. 8.6.
Tob. 9.12. the particle amen, is used in the greek tongue; and so it is kept
still in the new testament, where sometime the exposition of it is set down.
For that which is said of the widow, Mar. 12.43. Amen, I say, etc. in Luke
21.3. is thus expounded: (...): surely I say unto you.

Now whereas this prayer is concluded with this particle Amen, it teaches us,
that when we come to the end of our prayer, we must consider, with what
devotion we have prayed, that it be no cold mumbling over of words. Therefore
after we have laid open our necessities and our requests, at the end our mind
is excited and stirred up, to conceive an earnest request from the very heart,
whereby the heat of our desire is kindled and inflamed, which with inward
sighs does humbly and devoutly wish and desire that our prayer may be ratified
and confirmed with God, that our heavenly father for Christ our Mediators
sake, would bow down his ear, would hear and receive our prayer, and
perform those things which we desire [Amen, Amen:] let that be done, let that
be done, O Lord, which I have asked. II. By this particle, faith does show it
self not to doubt, or to be carried about with the waves of mistrust, whether
God will hear us and will perform those things which we ask: but to make
sure account, that as God has commanded us to ask, and has promised that he
will hear, so he will faithfully perform and accomplish our requests. Again
by this particle, faith does stir up it self, it does uphold, defend, and
confirm it self against doubtings. For it takes the word [Amen] from that
promise, Amen, amen, I say unto you, what soever ye shall ask the father in
thy name, he will give it you: and hereto he ioynes his own Amen, as it were a
seal, because he makes full account that God is faithful and true, Ioh. 3.
And hence Jerome very finely calls this particle [Amen] the seal of prayer.

FINIS.

