A PROTESTATION Of the Most High and Mighty PRINCE CHARLES LODOWICKE, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, Archidapifer, and Prince Elector of the sacred Empire,
Duke of Bavaria, etc.



Translated out of the High Dutch, and Printed at LONDON for RICHARD WHITAKER,
M.DC.XXXVII.

THE

PROTESTATION

Is against

All the unlawful, and violent proceedings and actions, intended and practiced
to his Highness, his Brethren, and near Kindreds prejudice.

Particularly, against

The secret, and invalide dispositions and decrees of the Emperor, in the
translation of the Electorall dignity and dominions, upon the Duke of Bavaria,
etc.

Secondly,

The unlawful, and vain Election of a King of the Romans, where his Highness
and the Electour of Triers were excluded.

Lastly,

The violent and unjust usurpation and possession of the Electorall Dignity,
Title, Voice, and Session, by the Duke of Bavaria.

A Protestation, especially being clear and well expressed, conserveth the
right of him that makes it. And though such protestation be necessary, yet
does it no wrong, or injury to any one.

Leg.^idebitor 4. 1. D. Quibus modis pignus and ibi Bartol. l. and si quis, 14.
Sed interdum 7. D. de Religiose. and sumptibus. Sampson, when the Philistines,
took his wife from him, and gave her to another, makes this Protestation
against them.

Judges cap. 15. verse. 3. Now shall I be more blameless than the Philistines,
though I do them a displeasure.

Charles Lodowicke, By the grace of God, Count Palatine of the Rhine,
Archidapifer, and Prince Electour of the sacred Empire, Duke of Bavaria, etc.
To all, and every one, that shall see or read these our Letters Patents,
Greeting.
IT is well known and manifest, not only in the Roman Empire, and Germany our
dear Country, but also in all Christendom, by the experience of those violent
actions and sad effects of war, which even unto this day are to be seen,
and by diverse writings and public monuments set forth every where, what
manner of proceeding was used, all the while these heavy troubles, and civil
wars of Germany lasted, in the occupation, surreption, division,
dismembring, sale, grant, and translation of Our now wasted Dominions and
Territories; and well as of Our Electorall Dignity, Archidapifership, Voice,
Royalties, and other Rights thereunto immediately and inseparably belonging.

Which proceedings and violences being altogether unjust, intolerable, contrary
to all right and justice, and consequently a nullity, invalide, and without
power and force: We have just cause to be sensible of them, and to this end to
publish Our complaints, exceptions and protestations against them, according as
necessity and justice does require.

Especially, that which grieveth and most sensibly afflicts Us, as tending to
the greatest prejudice of Our own, Our Brethren and near Kindreds Persons and
Rights, is that not without great dislike and sorrow We do hear and
understand.

First of all, how that in the last pretended treaty of peace at Prague,
without Our knowledge, in the time of Our minority, not being there, nor sent
for, nor heard, amongst the rest was concluded and agreed upon, that those
dispositions and pactions should be and remain firm, stable aad valide,
which heretofore were made and granted by his Imperial Majesty, to the Duke of
Bavaria, and the Wilhelmian Line and Posterity, in regard of Our Electorall
Dominions and Dignities, and withal, that the said invalide disposgions,
having been parched and compiled together in private and secretly, hitherto
unknown to the world, and as yet not published in their true force and phrase,
nevertheless were alleged against Us, under the pretense, as if they had
been allowed and confirmed in the said treaty of peace, and consequently
received by a general approbation of all the states of the Sacred Empire, as
it does manifestly appear in the last answer given by the Emperor to the
Earl of Arundel, the Kings Majesty of Great Britain His Ambassador at
Ratisbone.

By virtue of which dispositions, Our Right, Jurisdictions and Possessions,
belonging and appertaining unto Us, Our Brethren, and near Kindred, ex
primaeva and simultanea Investitura ex pacto and providentia majorum, were
ravished and violently taken from Us, and transferred from Our House to a
remote and far distant Line and Descent, against all right, laws,
constitutions of the Empire, customs observed in Fiefs of such importance and
quality; nay, even against the Golden Bull it self, and other pactions and
Imperial privileges, from many ages conferred and confirmed upon on Our
Electorall House.

Secondly, it much grieveth Us, that at the last meeting of the Electours at
Ratisbone, where the election of a King of the Romans was propounded and
treated, and the King of Hungary, Ferdinando of Austria, chosen and crowned, We
were not with the rest of Our Co-electors, by virtue of the Golden Bull, called
and invited, notwithstanding that We only represent and bear the Right,
Voice, Office, and Person of the Elector Palatine, but We were purposely,
though uniustly, past by and excluded, and the Duke of Bavaria suffered de
facto and really to usurp, and to bear our Title, Place, Session, Office and
Voice, against all Law and Justice.

All these things generally, and every one in particular being nothing, and
altogether invalide, unjust, and violent, to pass by many other nullities, We
do esteem and account the Dispositions abovesaid, and the pretended
conclusion of peace of no force and power, upon this ground, because they were
continued, framed and agreed upon, in the time of Our, and Our Brethrens
minority, when We were absent and in foreign Countries, having been neither
called nor heard, much less accused and convicted; besides, that in themselves
they are contrary to all Divine and humane laws, the fundamental
Constitutions of the Sacred Empire, the ordinary customs of Fiefs of such
quality, and the manifold declarations, which His Imperial Majesty has made
and given under his own hand with full assurance, to all the Electours, that
then were present, the 23. of February, anno 1623. and to the King of Great
Britain, Our honored Grandfather of most blessed memory, few days after,
viz. the 5. of March in the same year.

And withal the nullity of this pretended Election appears, in that. We
were with the Electour of Triers unjustly and violently excluded and kept out
from it, though unto Us only it belongs by Nature, Divine and humane laws,
to bear the Name, Title, Voice, Office, and Function of the Electour Palatine,
in all Imperial Diets, Electorall meetings, and generally in all solemn
actions of the Empire.

These inevitable necessities obliged Us, to publish Our exceptions and
protestations in a solemn and legal manner, for the maintaining of Our
unquestionable and undoubted Right, Jurisdiction, Princely descent, State, and
Name, against all such and the like violent proceedings, intended, determined
and practiced, to the prejudice and disgrace of Us, Our Brethren and near
Kindred, who were never so much as called or heard in Our own cause.

We do therefore by virtue of these Letters Patents, with good advise and
knowledge, in the best form and wise, according to Law and Custom, plainly
and fully protest against, and contradict all, both in general and particular,
whatsoever has been contrived, acted, granted, premised, pronounced, judged,
published, disposed, practiced and agreed upon, publicly or privately, with
deliberation and purpose, or any other way, to the prejudice, detriment and
damage of Us, Our Brethren, and near Kindred, or whatsoever shall or may be in
time to come, ordained, judged, decreed, practiced and acted, against Us, de
facto and really, without Our knowledge, consent and approbation.

Particularly, we do protest against those vain, impertinent, and most
dangerous dispositions, and conclusions of peace at Prague, against the hasty,
precipitate and unlawful election of a King of the Romans, and above all,
against the violent, unjust and heinous usurpation, detention, and privation
made and continued by the Duke of Bavaria, in keeping back, ravishing and
detaining from Us, as much as lies in his power, by his usurpation de facto,
Our Electourship, Dominions, Subjects, Royalties, Fiefs, Office, Title, Voice
and Session.

Reserving withal for Us, Our Brethren, near Kindred, and all those that have
any interest in it, to use all such lawful and conducible means, actions,
defenses and remedies, as are allowed in such cases, by Divine and humane
laws, to all, that are thus oppressed, and suffer such wrongs and injuries,
with this express declaration and Protestation, that whereas We Ourselves, and
others for Us have hitherto tried and sought, as much as was possible, to come
by fair means to the quiet repossession of what belongs unto Us, by Nature,
and Laws Divine and humane, upon honest and tolerable conditions, We desire to
be clear and blameless before Almighty God, the whole world, and all
posterity, of whatsoever may befall any one in the prosecution and maintaining
of Our just and lawful cause, for the obtaining of Our restitution.

We do likewise in the end profess and protest before God, who knows the
hearts of man, that We do not intend by this our forced lawful Protestation,
to derogate any thing from the Highness and preheminency of his Imperial
Majesty, whom We are willing and ready to honor and revere with most humble
and constant devotion, Or to diminish and offend the Rights, Honors, and
Jurisdictions of any State soever, having no other intent and scope, but more
and more by these lawful means to maintain, confirm, and publicly to
manifest Our innocence, just cause, unquestionable Right, Hereditary Dignities,
and lawful possessions, least by Our silence and forbearance of this necessary
and just Protestation, they should be neglected, endangered, or prejudiced,

And to the end, that this Our Protestation, drawn in the presence of a Notary
and witnesses, might come to the public knowledge and view of the world, and
all frivolous exceptions and pretenses of ignorance be cut off from those whom
it may concern, We have caused it publicly to be set forth and printed, and
have already sent some authenticke copies of it to his Imperial Majesty, and
the Princes Electours, under Our own hand and Seal.

Given at Hampton Court the 27. of January, anno 1637.

