A prognostication for the year of Christ Jesus our lord and Savior. 1566.
Wherein are declared diverse notable things, as you shall perceive by the readyng
thereof: which (if God so permit) at like to come to pass as well in this our
Climate; as also in certain other co^ntreis. Set forth by ^oh^ Securis,
Physician in Salisbury.

Anno Domini. 1566.

Anno Mundi. 5528.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Marsh.

Of the first part or revolution of this year, 1566. containing the one half of
ye Astronomical year, being the.xi. day of March at noone, and so ending
the.xiii. of September, about.viii. of ye clock after noon.
AFter that I had well viewed and considered, ye face of the heavens, at the
entrance of the Sun into the Equinoctial vernal point (which is the first
scruple or minute of Aries) I found the wytty, subtle and ^e planet Mercury,
to (...) well of the ascendent ^s (...) ^he first revolution. Of the which
reuolutio^. the Sun as a mighty lord and king, chale^geth some part with
him. I found also, that stout sturdy furious Mars, to occupy, yea rather by
violence to withhold the chiefest part of all the horoscope* that is the East
angle, being the first in order of all the.xii. houses in ye astronomicall
figure, which house also concerns man's life, from his birth unto his lives
end.

I found also Jupiter, that excellent and beneficial planete, (who for his
inestimable benefits and upright dealinge, were worthy of al honor, and to have
ye best place in ye celestial scheme: But alas, like as upright, plain, and
true dealyng men, are now a days little set by, and nothing regarded in the
world: Even so alas, I say alas is Jupiter thrust down, and as it were
forsaken, by the permission of God for a time. I found Jupiter I say, placed
in the lowest part of all the figure. And to increase also the more his
infortune, he is as well now retrograde, as he was the last year, and
occidentall of the son. The best comfort he has is, that the gentle and
friendly, lady Venus has lent him a lodgyng for a space, and yet that is no
longer then ye beginning of May: for then he must go a maying for one month
and more, until he return again the.vi. day of June, which being ones
returned, will then take heart of grace, and be bold to continue and walk in
his friend Venus her house, until it be the.22. of Noue^ber.

Considering also with my self the prevention goinge before, in the v. day o^
March, the Moon being in the house of Mercury, being also saluted the next
morrow after, with the quartyle aspect of fyery Mars, not to her co^tentation.
The Sun also being in a quartyle aspecte with Mars: I can not perceive, but
that much mysery and trouble will happen in this Reuolutio^, as now I will in
particular more largely declare.

Mars being in the ascende^t, in a septentrional sign portendeth a certain
earthquake to happen this year, either in England, or else in some country
nighe adiace^t, and specially about the latter end of the summer: it will cause
also seldom rain. I gather also, Ex tali eius situ, that much cruelnes,
extortion, usury, contention, and such like horrible vices, are like to reign
among men, causing thereby many, to be very pe^sife, and full of anguyshe and
sorrow. For many will be ready to scratche out other men's eyes, for to take
and ravish their goods. And other that can not so violently take the^, shall
assay by all craft and subtle policy, to convey the^ away into their hands.
Whereby gods plagues ar like to come upon us. Therefore O ye extortioners, O ye
insatiable usurers, al ye unmerciful, gredy, and covetous rich men, take heed,
take heed, repent, for it is more than high time. Praesto est dies Domini,
dies irae O calamitatis, dies illa tremenda and a^ mara ualde. Dum dies est
igitur and tempus habemus, operemur bonum, quia quando nox ue nit. i. post
mortem, nemo poterit operari.

The foresaid Mars placed in ye sign of Cancer, signifies sodeyn shipwrackes,
by occasion of great and sodein blastes of winds: also strife, contention, and
war in the west parts: impositions of subsydies and new paymentes, diverse
diseases: for Mars is lord of the vi. house, as hot agues, pleuresies,
squinances, inflammations, head ache, meigrym, peyn in the stomach, in the small
guts, in the back and sides, and vlceratio^s in ye matrice, privy parts and
fundment: also great heat, and little rain, no great store of butter. Item,
the death of cattle, and all other beasts, but chiefly of horses: The water of
wells to be very low, for lack of sufficient sprynges. And that the vulgar
people and husbandmen, shall be dylygent and careful about their own busynes.
They had need so. I perceive by the lord of this revolution, and the trine
aspect of the Sun to the Moon, that marchantes and all other occupiers, and
craftsmen, shall have some better gaynes the^ they were wont to have of late
years, and that as well by land as by sea. Also wise and learned men, serthes,
registers, secretaries, astronomers, and children, shall prosper better the^
they were wont to do: besides that there is like to be much store of fyshe.

As concerning war, I perceive that Mars placed in the ascendent, being also
septentrionall and direct, having no less then five dignities in Cancer: has
arm^d himself from top to toe, ready to enter into the field, and will do
what he can, to bring the people out of quiet: yet not withstanding, they of
Mercurius side (whom I take to be certain wise and politic men, and
ambassadors, doctors, scribes, merchants, and other learned men,) will so, I
hope, handle the matter that they shall scone repress the stout invasion and
furious enterprise of Mars. For although he should rage never so much at the
beginning: yea. May being ones entered, approchinge to the 28. degree of
Cancer: he should have for recompense, a foul shameful fall.

Jupiter being retrograde and occidentall, having no aspect with the lord of the
revolution, declares sorrow, much care and fear to fall upon the people. And
also much debate and strife in the law, for matters concerning inheritance,
successions, lands, goods, and debtes, left by the dead. In which things
not a few shall loase their right, and shall not be able to prosecute the
law.

Mercurius placed in the.ix. house, shows, that certain wytty, politic, and
learned me^, with the help of the higher powers, shall go about to establish
matters in religion: yet Jupiter being retrograde in the fourth house, seems
to be an occasion, that all things shall not so well go forward, as the
Mercurialistes would have it. The same testifyeng also the wyly and flatteryng
trine aspect of Mars unto the said Mercury. To whom Mars is always mortal
enemy. Which thing to be true, the very philosophers have always testified,
by this proverb Nihil Marti cum Musis. Mercuriales autem prae caeteris musarum
cultores sunt.

As touching Saturn, this general rule is always to be noted, (of the
which somewhat I spoke in my last years Prognoslication) that as often as he
is found in a fire sign, and specially in Leo: he declares mortality, with
penury of corn, grass, of diverse fruits, seeds, flowers herbs, and roots.

Also corruption of the air, gross mystes, dark and cloudy wether, with some
earthquake in the east parts. And because he is Septentrionall and Retrograde,
sygnifyeth also great showers of rain, corruption and destruction, as well of
the great men's goods, as of the goods of common people, and of marchantes:
pestilence, and ^yuers other long and grievous diseases. Also dissension and
much strife between brothers. Sol in x. constitutus, Reg^^ae honorem
exaltationem, eiusque gloriam atque profectii signat. By the position of Venus,
I find, that much trouble dissension and hatred, shall be caused through
certain women, and chiefly by those that be of the baser sort, and scarsly
reputed honest. (...) aute^ in 6. domicilio caeli shows the rancor and
discord of certain fathers, the gain of grasiers and horscorsers, and also
health to the body, saving that Mars is like to have the upper hand in this
point, as is said before. I perceive that excapito daa conis in scorpione, the
meaner sort of people, shall have cause to rejoice, by occasion of some good
luck that shall happen unto them. But the lighter sort are like to feel some
trouble and sorrow. Also is signified disce^tio^, war, wounds, and much
fornication with deceit. And that al kind of beasts (except those yt be
rydden shall much increace. Servants also shall inerece, I mean, that there
shall be many many mo servants then was wont to be. God grant yt they be true
and good, I would money would increase as well among the poor commons. But of
the increase I can find nothing by my calculatio^. Cauda draconis n.12.
posita, declares some aduersite, to ye greater kind of beasts and small power
to the enemies.

Hactenus de priori reuolutione.

Of the second part or revolution conteinyng the other half of the
Astronomical year, which begins precisely, the. 13. day of September, at. 8.
of the clock at night.
IN the celestial figure of the second Revolution, I find the beginning of
Taurus to be ascendent. In the which Venus is lady of the said ascendent. But
Jupiter is the Lord of the revolution, geuyng some part of his dominion to
Mercury.

All the Planeites (being as they were agreed and of one mind,


