DELECTABLE demaundes, and pleasant Questions, with their several Aunswers,
in matters of Love, Natural causes, with Moral and politic devises.

Newely translated out of French into English, this present year of our Lord
God. 1566.

Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard by John Cawood for Nicholas England.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the Studiouse and well disposed youth of England.
THE learned Poet Horace, myndinge to bestow the true prise of wisdom upon
him that is most worthy, says that he by good right does deserve the same,
which can best skill how to knitte and join profit and pleasure together. For
those two things be as it were vncoupleable, forsamuch as the gods, as
Hesiodus does witness, would that profitte were daily accompanied with sweat
and travel: and that commonly thend of pleasure is sower and bitter. He
therefore of good right is to be termed a passinge good workman, which can
with such ^astnes of consent incorporate and unite them, as the one may still
interchaungeably ensue and rise of the other. To which intent (notwithstanding
their diversity of opinions) thauncient Philosophers altogether endeavored,
sieking every one after his vein, in such sort to pollishe and beautify
that most excellent portion of us, the mind, as prepared the better to receive
the print of virtues seal, we might in this race of frailty climb to some
degree (at least) of true happiness and sound felicity. But because the name
of virtue is of such majesty, as at the first vewe it would dashe and
dismaie her first and feeble beholders, certain Philosophers castinge aside
their frostie beardes, and other such ceremonies of Philosophical show: with
loving care to cherishe and maintain those soft and gentle minds, that could
not yet well broke the pain full bruntes of scollerlike customs: have devised
certain pleasant confections (as it were wherewith to sauce and sweten the
study of Philosophy,) handling each part thereof so familiarlie, that the
most wild and haggard heads were oftetimes reclaimed to harken and follow
their wholesome Lessons. And so the phrigian fabler Aesope, giving fained speech
and conference of talk to creatures unreasonable, under cloak and color thereof
left unto the reasonable most necessary precepts of all humanity and moral
dewtie* The like has been from time done by a number of noble Poets, who in
their fabled forgeries (if they be well marked) have uttered all manner of most
deep and profound learning, I speak not of the Comike writers, who pretending
but sport, by pretty contriuement of parts and persons, teach how to bear
our selves toward all sorts, and specially to shonne the cosining trappes of
those that are numbered among the vilest kind of people. Which self same
fruit is also to be gathered of these our common plays and shows, which
grounded (after a sort) upon the rules of Philosophy, do whet and sharpen the
wits of the lokers on: even as the Barriers, Tilte, Torney, wrestling,
leaping or running do by use stre^gthen the ^^mmes, and frame the body better
and more ab^e to discharge, when need shall earnestly require their office of
arms.

In respect whereof, having fallen into my hands of late a certain French
book, the work sure of some learned and Skillful writer, driving
principally to the like good purpose, deemed it could not be, but labor
worth, to spend some vacaunt days, in teaching it to speak our mother
english tongue. Especially for that in full perusing the same I found he had so
handsomlye by way of question, couched together the most behoueable points
of all Philosophy, as to the diligent reader might nedesly bring with it
exceeding rich increase, both of profitte and pleasure. The rather truly,
because in order of his treatise, not intermedling with the particular dewtie
of any calling or estate he generally concludes of matter not impertinent to
all degrees. So that leaving the rawenes of thinfant and childishe years to the
care and correction of their nourses and scholemasters, begins to shape his
first precepts to the best advantage of that age which (as it is most
disposed to the vanities of love, so most likely to be abused and miscarried
by the same) may here in some part learn to know and eschew the tempting
deceiptes of that Boy she godde, and his blind disciples. From thence leads
he us into the dark storehouse of natures secrets, where with open eyes
perusing the weke condition of the world and worldely things, yea and of us
our selves, for whose sake they were principally ordained, may remain thereof
both more mindful and thankful to our creator. Lastely, he brings us to
the fountains of good nurture, teaching not only in private cases of our own
lives and houses, but in common welthe matters also, to give such verdict of
things incident, as among the wise and sagest governors, shall make us
esteemed not altogether ignorant or empty of good understanding.

All which things, although it is not unknown, may by the learned be picked
out of the works of thold and autentike Clerks, yet for so much as falls not
to al men such opportunity, as whereby to rake up their so huge and infinite
volumes, it is to be hoped, the greatest number, those specially whose good
spirit moves rather to give their leasured hours to some virtuous exercise,
then to idle (and for the most part dispraisable games) will with such
equity use and constre this englishing of these brief collections, as of a
labor lovingly undertaken, both for their delectable recreation of mind, and
profitable help of study, whereunto be wished universally most happy
success, till for the further benefit of them that favor the reading of the
Scriptures, which (truth to say) all men above all things ought to favor,
shall hereunto also be annexed the like Questions of divinity, right
pleasant, familier and most necessary.

QVESTIONS OF LOVE, AND THE Answers.
WHEREOF does it come, that Ruffians, Iesters, and common Dauncers be less
subject to Love then other?

That may come by the continual familiarity that such men have with women:
in whom they have no pleasure for respect of love, or whose familiarity does
make Love lothesome or out of taste.

What is the cause, that he that loves fervently is soon angry?

Because the sprites and humors of Lovers be very hot, and boil continually.

How comes it to pass, that an amorouse woman is so curious to be finely
appareled and decked?

She does it to increase and set forth her beauty, thereby to subdue and
draw those unto her, that be most beautiful and desirous to Love.

But why be rough and hearie men more prone and disposed to the amorouse
battle of Love, then other?

Because they abound and be more full of humors then other.

What has moved certain Greek Poets to say: that Love is the most
excellent amongst all the heavenly gods?

It is perchance because there is no Philosopher that does teach the manner
of man's life ^o well as he, or makes man more practique or quick sprited.

But why has Love been esteemed a godde?

Because he makes an Idiote to speak well, a coward to be bold and hardy, a
melancolike man Joyful, a heavy and slouthful man prompt and ready to all
enterprises, be they never so great. Or else he is made a godde, for man to
excuse him self, and to cast upon Love all that, which by the same he has
done and sustained.

Why be Lovers so desirous of corporal and bodelie beauty?

Because beauty (as ancient Poets do affirm) does please the Gods, is
agreeable to men, is not lothesome nor heavy to him that is endued therewith:
but desired above all things that may be wished.

what is the reason and cause of Nosegaies, garlandes of flowers, and grene
bows, wherewith Lovers be wont to adorn the frontes of their Ladies lodginges?

It is to honor them as their gods on earth, and to show that such
Nosegaies, Garlandes, and May bows do serve for the spoils and triumphs of
their Ladies, and for true signs of the service and devotion of their loving
servants.

But whereof comes it that we dream seldom of the thing that we love?

All lovers being tossed and vexed with diverse thoughts can not steadfastly
grave and settle any one thing in their fantasy: for their houghtes be like
the circles and bubblinges of the water, which are dissipated the one by the
other.

From whence comes it, that certain Lovers upon the view and sight of their
Ladies, do blushe?

It rises of the blodde and sprites which ascend vpwardes, whereof the face,
fullest of poores of any part of the body, does charge it self with coulor.
It may be also, that it proceeds of a singular reverence that they bear to
their Paramoures.

But why do they afterward wax pale?

There is no true lover but is troubled with some disquiet or contrariety. If
the cause then of his pain do present it self before his eyes, the same
does easelie grow and increase. And so Nature retiring unto the inward
parts, as into her hold or forte, carries with her both the blodde and
sprites, leaving the superior parts without any coulor,

How chances it, that barren and unfruitful women be more hot and prompt
to love, then they which are fruitful and bear children?

Because that such do moore abound with seed, and do purge them selves of
their natural disease less then other do.

Why do Lovers delight to bear in their hands Nosegaies and Apples?

All Lovers have desire to enjoy and possess the flower and the fruicte of
others age and beauty, wherein they rejoice, when soever they see the same. And
so be amorouse both of flour^ and fruicte, and of all such beautiful things
that they see.

But why be Lovers for the most part ready to weep?

Poor Lovers continually be pricked with some Nail, and feel cause whereof to
complain, being of Nature, fearful, suspiciouse, Jealous and troubled, so
that it is no merueile, if such and the like passions do provoke them to tears.

What means it that Lovers be continually as it were in a fire?

The affection of Love does move and trouble their sprites, which does raise
in them this heat.

Why be women more prone to the combat of Love, then any other creatures at all
times and seasons?

Nature has endued them with more delicate touchinges, and with more moderate
complexion then other. Besides this, they be of complexion who^e and moiste: a
thing very proper and requisite to that play and pastime.

How comes it, that men take no pleasure in the play and game of Love, when
they have lust to make water?

Because even then the Conduictes are full: and that which is full of moistnes
cannot receue other humor. It may be also, that the heaviness and weight of the
urine does restrain and stop the conduicte from whence the seed does
issue and come.

Wherefore is the pleasure of Love, greater then all other pleasures that may be
ymagined?

That comes of the Sperme which passes through all the parts of the body,
yelding unspeakable pleasures to the other members.

How chances it, that men of melancholic complexion be more lively, then
other in combat of Love?

The windy passions whereof they be full, be causes of the same: which make
them more wakefull and disposed thereunto.

Why do Physicians praise mediocritie or seldom use of Loves game?

Because the same does lighten the body, rejoice the spretes, comfort the
brain, recreate the senses, and expels from them all accidents proceeding
of melancholic humor. Excess also is to be blamed, because it does weaken
the body, and is hurtefull to the sight.

Why does Nature give to Love so great pleasure?

For preservation of mankind, which through the same is continued.

Why do they soon grow to graie hears, which be much given to Love?

Because they expel from them their natural heat, whereby life is conserved
and maintained.

Why does the bear of the hedde and eyebrowes of those that be fornicators
and lecherouse soonest fall?

The game of Love does marueilouslie cool the superior parts, which being
made bare and void of blodde and sprete, can not digest that which does
nourishe the same. And so the vapors proceeding of digestion be not sufficient
and able to ingendre hear of the hedde and eyebrowes.

What makes a man after he has committed the act of Venus, to be soudenlie
melancholic and angry?

Because in the doing of the same we lose and skatter the most part of our
vital spirits, which makes us heavy and sad.

What is the cause that a man does sooner dispatche that act fasting, then
when his belly is full?

The Conduictes whereby the seed does pass, be more open fasting then after
meat.

Whereof comes it that Lovers care not to spend the whole night in Love.

Every vehement passion does holy draw a man thereunto, and suffers him not
to give himself to any thing else, but to that whereof he thinks, and whereupon
he bends his fantasy.

Why be Lovers so careful of the sight and amorouse looks of their Ladies?

All Lovers be wont to suffer them selves to be fedd with such allurementes,
and there is no part of the body that does so well manifest and declare the
interior passions of the mind as the eyes. Also we say, that the eyes are the
true harboroughes of the heart. And thereof it comes that when one kisseth the
eyes affectuously, as a thing desired: It seems that he kisseth the thought,
and the soul it self. Whereof certain Poets, with good reason have written
that Love boroweth his arrows from the eyes of Lovers, to serve him self
against them selves.

What does move the Poets to feign Venus to be of Massiue gold?

That may be by reason of her rare and excellent beauty, or else because she is
so much desired as gold, some assign the cause upon the great some of gold
that Lovers do consume and spend upon Love.

What is the cause that Lovers do use so to forswear them selves?

Love does laugh at such periuries, Lovers therefore desirouse to serve there
god, do swear continually. Or else it proceeds of a certain lightness caused
of diverse thoughts which do rise in their minds.

How chances it, that men leave not to love a woman although through age, or
some other accident or chance, she waxes ill favored and foul?

That comes of Love, which is blind, and being blind, can not know or judge
the imperfections of other. But how should he take knowledge of that which he
can not blame. And how can he blame that which he is constrained to embrace
and wholly to pursue.

From whence comes it, that most comenlie we be given fervently to love,
not those only of whom we never received pleasure, but those also whom we
never saw?

Every one bears the Image of his mind in his face, and thereof may be
gathered some sign or token of the wit and nature of the person, by means
whereof we may conjecture whereunto she is most inclined, which is the very
spring and beginning of natural amity or hatred.

How chances it, that diverse men can not obtain the grace and favor of
their Ladies, although they do serve them, honor them, and adore them?

Because (as Aristotle says) there is nothing in them worthy to be beloved.
But what man is he so void of Natures grace, but has somewhat in him worthy
of Love.

But what is the cause that some Suitors be better beloved of their Ladies then
other some?

The Lady enriched with beauty and good manners, is like unto the son that
does every where equally extend his beams, which notwithstanding are received
unequally, of some more, of some less after their capacity. The sterres also
therein do bear some rule, so that after the saying of Diogenes the Stoique,
the signs comune to two persons, that is to say, under which the one and the
other shall be borne, and those signs agreing, do cause the wills of the same
two persons to be joined and united.

Why be these little and pretty angers and fallinges out which chance among
Lovers the refreshing and renewinge of Love?

That shall ever be, because Love is like a flame that will go out and dye if
it be not blown and oftentimes moved: Or else we may well say that the more
the thing which we desire is denied, the more we desire it.

Whereof comes it, that we be ashamed to comunicate to other our desire and
lust to the combat of Love, and of other appetites and desires, as to drink,
eat, sleep, and such like we be not ashamed?

Because that the same carnal affection is not so necessary nor so profitable
for this life as the other appetites be.

Whereof comes the diversity of weapons wherewith Love is wont to wound men
and women, fishes, birds, and other four foted beasts?

Of the diverse nature of things that he assayleth.

You will say, that beauty failing, love decreaseth.

I would say yea, because Love is no other thing but a desire of beauty.

Whereof comes it, that a man being touched with love can not rid him self
of that passion by any dexterity, policy or wit:

Love is a certain estate and plight that does wrappe and fold the mind of
man, and with a certain sweet mocion does transport him into the thing by him
desired. This affection rises by the contemplation and judgment that he has
of beauty, which causes him to conceive in his sprite and mind such
admiracion and desire, that whether he will or no he is caught in the Ginnes
and nets of Love.

Why do the new married use roquet, and musk when they go to bed with their
new married wives?

Because such things do provoke lust and engendre seed.

What reason have certain people of the North parts to sees with water a
certain stone called Gagates, causing their spouses before they lie with them
to drink thereof?

That is to know whether they have made any fault or not before. For the
property of that Stone is soudenlie to force them to make water that have
endured and suffered the act of man.

How comes it, that if a man give him self to much to the sport and play
of Love, the same does diminishe the pleasure thereof?

Because the seed being sore diminished is but a certain waterishe matter of
no great heat, which can not yield any great pleasure.

What is the cause that women which be of very hot Nature cannot conceive?

Great and vehement heat does distroie and corrupt the seed, and therefore
they which be very hot are comenlie fructeles and barren.

Why do some women love men that be black, and some other those that be faier
and well collored?

Women of feeble sight love them that be black, because blackenes does join
and unite the sight to much disparcled, and by this means does comfort the
same: Or else we may well say that every thing does love and desire his like,
They therefore which be hot of nature love them that be black, because they be
more prone to heat. Other which be of colder nature do love them that be
white because they be of cold complexion, the mother of whitenes.

Wherefore have the ancient compared Love to dronkennes

For nothing else, but because it makes men, (which before were cold, heavy
and covetous,) iustie and liberal.

Why were Oysters consecrated by the ancient to Venus?

Because Oysters do provoke lechery.

Wherefore do not common harlotes conceive: or if they do, it is very seldom?

The diversity of the seeds does let conception, and causes that the same
can not be retained.

What means it, that the purse of Cupido is tied with a Leke?

This proverb does declare that Love is liberal and fyndeth no let to put
his hand in his purse.

Which is greatest, the hurt or profit that comes of love?

He that does not love of him self, estemeth the loss to be greater then the
proffet.

Think ye that Love has judgment or no?

How can he with judgment cause Lovers daily (as every man may see) to fall
into such enormities.

Whereof comes it, that for the most part, the children which married women
do borrowe, or which be nor lawfully begotten commonly called Bastardes, do
resemble more their husbands, then those that be legitimate or lawfully by
them begotten?

The reason comes of an Imagination that they have to be soudenlie taken or
espied of their husbands: And so their husbands be always in their fantasy,
for it seems to them that they be continually before their eyes, and that
they say unto them: what do thou, thou shameless whore? Is this thy assured
promis made unto me at the marriage day?

Wherefore be Bastardes for the most part of better courage and more lyuelie
then lawful children?

That proceeds of a more ardent force and virtue of him that does beget them:
for man is more earnest in that act, when it is secretly committed and done
in a heat, then at other times, because the affections are not distract hither
and thither: and principally when such encountres and metinges may be
boldly done without fear.

Wherefore be young women more prompte to laughe then other?

Young women are under the safegarde and tuicion of Uenus the Goddess of
laughter, and so they do easelie laugh. It may also be said, that they have
tender and delicate bodies, and laughter is no other thing then a spice of
Joy, wantonness, or tickeling.

Do you think that Love is so blind as he is painted, or that his sight be
good?

Wherefore should not I thing him blind? sith among my neighbors I see the
most ill favored to be best beloved of the fairest.

What people (after your mind and judgment) be most worthy to be beloved?

I think those that be learned: because they may give pleasure to the body,
proffit to the spirit, and make their fame immortal.

Wherein is the subtilitie of women most discovered?

In that that they seem to love one alone, and nevertheless do give them
selves to many.

What woman thinks her self most worthy to be beloved, the fair or the
foul?

Before I shall answer you, show me a woman, that thinks her self to be
foul.

Wherefore do Physicians forbid young Lovers to forbear their Ladies
incontinently after meat, and when they be fasting, when they have bathed
themselves, after they have vomited, and when they shall receive medecines?

Because by such forces digestion is let, the body is made feeble, and
waxes cold: and it has been at all times daungerouse to use two purgations
at one instant.

What means it, that the lokes of Ladies do wholly turn us from all other
obiectes, and do draw us unto them?

The looks of Ladies be nerer neighbor to the image and imagination of beauty
then any other thing, which above all things does ravish our senses, and they
do pleasantly bind and captiuate the same of purpose, in the end to bring
them to subjection.

What might induce the wife of king Aguilfus of Lomberdie to abuse her self
with a Dwarf, having to her husband the goodliest man that ever ware crown?

This trym goddess knew well that Nature is accustomed to amend in small
members the fault that happens to be in the greater, and supposed that the
matter which should be in the arms and legs was fallen to engrose the
Ordinance, the canon shot whereof Ladies do willingly receive.

What be the conditions that an amorouse Lady ought to have?

That she be not couetouse, that she be curteis and easy to be spoken unto,
neat and secret in her doings.

What properties be requisite in a Lady that right well may be called fair?

That she have a fayer and a comely personage, a fayer neck, a small body, a
little mouth, and white teeth and clean.

Is this a proverb good? Love him that will love thee.

Ye very good: for he is a beast that will not love, being beloved.

Whether is the man or the woman more subject to Love?

That question is very evident, a man is sooner taken and ^rapt in Love then a
woman. For we see that the man, which is borne to a thousand good and great
enterprises, does for Loves sake abandon all glory and honor that he may
receive.

Why have the Poets fained Pan (the godde of Lechery) to trotte upon Goats
feet?

To declare that he was lecherouse. And here is to be noted, that all the
nourishmente which should be employed upon the members that want, remain in
the veins, and not being able to be applied to the members that lack, does
wholly convert into seed, which being augmented does increase lust. In
token whereof we see them that be spare of flesh and have great veins to be
very mete and apt for Uenus. For this cause Uenus was given in marriage to
haltinge Uulcane, because that they which do halt are commonly great Lechers.
Contrariewise they be unapt thereunto, whose members be greater then naturally
they ought to be, because that superfluity in members does draw unto it for
his nourishing and maintenance all that which is good and superfluouse of
nature, which otherwise would have been converted into seed.

Why have the ancient and they of these days painted Love with wings?

To declare that the desires of Lovers be high, and labor to atteine high
and great enterprises.

Who deserves more to be favored of love? the fayer of simple and honest
meaning, or the foul that is sage, crafty, and well advised?

Prudence is the beauty of the mind, which contineweth longer then the
beauty of the body.

Can love be without Ialousie?

I think not. For testimony whereof be Ovid, Uirgill, Plutarch and Boccace,
who writes in a Sonnet: If Love lived without Ialousie. etc.

Why be Ladies sooner amorouse of a Souldior, then of a learned man?

Soldiers be more liberal, and not so subtle as Scholars be, more easy to
be allured with enticementes of women. There is no Souldior so brave, if a
woman say unto him: that he has a fayer bearde, that his legs be well
proporcioned, that he is comely on horseback, strong to incountre and
overthrow his enemy, but incontinently does not give over and submit
himself unto her will and pleasure.

What is the cause, that many dispysing their wives, be so fond upon curtesans
and harlottes?

The Curtesans suffer not them selves to be seen, except they be first
painted, but wives must often be s^ne of their husbands, which causes them to
seem not to be so fayer. Or we may say that wines continually be at their
husbands backs, misusinge them with byle and unseemly words, which makes
them to taste of other meats, and causes them to ymagine a thousand other
appetites and lusts.

Wherefore have Lovers so feoble voices?

Of the fear that they have to displease their Ladies. And therwithall the
unequal motions wherewith their spirits are moved, which forces this
feoblenes of voice.

Where does Love show her greatest force, either in making the fool to
become wise, or the most wise, or advised man, to become a beast.

If there be more pain to break down, then to build: I believe there shall be
more ado, to restore wisdom to him that has lost it, then newly to make
him wise. For Love and folly, be nothing else, but an alienation of the good
sense and wit.

May a man die, through vehement Love?

Of this the history of Seleucus and Antiochus may testify, and bear
witness, which may be read in the first Tome of the Palace of pleasure lately
published.

Which should be the greatest heart breaking? the Lady dying in our sight and
presence? or in our absence?

I would think by her presence, for the eyes do give greater felinge of dolor
and grief then the ears.

Whereof comes it, that men have diverse Judgments of the beauty of women?

It is a proverb derived from the ancient Greeks, that all faier and
beautiful things, be hard to be judged: even so of this difficulty comes
this diversity of Judgments.

How chances it, that many which be esteemed men of very good Judgment, be
surprised with the love of foul and ill favored women?

It may be that they have marked a certain beauty in them, which does not
appear outwardly. In like manner, Painters and Musicians have judgment of
draughtes and accordes, whereof none do take heed but such as have skill in
the same.

Wherefore be they, whose bellies be covered with hear, so given to women?

Lechery does proceed of the heat of the reigns, whereof do rise great
vapors, which engendre the hear of the belly, the abundance of the hear of
the belly does signify the heat in the generatiue parts,

Do you think the discovering of Love, to be the cause sometime that a man
obteineth not his desire.

That chances many times by reason that such women do love their honesty
very much.

Is the travel greater in secret and conceled love, then in that which is
discovered and open?

Without doubt there is greater pain in concealed love: because a man can not
event the heart of love conceived, which by comunicating and counseling with
some other, may be made more conforta^le and easy.

Whether is more constant in love: the man or the woman?

The man* being both of body and spirit more firm in all affairs. And
naturally he is more constant and of better perswacion in love.

Whereof comes it, that he which loves is most commonly beloved?

That peradventure may come, because our spirits can not resist the amorouse
shottes which do proceed of the sweet looks that Lovers do continually cast
one upon another. Or else we will say: that it is the property of nature to
couple and join like to like, and to skatter and divide the things which have
no proportion together.

Wherefore do men say, that to Neese is a good sign in the fact and deed of
Love?

Because it comes of the brain, which is as it were the little Cauan and
withdrawing place of all the senses. And it seems that all the senses do
agree and give their assent to the sentence and conclusion of Lovers.

Whereof comes it, that secret love is more burning and fervent, then that
which is discovered and open?

That chances because the secret Lover has no mean of ease and rest to let
out the fire that does consume him, the virtue of Love being of meruelouse
force and strength, and so not able to atteine the thing which he loves best
is unto him greater travel and pain, then if he inioyed it, or might discover
it to his friend for his comfort.

Whether were it better that there were love or no love?

I believe it to be better that there were love, for so much as it brings unto
us more good effects then evil, and to my mind and opinion Plato agrees,
who making a definicion of Love does say, that it is nothing else but a desire
to get and obtain a faier and beautiful thing.

Think you that one may be in love with an other, only upon fame and report?

If Love be wont to place himself in the chamber of our minds, by entry
through the gates of our eyes, who doubts but likewise he may enter by the
doors of our ears, to harborough him self in our understanding. Boccacio in
his Decamerone and Plutarche be of the same opinion. Example hereof may be
sen^, by the history of the Duchess of Sauoie, and the Lord John of
Mendozza: which may be read in the Palace of Pleasure aforesaid.

What does incite a man more to virtue? either honor? or the desire that he
has to please the thing he loves?

I do not judge or think that Love does serve for a spur to prick men to
virtue: supposing that a man desires it for none other purpose, but to enjoy
it.

Whereof comes it that diverse women have remained long time without loving
any person, and afterward have burned with love?

I say that the virtue of the Planetes have wrought it: for in this
university of things nothing does move it self, that does not take his
first motion of the planetes.

Who loves most fervently, the hardy or the Coward?

It is the bold and hardy, for the coward commonly dares not advance him
self forth to prove his fortune.

Are ye not of this opinion, that he which is more lively and of spirit more
excellent is less content with one Love alone?

Yes truly, and that is accustomablie seen among men and women: for why? to
content him self to love in one place, is an act of pusillanimitie and of
small heart and courage, which is the cause that my mystres does not content her
self with a thousand servants.

Which is greatest pain? to get and obtain the love of one, or to maintain
the same being gotten?

To maintain it after my judgment, because of the great inconstancy of women
which do sone fill and satisfy them selves, and are quickelie angry and
soon weary, lightly found and sone forgotten, very slipperi^ Catta^l.

Who is more easy to be persuaded that they are beloved, the man or the woman?

The man, and that may be clerelie seen: for Ladies neither by long service,
great gifts or otherwise, can persuade them selves to be beloved, but evermore
they be ready to reply, that a man does dissemble and counterfaicte the
truth.

What does certify the woman that she is loved?

The perseverance in Love.

Is there no other sign then perseverance?

To be Ialouse of them, and to give liberally, if perchance they be
couetouse, as in deed they be for the most part.

Why is Love painted by some in form of a Shepherd?

Because they which pursue and follow love be more lyker beasts then men.

Which has greatest force in man? hatred or Love?

I would say, that the passion of Love should be greatest. And why? man
through hatred never killed him self, which men do often times through
extremity of Love.

Is Love blind as he is painted?

The vulgar and common love is blind, but the celestial love is not: but with
great dexterity it opens and discovers the greatest secrets.

Why be they that have small legs more subject to love then others?

That proceeds of the abundance of seed that makes them so Lecherouse,
which thing comes ordinarily to those, whose inferior parts of the body
receive no great nourishment: Because all that which Nature takes from the
nether parts, is by Nature converted into superfluity and seed. Therefore we
should rather have demanded, why men greatly given to lechery have for the
most part so small and slender legs?

Whereof does it come, that Lovers have so little knowledge of the imperfections
of their Ladies?

One great mocion does let an other. Every Lover then being troubled in
spirit, the judgment of his sense is impeached and let in such wise as he
remeineth blind in the thing which he loves.

Why do lovers so often break their faith and promis one to an other?

Youth abounds in heat, and is subject to diverse and many things, and can
not stay it self in one thought, whereby it proceeds that the auncientes have
made Uenus the mother of Love, whom many Lovers do follow.

Do ye think that by Magique art the heart of an obstinate woman may be
mitigated to condescend to the pleasure of a Lover?

All they that have written of Natural things affirm the same. The Divines
say contrary. And I in the diversity of opinions in so great men dare not
declare mine own.

Is it possible that a couetouse man may become amorouse?

The forces of Love have always been more brave and fine, then those of
covetousness. So I believe that Love can not only make the Couetouse liberal,
but also prodigal: for as the couetouse have had no measure to get goods, so
they may have as little to spend them, if they think that by money they may
inioye the thing that they love.

Wherefore have men more liberty then women to love in more places then one?

Take modesty, shamefastnes, and fear from women, and ye take away their
life, which chances not to man.

Wherefore be Lovers continually ready to demand the hearty good will of them
that they love?

The heart is the feate of desire and of all knowledge, all which be ready to
obey the thing that it loves: the image whereof representing it self pleasant
before the eyes of Lovers, does rauishe from them both the heart and the
principal parts. And thereof it comes, that being as it were robbed of them
selves, and oppressed with intolerable bondage, they require with all
importunity to be restored and placed in their entire and former estate.

Whereof comes it, that commonly we suffer our selves to be allured to love
things whereof there is no hope to atteine unto?

That is for lack of knowledge of the beginninges of Love, the which are light
and little. And although that all hope is cut of and taken from us to inioye the
sweet embracementes which Love does promis: Nevertheless the beauty of the
thing beloved, does delight us, and the remembrance thereof does occupy the
brain. Such passions have been called of our elders, dom^ne desires, because
they do still and stealinglie possess the heart unware, and by little and little
take increase. And our reason should not be hindered if it were sustained by
hope.

Wherefore be all the joys of Lovers uncertain?

Because in love there do daily chance diverse casualties, as suspicion,
Ialousie, fear, anger, Peace, refuse, disdain.

Why is Love compared to a Dark laberinth or Maso?

Because the entry and coming in is easy, and the going out impossible.

Wherefore do men compare love to a Crocodill?

The nature of a Crocodill after the mind of those, that have written of
natural things, is to follow those that fly from him, and to fly from them
that do follow him: And so is it with Love. Therefore I give council, that
who soever will enjoy theffecte of his desires, that he be not to sharp and
egre to pursue and follow his Lady.

Believe ye that Love and good judgment may be together?

I believe no: for then the foul and deformed should never be beloved. But we
see not only the contrary to happen but which is worst, those that be the
vilest, indewed with most treason and least loyalty and faith, how foul so
ever they be, are most commonly best beloved.

Whereof comes it, that diverse which loved fervently to have some comfort,
did soudenlie lose that great heat of love?

All vehement love does not long continewe, for within a while the spirit
has leisure to examine it self, and to return to due understanding,
thinking upon all things that might violate and corrupt the same, whereby the
sensual appetites be by this means restrained.

Why do men call love both flame and fire?

It is not possible better to express how insupportable a thing it is,
considering the heat of the desires which it ingendreth in the hearts of his
servants, and the tirannie that he uses toward those which are under his
power, whom he brings to ruin and consumes like fire without any pity.

What is the cause that Lovers take pleasure to return so often to those
places where they have had joy and solace of their love?

Because in so doing they conceive Joy, and the memory of that which they
most love, does refreshe them. And yt seems then that this remembrance
does double the pleasure already received.

Why are men rather amorouse then women?

For that they are of hoter complexion, and their spirits more quick and
prompte.

Why be women more firm and steadfast in love then men?

Because things which of them selves be cold, be less subject to mobilitie
and inconstancy then those that be hot.

Whereof comes it, that women be more easelie persuaded to be loved then men?

Because they esteem them selves much more then there is cause.

But why be they angry, or why do they frown and lower when men say they be
foul or old?

Foulenes most commonly comes of age: and age is the high way to death,
which naturally does anoye and displease all persons.

Wherefore is it said, that the coughe and the passion of Love can not be kept
secret?

They be two things of great force, for the coughe troubling the body can
scantly be concealed or hidden. Love is a passion proceeding of a certain fire
which by the eyes is discovered (and manifests it self by the coulor of the
face,) and by all the acts of a Lover it may be comprehended and known, so
that without great pain and difficulty, it can not be hidden.

From whence do the amorouse send forth so many sighs?

Their continual thoughts send all the heat to the heart, whereof it comes
that necessarily it is convenient for them to respire and breath, of which
respiration sighinges be forced: whereby the coldness of the air is drawn to
temper the inward heat. That may also rise of the consideration of the time
lost of the detestation that comes of lechery, of the v^^inision of honor
and reputacion, and finally that the success of dishonest love, is tragical,
noisome, furiouse and miserable.

Wherefore have the ancient painted love holding flowers in one hand and fyshe
in the other?

To show that Love is a lord both of Sea and land.

Think you that love does yield greater force, courage and strength to him
that does combat and fight in the presence of his Lady?

There is nothing more certain. And for this cause was brought in and ordained
the brave and lusty company of the errant and wandering knights, to give
pleasure to Ladies by Iustes and turneis.

Who receives most contentacion, the victoriouse and loving knight, or the
gentlewoman for whom he has fought?

The knight as I suppose ought to be best contented, as having cause to content
himself with his own act and deed of Chivalry. For he that does best, is
worthy of greatest praise: And he that runs best for his Ladies sake, is
best worthy to inioye her.

Wherefore do amorouse Ladies impute that to fortune which chances contrary
to their hearts desire?

Because they like rash creatures without due consideracion esteem al things
to be ruled and governed by Fortune.

Is it love, to love the Image of a woman?

It is not love, but rather rage and madness.

What be they that love by a certain destenie and influence?

They that can give no reason or any cause of their love.

Do ye think it to be true, that the Gods were Lovers?

You must know that the old and ancient Poets were great divines, and
speaking of one thing they signify another. True it is that there be diverse
well learned that can not abide poetical allegories, which after my judgment
have no great reason on their side.

Wherefore was Paris desirouse to see the three Goddesses naked, when he was
appointed arbitrator of their beauties?

To give better judgment by viewing the proporcion of their bodies. O how many
faier and beautiful be there in outward appara^ce, which under their sumptuouse
garments and crimson robes be full foul and ill favored: that if Peter Grubbe
of Belchelianger, or Ioanne Stubbes of Norton folly viewed them naked as Paris
did the Goddesses, they would run home for the next gemman or Iustician of
peace to interteigne them, for they would scarce vouchsafe.

Think you that the beauties of Ladies is a commendable argument to dispute of?

Wherefore not? seeing yt the wisest have written beauty to be a gift of God.

What moved the ancient to say, that Love is a lord over gods and men?

Because all that which is made either in heaven or in earth is made for Love.
Remember what the Philosopher says: All things do move that men do love and
desire.

Which is most to be feared? the bow of Love? the mase of Hercules? or the
sword of Mars?

The bow of Love, and specially when he shoteth his Arrows of Lead. But not
so much when he shoteth his arrows of gold and silver.

How is it possible, that women should have faces of Angels, and heddes of
deuilles?

Be not Deuilles called Angels in holy write? Read the scriptures and ye
shall be resolved.

Do you think that a Lover may be enchaunted by the sight of his Lady?

If Sheep after the mind of Uirgill by a look mait be charmed: how much more
may delicate Love be subject to enchauntmentes?

Can women by any celestial influence be made better or more rigorouse toward
their loving servants?

The Mathematiques, Astrologiens and Magicians by diverse and many experiences
and peremtorie reasons affirm the same, in such wise as I dare not affirm the
contrary.

How can the fire of Love (not participant with any other element) inflame our
hearts.

It is only a manner of speaking very common to Latinistes called Netaphora.

Whereof comes the love of two, which do equally love each other?

Some think that it comes of their conversation and mutual familiarity:
other of Angels and spretes assigned to each man. And other of the
concurrantes and conformity of the planetes.

Whereof proceeds the rare beauty of women?

Some do say that it comes of the temperature of the elements: other do
tell reasons more excellent.

Why did Euripides say, that Love was like a Tragedy?

Because that Love is evermore accompanied with heaviness, with complaints, and
with a hard and bitter end.

Is there any difference between the grace of a woman and her beauty, or
whether they be all one?

I believe that there is a difference: for the one has a greater force then the
other to cause a man to be content and satisfied.

Whether is it a greater adventure to get the grace of a faier woman, or else to
recover it, if it were lost?

It is a greater act to recover it as I believe, women being of their own
nature disdainefull and stout in their opinion.

How may a man do to obtain and get the favor of an other?

Some do say by merit, some other by fortune, other do impute it to the
conformity of Nature, and some to attribute the same to influence or destenie.

Whether of these three qualities be best to obtain the grace of women,
Beauty, Riches, or Learning?

They which be faier desire to have faier servants. Rich, those that have
wherwithall, and the learned love them that be learned: But most commonly
riches is best liked of women for their mainteinaunce, although with wise women
learning is of greatest price.

Is it possible that a Lover may see continually the things that he loves?

That chances to those specially that be not touched with Love, that is to
wit, which can represent to them selves those which be absent by cogitacions.

How may the heart of a lover live that is not beloved?

He may live very well, considering that it is more pleasure to love (as I
have at other times affirmed) then to be beloved.

May a man establishe laws to Lovers?

I think not, but yet I will not deny that they which love by a certain
gift of nature or chance fatal, Laws may be established, whereunto they
may subdue them selves.

Is there any thing in the world that may retire and draw an amorouse man
from the thing that he loves?

Only disdain may withdraw him more then any other thing.

Why do the ancient painte Cupido, to force him self to pluck a branch of
Palm out of the hand of an other Cupido?

In ancient books there is remembrance made of two Cupidoes the one chaste,
the other lasciuiouse and dishonest. The chaste is he that does strongly bynd
and bring him that is lasciuiouse and dishonest into subjection.

How can a lover die in himself and live in an other?

This is clear, that the heart is more where he loves, then where he gives
life.

Wherefore be the angers of Lovers of so little continuance?

Because they are angry for trifles and things of nothing.

How many sorts of Lovers be there?

Two sorts: the one after Plato celestial, and the other vulgar and
terrestiall.

How comes love in us? by judgment or by destenie?

Most often by judgment, for diverse times men judge before they ^oue.

Is there any pleasure in the world that surpasses the con? tentacion of
Lovers?

No, for why? the seed comes from all parts of the body, (...) which
causes an universal pleasure throughout all the body.

Wherefore do men esteem women to be an evil like to the fire and to the sea?

Because there is no day but that by women evils do come and infinite
misfortunes.

Which proceeds most from women, swetenes or bitterness?

For one swetenes comes a Sea of sharp sower bytternes.

When be lovers most vexed and offended with themselves?

When by a certain default of nature they cannot make the ram to butt.

Whereof comes it that men compare the state of louer^ to a ship upon the
sea?

For the great dangers wherein they daily be.

What would a true Lover do being a far of when he sees the ship (wherein
his Lady is) to be in danger of drowning?

He would make vows to Love, and with joined hands beseech him to save her,
though it cost him a Taper so big as the maste of the Ship. to offer to his
Godhedde.

wherein has the Lover greatest pleasure? In the contentacion of the body, or
of the mind?

In the contentacion of the body, the body being the true obiecte of Love.
And since it is so: when a woman begins to ware hoare heared, give her a
blow upon the tail with thy foot and let her go.

Why do we love the body so much being but ^arthe and corruptible?

We love it because we can not always have it.

Can the love of the body and of the sprite agree together, or whether be they
contrary?

They be contrary, and one against the other.

I would know whether the body alone might content the Lover?

Not if he be virtuous, gentle and of a good Nature.

When a woman answers nothing to the request made unto her, is it a sign
that she agrees thereunto?

Sometimes yea, sometimes no: whereof a man can ground no certain judgment if
he pursue no further.

Wherefore do young women love perfumes so much?

They be al Uenus children. And the Greek Poets affirm that Uenus never
departed from any place without leaving an exquisite perfume behind her, for
witness of her presence. Besides this all perfumes and good odors do either
open the appetite or else provoke Uenus.

Wherefore do men compare the beauty of a woman to a flower?

Because it is soon come and soon gone.

Why do men feign that Love lives among flowers?

Because that flowers give continual hope of fructe. And even so does Love,
for he nourishes and enterteineth his servants continually with hope,
trusting to enjoy at the last the fructe longed for.

Of two Lovers, which shall we esteem more to be favored, him from whom his
Lady shall take away a nosegaie and put it in her bosom, or him to whom she
shall give a nosegaie that she her self did wear?

The properties of women is to take and not to give. I say then that he shall be
best beloved, to whom she shall give the nosegaie.

Of what coulor should women be most desired?

I would desire them to be of the coulor wherewith men paint virtue, which is
read: but men do desire the pale, and yet they them selves desire to be read.

Of whom have women learned to close their ears against the supplications of
poor Lovers.

Of the Serpent Aspis which is deaffe and venemouse.

Wherefore do men say that a woman has the look of a Serpent, and the eye of
a Basilisque.

By reason of the great subtlety and craft wherewith they use to entrappe and
draw men to their love.

Be Herbs medicinable for love.

Yes I have seen thexperience thereof at Mantu^ a city in Italy albeit Ovid
cries out that love can find no remedy in herbs.

Wherefore is the life of a lover not beloved compared to hell?

He that made such comparison did it by good judgment.

Think ye that women be the greatest goodness that is in all the world?

They that judge and esteem so be blind and have placed their senses on earthly
things, but they whose minds be directly bent on high would say the
contrary.

Is there greter swetenes then bitterness in amorouse death?

Bitterness in all things does surmount and pass all swetenes and specially in
love.

Why do women generally hate war?

Because it retayneth men, and thereby are deprived of their service and
intertainement.

Do lovers live in more peace and quietness being nere or far of?

They live better in peace a far of, that I can speak by good experience,
for it is not long ago that I being servant to a Lady of Placentia a city in
Italy, she assured me to have proved in her self my saying: and it is not yet
three wekes that a Lady whom I serve with all devotion said the like to my
great grief and sorrow.

Must we be ceremoniouse in love?

All true lovers live in love with fidelity and integrity of heart^ without
any ceremonies.

Is it more pleasure to love or to be beloved?

I believe to love, considering that it comes and proceeds of a free and
frank action and deed.

Who is better content, the bridegr^me or the bride when they embrace each
other.

The bride, and that it is so, ye shall see them continually rise up merry and
joyful in the morning.

What signified the ancient Poets, by causing the girdell of verginitie to be
vnknitte at marriages.

What else, but that the bride must change her estate, and signifies that
she was untied (that is to say) made free to this end, that like a good
huswife she should not be slothful, but go about her house, and look to all
parts of the same.

Which is best married, the maid taken perforce, or the man whom she loves?

In the act of marriage will rules, and not force.

Is Love a thief? what is he accustomed to steal?

He is a thief, and a great robber of hearts.

Do you think it theft, to rob by mean of beauty?

Is there any greater theft? Is not beauty the cruellest Tyrant that is.

Wherein does the beauty of women resemble the spring times?

For that it does soon pass a way and perish.

Wherefore be all things more disposed to love in the spring time, then in any
other season?

Because that then the humors do move them selves, and the blood does wax
hot.

What is the greatest happiness that man can have in love?

To possess and play with his lover, without Ialousie or suspicion.

The eyes of the Lady have they such force upon the heart of the Lover, as
the beams of the Sun have upon things on earth?

Yea doubtless, if the looks be amorouse, otherwise it is clean contrary.

The time employed about Love, is it well bestowed, or is it lost?

If a man bestow his love well he loses nothing, but does rathe^ gain.

Is love subject to time, as all other creatures be?

Love is free and is in property above time.

What is the greatest pleasure that a true Lover can feel?

To think that he is borne to serve and please his Lady.

Be our hearts drawn by an amorouse woman, as the Clouds by the wind
Caecias, Iron by the Adamant, and straw by Awmbre?

There is far greater force in the drawinges and inticementes of women.

May Love be well called and termed an Enchaunter and Magician?

His effects be supernatural: and therefore to be esteemed a Magician, and more
then a Magician.

Wherefore have certain wise men painted Love with his eyes unbound?

To show that nothing is hid from him, and that there is no craft unknown
unto him, whereof he has not the counterpoiz.

Do ye believe, that a true lover does think, that he may merit the grace
of his Lady by his service?

All true lovers do judge and esteem their Ladies to be of inestimable price
and valor, otherwise they could not be induced to love them. And if it be so,
how can a Lover be so arrogant to think that for a little dured travel he can
get such favor?

Whereof was Love made?

He was composed of pleasure and displeasure.

Wherefore be women compared to Proteus.

Because of their great inconstancy.

Tell me, if it were possible for Lovers to change them selves into many and
diverse forms, as Proteus did. In what form were it best for them by wishing
to remain with their Ladies?

I would advise them to become Satyrs, which have their tails hard and
stiff continually.

Whereof proceeds so many Bawdes?

Because many desire to depend of other rather then of them selves.

How is it possible for poor Lovers to end their travels?

By despair, never to be fortunate in Love, or never to enjoy theffecte
thereof.

Why be young hores commonly old bawdes?

To cause other to feel the pleasure which they whilom did feel them selves.
Or else because they would that all other were like them selves, that they
might have no cause whereof to be ashamed.

Ought she to be called a bawd which does the message without taking of money?

I say that she does not deserve to wear that hoode, considering it
proceeds of pure pity which she takes upon the weakness and fragilitie of
other.

What qualities ought one to have to be a perfect bawd?

They must sometimes be discrete and have a respect to things: sometimes they
must be importunate, foreseing, well speaking, and that they may and can
consider both the time and conditions of the persons.

Falling into the hands of a pitilesse woman, what were best to do? To absent
him self from her, and to pass over into some other country? Or else to
have her daily before his eyes, and to take occasion of travel?

The surest thing is to absent him self far of.

I desire to know if the ordonaunces of Love be reasonable or not?

The principal ordonaunces of Love are, that they love equally: and that
between the Lover and his Lady there be nothing hidden. And thus I esteem the
ordonaunces of Love to be very reasonable, seeing that he uses such quality
in things unequal.

Does Love use his laws with equity or with rigor?

He that understands them well, shall find that Love continually has used and
does use his ordonaunces with great equity.

Be not the laws of Love subject to other laws?

The laws of Love be sovereign above all other.

Are they contrary to the laws of Nature?

No they be rather conformable unto them, and be as it were one thing.

May Love be called an excellent Phisician?

Nay rather a hurter of men, for how can he take upon him the title of a
Phisician that can not heal any other wounds but those that he him self
makes.

Of what power is the Scepter of Love?

Able to make them liberal hardy and pacient that will follow his trace.

If love proceed of Idleness, how can the same make men ingeniouse and witty?

Love has always done and yet does great miracles, and therefore for him to
do that is no great meruell.

How may Lovers be most truly termed: fools or wise men?

I will call them wise, if they have well set and placed their love, and by
loving do not lose them selves. Fools I will also esteem them, if they love
the thing without reason and measure that is not worthy to be beloved.

Whereof ryseth Ialousie?

It comes to some of the fear that they have to lose the thing that they
most love. To others, to see that which they love, to love another.

Who is most Ialouse? the man or the woman? and which of them has greatest
occasion?

The woman is most Ialouse, but the man has the greater occasion: the reason
thereof and the cause I will keep silent for this time.

Is the Ialouse person blind, or has he a good judgment to foresee?

If Ialousie be moderate, it sharpeneth both the judgment and sight in such
wise, as it sees and knows all: But if it excede it is more confuse and
blind then a Moule.

Whom does Ialousie become? or whom does it not become?

Ialousie is not comely in him that has experience of the faithfulness of his
Lady, but Ialousie is not uncomely in him that is a new Lover.

Think you that where love is great, there Ialousie may be great also?

Many do think the contrary, because that the vehemency of love does so
transport the person, that he is never separated from the thing that he loves.

Were it good for them that be Ialouse to dye without cause in that rage? What
should they fear more?

It should be well employed.

Whereof comes Ialousie?

Of envy and love.

Is the Ialouse man without judgment?

Not always, considering that most commonly the scapes of Ladies are
discovered: and he is very blind that can not perceive them.

What is the property of Ialousie?

It is to serve to a thousand deaths, to prepare embushmentes for the honor of
Ladies, and to mingle in the midst of other pleasures, poysones mischiefs
and hatredes.

Do ye think that Love does only intrappe the light and tender hearts?

I do think that it intrappeth all, and there is none that is able to shut
the gate against him.

Is it possible that a noble sprite for a small matter may be entrapped?

I believe that it may, for every gentle spirit for each little trifle is
inflamed, whose noble and gentle mind is subject to Love.

Is it sufferable to falsify faith in love?

Why not? ^ith it is nourished only with discept, treason, and falshod.

Is the service of Love more troublesome then others?

In effect it is more weighty and troublesome: but in will much more easy to
be disgested.

What is it that pacifieth Lovers in their greatest travel?

It is Hope.

Wherefore do they feign love to be tied to a pillar of Jasper, The water of
the river of Lethe being dronken does cause a man to forget his memory.
with a chain of Diamonde and Topace, dipped in the flodde Lethe?

To provoke women to be pudike and chaste, and to turn their eyes from the
wanton allurementes which their lovers be use toward them.

Should the ingrate or unkind woman be beloved?

No, because there can not be found a worse vice then ingratitude. Wherefore we
ought to deem her hollie transformed into the nature of brute beasts?

Which is the trewest service in love?

A steadfast and a constant faith.

The Lover that is loved, is he a servant or a master?

He is rather a servant then a master, for so much as he is clogged with a
double chain. To love and to be loved be two chains, although that the one be
voluntary and the other by necessity.

Do you think that a woman without the prejudice and hurt of her honor, may
satisfy one that has served her a long time and season?

I dare not say without prejudice. But yet I will affirm that she is to be
excused, if she give him some ^ase that has long and faithfully served her.

Which is the greatest ingratitude that may chance in love?

Not to reward at all his services.

Why is the service of Love worthy of greater reward then other?

Because the longer one continues therein, the greater bitterness he endures
and suffers.

Think ye that Love has placed his principal treasure in women?

I believe so, because it has given them the soueraintie above all men.

Who is the most fortunate in love? the Attendant, or the possessor?

The possessor has one contentacion, but the attendaunt has more then a
thousand.

Is love the cause of good or evil?

Of good, seeing he makes fools wise.

Why do men say that love is a perfect musician?

Because he tuneth the sprites and affections which before had no agreement.

Why do men say, that a faier woman is a monster in beauty?

Because it is a rare thing, as monsters be.

Do Courtyzans love, or do they feign to love?

There be many reasons to say that they love not, but experience teaches the
contrary, for I know them that be mad for love, and other that die for the
same.

Wherefore do Lovers many times take upon them long Iourneis to rid them
selves from Love?

Because daily travel in Iourneis do cause new and strange things to
appear, able to cause a man to forget love, I speak nothing of the pains men
have, nor yet of the new loves that may chance, which as one nail does
drive out an other, so they make and cause them to forget their first.

Whereof comes it that many Lovers, the more they be ill intreted of their
Ladies, the more they be inflamed in their lou^

That comes of a certain constancy of Nature. Or we may well say that all
Lovers be not masters over them selves.

Whereof does it come, that the woman is more Ialouse then the man?

Because she is more fearful and suspiciouse: or else because she loves
with less discretion then the man.

whether is it more difficulte to fly love, or to dissemble it, when one is
entangled with the same?

He that loves not at al, nor is overcome with any affections, can without
great pain dissemble love: but where love rules and mastereth, it has such
force, that in despite of us he does manifest and show himself.

How chances it, that diverse great amities and frendships are upon small
occasion turned into great hatred and malice?

That comes through the lightness and inconstancy of Lovers.

How comes it, that he which is soon taken with Love, does soon forget
it?

He is like to them that ride a great gallop, and by and by wax weary

Why be some more given to their kin, and of them take more pleasure, then of
other?

For the conformity of blood.

What means it, that although diverse women being of Nature couetouse and
hold fast, yet cannot give them selves to love those that be rich?

They do that, to show that they will not sell their good grace, but be
willing to give it liberally, as being of a noble and gentle spirit: but how
many shall ye find of that mind.

Why do they esteem it daungerouse to love a man that is fair?

Because that such be most desired, or they be of Nature more proud then
other. For Beauty is the mother of pride.

Whereof comes it, that women do greatly hate those that have forsaken them:
and with greater malice if they carry away any thing of theirs?

The double loss which they receive is the cause.

Why should we not ground our love upon those that be to young?

Because they be inconstant, very bold, and ever more curiouse of new
servants and lovers.

How chances it, that most commonly the beautiful desire to have
servants and Lovers that be faier. And that the virtuous those that be
virtuous?

Similitude and likeness does engendre and bread love.

How is it that they which have a short or dim sight, are more given to love
then other?

It may be because they se not the foulnes and imperfectio^s so well as others

Whereof comes it, that the Contrie people do love paiesantes better then
Citizens?

Because they be more affectioned to their like.

Why do women appear fayrer by candle light, then in the clear day?

Because their painting or beauty does glister more by candle light then
otherwise: even as our body and flesh does shine more being in the sun,
then in the shadow.

Which of these were it best to serve? a maid? a married woman? or a wydowe?

The love of the maid is most constant, of the widow much more pleasant,
and of the wedded woman more sclaunderouse and hurtefull.

Whereof comes it, that such as love Religiouse men can scantly and with great
pain retire them selves?

The Religiouse for the most part be learned, and consequently they can
persuade and make the simple woman understand a thousand tales and joys,
causing them to believe, that they will do them pleasure, and that they shall
triumph in Paradise, and be placed and set in the rank and company of
Angels.

Whereof comes it, that many be so amorouse of Nuns?

Because the hidden beauty is most desired, and because they he attired and
colored with ten thousand toys: and it seems that al their words be so sweet
as Sugar and Rose water.

Whereof comes it, that those which be young are more amorouse then other?

Because they trust to receive greater pleasure.

Wherefore is love painted to be placed between slouthfulnes and hatred: and
that Idleness goes before, and hatred follows with wings?

Because Idleness does engendre love, and of love many times rises hatred.

Whereof comes it, that women which of nature be timerouse, be nevertheless
strong and hardy in amorouse enterprises?

Because Love does darken their understanding, and in things wherein they
should be most fearful, does harden and encorage them.

Whereof does it come that old women for the most part are embraced of young
men, and that sometimes old men do sooner enjoy young women?

Old women through experience be very bold and hardy, and without any
regard imploye them selves upon young men. Old men (because they be not ^o be
feared, and that without suspicion they may speak familiarly by good
authority by reason of their age*) do come for the most part where young
men for nothing that they be able to do can come.

What means it, that women given to Love, be more disposed to charms and
enchauntmentes then men?

Of their folly and fond belefe, which is the thing principally required in
charms and enchauntementes. And thereof it comes that the number of women
witches be greater then men.

What is it that causes most the union and conjunction of Lovers?

The diversity of complexion causes the effects of Love to be diverse. And
most commonly the celestial influences be the causes of their union and
conjunction.

What does it mean, that simple Shepardes have been taken with the love of
some great Lady and Princess?

We evermore desire the things which we cannot have. Love also takes pleasure
in many strange things. But there is yet a thing more strange, to see two
persons of diverse fortune, the one to dye for the other. Read the history of
Tancredy in the Palace of Pleasure.

Whereof comes it, that young women which be in love, are never satisfied in
dancing, and in all other things they be of foeble complexion.

Immoderate desire of Dancing is Uenereall, young women and maidens be subject
to Venus. So that in such acts they never find them selves molested or weried.

From whence comes it, that Love makes us solitary and pensiffe?

Love as Ouide does write, is full of fear and care. And it perteyneth to the
fearful to be solitary and pensif.

What is the cause that many do esteem themselves not to be well loved, if
Ialousie be not mixed with Love?

The fear which they have to leese the thing that they love, does cause the
Lover to be more cherished.

What causes many men although they be faier, young, rich and fresh, to be
Ialouse of the least wretch they see?

It may come of their own concepte. Or for that they know the lightness of
their mistres behauior.

Wherefore do women require above all things, their servants and Lovers to
be secret?

Love being discovered there is not so great pleasure: besides that Love
disclosed can bring naught else but damage and travel, and sometime danger of
death: as may be red in the second Tome of the Palace of Pleasure, almost
ready to the print, Of a Lady of Burgundy.

Whereof c^mmeth it, that Lovers delight so much in Music

Music is a very vain thing. And Lovers always follow after vanity. Yet I
will not blame all sorts of Music, but that only which is lasciuiouse and
does effeminate the sprites.

What means it, that many do love fervently, and yet cannot be beloved.

That proceeds by reason the complexions can not agree.

How chances it that Love does make men lean.

Lovers be in continual travel, which dries up the bones, by reason whereof
they diminishe and consume them selves.

What is the cause that the talk of Love or sight of theffectes thereof in
painted Tables, make men desirouse to enter into his snares.

The pleasures that be past are by such means brought to our memory, and so
the pleasure is double.

Why does Love blind us from seeing the Imperfections of the thing which we
love?

Love is blind, and does blind other.

Why is a man many times amorouse of a woman upon her only feign?

Renown does evermore make things greater then they be. And the mind
estemeth things more great by hearing, then by sight.

Why does the earnest view and beholding of a person make a man amourouse?

The eyes are the messengers of love, but specially when the beams which
proceed from the heart do unite and conform them selves to the thing viewed and
looked upon.

What is thoccasion that Lovers do study to apply them selves to the
imperfections of their Ladies?

It is the better to resemble them, being well assured that conformity of
manners does ingendre love.

How comes it, that women can better perceive and discern those that be
amorouse, then men.

It may be that they are more expert in the practice of Love, as being more
subject unto it then men be. A goodly history hereof may be seen in the second
Tome of the Palace of Pleasure, of Queen Anne of Hungary.

From whence comes it that amorouse Ladies are more liberal then they which
resist Love?

It is the property of Love to cause them to be liberal and free hearted.

Whereof comes it that when Lovers do talk with their Ladies, spittle does
come and increase in their mouths.

The tongue often times moved does heat it self, and that heat does resolve
into spittle.

Whereof comes it that when amorouse dames do talk with their Lovers, their
breasts seem as though they would depart, their bosom does leap and hop
with such force.

That proceeds of the great neighborhood that the heart has with the pappes
from whom all the vital spirit^s do proceed, who retyring them to the breasts,
be the cause of such motions.

Whereof comes it that diverse amorouse women do often times speak evil of
their servants or Lovers?

It is to put away the suspicion that men may engendre of their Love, or else
for fear that other women should backebyte them.

Why do men so willinglye kiss the eyes of them whom they love?

The eye is the derest part of the body: and in the eye a man may see and
know what is hidden in the heart, or else they do it because the eye is the
beginning of Love.

Wherefore do Lovers hyde them selves when they go about to content each other.

Because of the filthiness of the act, or by a natural shamefastnes, for that
they seem to do a thing that is not very honest.

Wherefore be Lovers so curiouse to know the name of their Ladies?

Because they suppose to find in the names some secret thing that may yield
them hope to enjoy the thing that they so greatly desire, or else we may well
say that Lovers will not only possess the bodies of their Ladies, but also
have all that is joined thereunto, and that which does depen^ thereof.

Whereof comes it that Lovers be so importunate to demand of their Ladies
how well they love them?

It is to certifye them selves the more, of which assurance the spirit does
appaise it self, and receives contentation.

Wherefore do Lovers delyght to carye about them any thing that has been
their Ladies?

To be more agreeable unto them, and the better to conform them selves to their
desires and wills.

Wherefore do Lovers give their colors the one to the other?

The conformity of deeds and will does ingendre and augment amity. Besides
this the colors secretly do give to understand the thing that inwardlye we
do suffer, as by signifying of inconstancy, diminution of heat, mockeries,
travels, humility, highness, we do show it by the colors of a yelowe, pale,
read, blewe, white, graye, and incarnate.

What causes diverse Ladies esteemed wise and of good judgment to give them
selves over to vile men, infamouse and wicked?

I have told you often times that Love is blind, and does captiuate the
senses, abandoning judgment and foresight in women, specially in those that
be amorouse, whose wits be very weak and imperfect.

Whereof comes the custom that the Greeks do eat a confection made of
Quinces (commonly called Marmalade) the first night of their marriage?

Because they fear to disease and werie their spouses at the first recountre
and meting.

Whereof comes it that many be in love with Gard^ners?

Their simplicity perchance is the cause: Or else because gardens be dedicated
to Venus, and those that be continually within them do savor of Rosemarye,
Margerome, or of some other sweet herb.

How chances it that the new married women the first night of their marriage
go so unwillingly to bed, and do rise the next day so lusty and joyful?

That comes of the perfection that they have received of the man, for then
they know that they be women in deed.

Wherefore does agreement in love cause things to please us, which otherwise
should not so do?

Love of necessity does inflame. For we seeing many to pursue the thing we
love, the opinion which we have of her beauty does increase in us.

Why does a word many times more allure the heart, then long service?

Because service was not inployed to the purpose, and the word was spoken to
effect.

How comes it that women touched upon the Navel, be incontinent provoked
with a desire to enter the field?

There be certain veins in the mawe, whereof the Navel is made, and the mawe
is the very seat of voluptuousnes: It is no marvel then if they be moved
thereunto when they be touched upon the same.

What is the cause that some lovers be better pleased with the Melancholic,
then with the lively and lusty?

Lovers be easelie induced to believe that they be beloved, and perceiving their
Ladies to be Melancholic and heuie, they esteem that to come of the care that
they do take of them and of their affairs, but it may be that it comes of
the agreement and similitude of complexion.

Why be rich women more given to love then the poor?

Idleness is the cause, who is the mother of all superfluity. I leave to speak
of the delicate meats and the good wines that the rich does use, without
having any grief or vexation which troubles their brain.

Why is love most commonly painted with his eyes bound up?

Because he blinds poor Lovers and makes them so like unto beasts, that
they cannot at all deserne the imperfections of their Ladies.

Why do Lovers delighte to hear amorouse histories of Love discribed as well
by aunciente writers, as the histories written by aucthours of our time?

By the conformity of their passions, and likelihode of their affections.

Why be women well content when they be told that other women be in love as
well as they?

Because their fault seems the less, not being alone spotted with that vice.

Wherefore do stepmothers love their sons in law, and hate their daughters in
law?

They hate their daughters in Law because they draw all the substance from
their sons: and they love their sons in law as the principal goodness and
solace of their own daughters.

Why is love better liked in the Cuntrie then in the To^^?

Because in villages there is not so great respect, and for that all
commodities and things are not to be found there, Lovers be constrained to
apply themselves one to another. Moreover the pleasure of gardines, of
hunting, fyshing, and other Cuntrie delights do most commonly cause men to
keep themselves at home, and to forgett the toys and follies of Towns and
Cities.

Whereof comes it that amourouse women be more ticklishe then other?

Women prone to love be delicate for the most part, whose skins be lose and
soft, more easy to be tickled.

Why do women love them most earnestly that had their Maydenhede, and men
clean contrary hate those women who^ first of all they embrased?

Women by the conjunction of the man do gain perfection, and the man thereby
makes him self imperfect, because the woman is a creature imperfect, and as
the Philosophers say, a creature caused and not complete.

Why be some hard to be persuaded that they be beloved?

Because they perceive not themselves amiable: and because they know that in
them there is nothing that may incite other to love them.

Wherefore do Lovers many times write to their Lovers, with the Ioyse of Onions,
or of Leamondes?

Because the thing which is written with such ioyse should not appear
manifest, except it be near the fire, and they do so to keep their love
secret.

Why do not Lovers subscribe their letters which they write to their Ladies and
Paramoures?

The reason and cause is above mentioned, being assured that if their Love ^ere
disciphred, they should have less pleasure. Besides this away should be opened
for false tongues, to impeach and let their minds and purposes

Why do Lovers write one to another amorouse sonnets in ryme rather then in
prose?

Poetry is the friend of Love. And all the praise belonging to love was always
more swetely song and celebrated by Poets then by Orators.

Wherefore do women so willingly behold them selves in Glasses?

To contemplate and behold their beauty to esteem the same as it is worthy.
Or else it proceeds of a certain lightness that is in them.

But wherefore use they more willingly glasses of Stele, then of Crystal?

Stele is of a more sound substance, conforting with his glimse or
reuerberation the sight more then Crystal does.

Wherefore do we present women with glasses, gloves, ringes, chains, Jewels
and pretty fannes to cool their faces or defend the same from the fire?

Glasses do serve them to see their beauty: fannes refresh and cole them
cheynes to signify that they be foles, and had need to be cheyned: gloves to
let their hands from snatching, still ready and proper to the spoil: Ringes
that they may consider the end with the beginning, and to think upon the time
present and to come.

What is thoccasion that many women have lived chastely in their youth, and
approaching to age, have given them selves over to wantonness?

It may be that in their youth they labored much, for travel is enemy to
love. Or else they were so well looked unto, that they had no leisure or time to
attempt that enterprise.

Whereof does it come, that loving and amorouse women be given to babble and
prate more then other?

If love be not to excessife it renders and makes folks joyful, lusty, and
well speaking. And commonly it seems that heaviness stops the Orgaines and
conduictes of the voice: contrariewise Joy and gladness of the heart does open
and unloose them.

What is the cause that many rapt with love do upon the soudein lose this love?

All they which be of hot complexion be subject to soudeine mutations and
chaunges, and run hither and thither without any rest.

Whereof comes it that Lovers lose their eating or appetite?

The amorouse passions does disparse their hearts into sundry parts, and
their lively and vital spirits be improper to digestion through being to much
distracte hither and thither, and plonged in affections of Love.

Why did the auncientes painte Love with a window or a gate in his stomach,
wherein were written these two words: Far of, and at hand?

To show yt he which is a Lover must love as well in absence as in presence

But why was he painted bare hedded?

To show that between Lovers there should be nothing covered or hidden.

Wherefore do some paint Love with the face of a man, and not of an Infant?

To show that a lover ought to be constant as very men be, and not like the
brutishe.

I desire to know wherefore the notable painter Zeuxis did painte him with a
grene robe?

Because Lovers live in continual hope: and grene does signify no other
thing then hope.

But why does he set upon the borders of his Robe these words: Death and
Life.

Because that true Love dureth both in life, and also after death, and
breaks neu^r for any accident that may happen.

And wherefore did Appelles painte him with these words written in his
forhedde: Spring time and Summer?

To show that in Love there is both prosperity and adversity, which are
represented by those two seasons.

Wherefore do they give him wings?

Because the desires of Lovers do tend always to high things.

Wherefore do they make him a child?

Because that whosoever does give him self to love, has no understanding:
for most commonly he loses for a thing of naught, matters weighty and of
great Importance.

What moved thinhabitauntes of Cipres to paint Love, having a Turkey bow
behind his back, and his Arrows before

It was because that love has a custom to wound all them that he meteth. And
because that he secretly does the same, they place the Turkey bow behind his
back.

Wherefore be his arrows never blunt, but sharp?

Because they should wound the better and enter more depely, for they make him
sore to feel that is wounded with them.

How comes it that women, how dissolute or whorishe soever they be, their
bodies being uncovered do hide their privy parts?

That comes of a natural shamefastnes: or it is because that such parts
are filthy and ill favored to look upon, and without any proportion.

How comes it that one look is more hurtefull to Lovers, and wounds them
more then any touching or talk?

That is because love takes his beginning of loking.

Why do Lovers wax so soon pale and lean?

The passions of the mind do bring the body to a poor estate.

What is the cause that the game of Love does provoke man sometimes to sleep
and sometimes to watch?

If it be used excessiuelie it hinders sleep, for the party euacuated and
made foeble by such excess, his spirits be diminished and moved by
disquieting of the brain, whereupon sleep is interupted: but when the spirits
be quiet and at rest, then the brain is cooled, and thereof rises sleep, the
nourice of Nature.

Whereof comes it that this pastime and play does often times expel from us
al melancholy and heaviness of mind?

I will show you, with the seed there is extruded certain adust and burning
vapors which bredeth in us heaviness and melancholy. Afterward man begins
to wax pensife, because he has lost and separated from his body the thing
that nourished his members.

Whereof comes it that Posts, Ryders, weuers, and generally they which be
accustomed to great agitation of the body be more lecherouse then other?

Moving does heat the reins and the vessels of generation. Travel also
does open the conduictes where the seed does pass, and is not to be
doubted: but cold does cause the humors to be in a manner immovable, letting
the seed from coming to the generatife parts.

Whereof comes it that men of hot, strong and good complexion, absteining
from copulation with women do commonly fall into the flux, or have the yealowe
Iaundesse, or be troubled with immoderate colere?

Men with their seed do avoid certain corrupt humors, the which remaining in
the body be converted either into colere, or else into the yealowe Iaundesse.

What is the cause that Harlottes and whores do stincke so rammishe?

Because they seldom retain their seed, which being out of the Matrice does
corrupt and stincke.

Is it lawful for a lover to take his pleasure with any other besides his own
Lady?

I answer no. Nevertheless his Lady being absent and can not inioye her, he
may have liberty to use another, if she resemble his own in such perfection
as she may be termed a second Lady: but not in any wise to fyxe his heart
upon her. He then, I say, that uses such a one in his Ladies absence is the
rather to be excused, but neither of them is to be admitted in my judgment, if
he mean to deserve the title of a true Lover

Tell me then what thing is Love?

It is a passion that does blind the sprites, remoueth the understanding,
takes all the memory away, causes ruin and loss of goods, makes a man
weak, and is the enemy of youth, and the death of old age, the mother of
all vices: the receptacle of pe^sife minds: a thing without ^eason, without
order and stabilitie, and the whirlepoole of man's liberty.

What is a woman of her self?

A beast imperfect, given to ten thousand passions and pleasures, abominable
to be thought well of. So that if men would do as they ought to do, they would
not follow them nor pursue them, with other desire or appetite, but as things
inevitable, which necessity does constrein the^ to use.

Wherefore be there so few women that can content them selves to love one?

Because a woman is nothing but Lechery, in^aciable. And for this cause she
cares neither for number, nor for any thing that is honest, so that he be able
to cover her skin, he is welcome.

What is the cause that Love being discovered comes seldom to per^ection?

For the lettes that comes thereby.

Why have old men the repulse of young women?

Because they have not wherwithal to ease them where it Itcheth.

Why do women count them beasts that be over curious and diligent to serve
them?

Because they know themselves unworthy of such service.

Is it true that men say, when one kisseth two mouths, one of them must needs
stincke.

I believe so, if he love perfectly.

How comes it that Lovers are more suspiciouse then other?

Because their minds be continually troubled.

Why is it so noisome for a rich woman to suffer trouble?

Riches ingendreth pride and insolency,

Where do noble minds commonly mete together?

Where the fairest Ladies be,

What is required in a perfect Lover?

To fear and reverence above all things the mighty power of Love, and to
refer or report to him of all his thoughts and desires.

How do men come to the fruicte of Love?

By hope and perseueraunce.

What things are contrary to the kingdom of Love?

Shame and fear.

Who be they that do not let to serve Love, although they be otherwise pressed
with affairs?

Lusty and coragiouse hearts, which in despite of business do not pass to
suffer them selves to enter the yoke of Love.

What be the pains of Love?

Hurtes and wounds more then deadly: that is, desires full of rage, extreme
travel, exile and banishmente, greuouse martyrdom, and pride intolerable.

What is the meat of perfect Lovers?

Sighs and tears.

Wherwithall do they make sacrifice to Love?

With clean hearts, which are not spotted with any couetousenes.

Who be the messengers of Love?

Pleasure, Travel, sweet, bitter, war, Peace, life and death.

What are the causes of Lovers sicknesses?

Heart breakinges, hurtful fastings, the hungre of Love, trembling quiuering,
and continual travels, secret dolors, the extremity of vexations, and great
watchinges.

which are the benefits of Love?

Plays, stepe, beds, pleasures, rest, tranquillity, contentation,
abundance, peace, refreshinges, and other reioysinges.

Who be most secret in love, men? or women?

Women be most secret no doubt, because they speak less then men, a thing
likely to be true, but seldom seen.

Is the benefit greater by being secret in Love, or the hurt by too much
speaking?

I think the hurt surmounteth.

Think you that by the dexterity of the sprite, men may know the secrets of
Lovers?

The holy Scripture does witness, that the heart of man cannot be known, and
that god alone does know the same.

Why be the secrets of love so easily kept?

For the great swetenes that men find in them.

Is it better to love them that be faier, or them that be secret

Without doubt the secret wise, are more worthy to be loved, for beauty is of
little continuance.

How should men keep them selves secret in love?

They must take heed that they pass not oftentimes by their Lovers houses, or
often follow their haunte, but wait until Fortune present apt occasion.

How should our pleasures be measured?

They ought to agree with our age, with our estate, with the time and place
where we be.

What should be the faithful service of a Lover?

It ought to be necessary and voluntary with the heart and the life.

What means it that women for the most part do love them that have slow
and unsettled heddes, and contemn others which have more amiable qualities.

They do esteem perhaps that they shall be better beloved and served of those
meaner spiretes, because they have not such knowledge as the other which are
of more understanding then they.

How many sorts of beauties be there?

Three, one in the body, the other does consist in the accord and harmony of
the voice, the third in virtue.

How may they be comprehended?

The first by the eyes, the second by the ears, the third by the
understanding. And men may also inioye the perfection of beauty, by sight, by
hearing, and by thought.

What mean the Poets when they feign of Circes, that she with her sorceries
did change and transform al them that tarried with her into beasts?

They would signify by that metamorphose, no other thing, but the wanton and
lassiuiouse allurementes of Circes, wherewith deteyning all those that fell into
her hands, she so far forth made them equal to brute beasts that utterly
they forgot their true estate of manhood.

From whence come the pains that men suffer in this earthly and vulgar Love?

They proceed of that, that we desire things which we can not always have at
our will and minds.

Do ye think that desire of beauty does hinder the rest and quietness of men?

No, for that desire is not of any thing Corporal.

Wherefore do men attribute arrows and fire unto Love?

To show how ardent and full of dolor his passions be.

Why is Love painted naked?

Because that all the acts and deeds of Lovers be such, that they can not be
hidden nor dissembled.

What is the greatest blindness in Love?

To love her whom we think can not be contented with the love of one.

Whether do ye esteem greatest, the beauty or the foulnes of those that can
not content them selves with the love of one?

The foulenes is far greater.

What deserve they? to be loved, or hated?

In my Judgment they should be hated and eschewed as the plague.

Which is the greatest spur that provoke a man to do well and honorably?

The presence and favor of his Lady.

To what thing is the servitude of Love like?

To the service of Princes.

How should a man behave himself among Ladies?

As in the court among Princes and great estates, to wit that he must be
bold and hardy.

Is it very true that he must needs be bold and full of audacitie?

After my opinion no: but according as a man may use him self, I say yea.
Notwithstanding I suppose that in the court and train of Princes and in the
service of Ladies, men ought rather to march in the steps of humility and
reverence, then in to much hardines and presumption.

Which be the noblest hearts?

They whom love disdaineth not to warm with his sacred heat.

Wherefore do sum love many persons at once, and yet do not use to disclose the
same?

Noble minds take great pleasure to do so, but to tell and show it, it is but
loss and shame.

Is it true which men say, that if one be in love with another, he then bears
affection to all those things, which resemble the thing he loves?

That is to true, for they be in love even with things that be dombe and
without sense, with pictures and engraven things and such like, if they show
any remembrance of the thing they love.

What is the true gage of Love?

A pure and clean heart.

Why do women very oftentimes blame or disprayse their Lovers?

To the intent that other should praise them, thereby to double their pleasure.

Who has the more lively spirit, and better memory, the man, or the woman?

The man, not after the saying only of the Philosophers, but also of holy
Scripture.

Who has the better judgment of the amiable parts, the man, or the woman?

The man, as being endued with the nature of a more high understanding, and a
spirit more subtle.

May we love the thing that does turn us to dishonor?

I think not.

What is the greatest recompense that a woman can make unto a man?

To reveal unto him her secrets, and finally to make him Lord and master of
her body, and of all her thoughts.

FINIS.
NATURAL QVESTIONS, and the Answers. THE.II. BOOK.
The doubts of C^n^e Fu^uio Rargone
Wherefore is not Chese made of beasts that be tothed on both sides?

Because their milk will not curde or cream.

Wherefore do men cast Smallage into Pondes?

Because Smallage does serve Fyshe for a medecin, and also they delight to
eat the same.

Whereof comes it that Dogs never love to eat of the tail, or of the
belly of a Heart?

Because the gall of a Heart is sometimes in the tail, and sometimes in the
belly.

What is the cause that fat people have little blodde?

Because the grease and the fatnes do consume it.

Whereof comes the saying of the Auncientes: that he who is wont to eat a
kind of pulse called Lentilles, is for the most part pleasant and amiable?

It is because that Lentilles do cause cold humors.

How comes it that we be more gredie to eat when the North or Northeast
wind does blow, then at other tunes?

That comes of the cold of the foresaid winds, which does unite and hold
the natural heat together.

The (...) a noble man of Trescia.
Whereof comes it, that the Florentines when they be disposed to quench their
thirste, do drink water mingled with Uineger?

I will tell you. Uineger being of his nature cold remoueth the inflammation
and heat of the stomach, which provoke thirst, and so by removing the cause,
the affection also is taken away.

Whereof comes it that the Sheperds of Nuceria in Campania within the region
of Italy, when they mean to geld their cattle, do lay upon their coddes,
things stupefactiue, that is to say, that properly do mortify?

Things stupefactiue do thicken the vital spirits of the membre, and do
alter the complexion thereof, so that they let the natural heat, and stop the
conduictes whereby the sperme does descend.

What mean the Shepherdes of Calabria, when they list that the Ram shall
engendre a wether lamb, to tie the left codd, and when they will that it be a
female, to tie up the right*

The male lamb is hotter then the female, and therefore most commonly he is
engendered of the right side, and the female on the left. Binding then the left
codde, the sede and likewise the generatife sprite enters the right Codd,
whereby he takes heat and force which does sooner bring forth a male then a
female.

What causes the Ethiopians and Mores when they entende to gelde their
cattle, to cut their veins which be under the Temples?

The sperme and seed for the most part does descend by the veins above
the Temples, which being cut, there can no manner of humors descend from the
brain, and so all means of generation are cut away.

Whereof comes it, that to get a stomach, men use egre and sharp things?

That is because all egre things do dry and open the stomach, which causes
the appetite.

What causes, that they which have a feminine voice be not in any great
estimation or opinion among the wise?

Whosoever has upon him either member, or mark, or manner of doing which is
proper to any other creature whatsoever it be, he is suerly participant of the
nature of the said creature. And because the woman is of small practice,
whosoever has the voice like a woman, is esteemed of the wise to have little
understanding or knowledge.

What causes the people of Boetia to have a gross voice and yet low and
seble.

The Boetians be slothful and given to the belly, which causes the voice
to be so low, the reason is evident, because their vigor and strength is more
feeble, receuing and gathering less air: Wherefore they cannot very well move
the muscules of the stomach, and so they are the more heavy, and less apt to
labor.

Whereof comes it that they which be hasty of speech are of small constancy,
ill conditioned and extremely cholerike?

All sodeine motions come of thexiremitie and excess of heat, which
engenders in men this inconstancy and lightness, to promise without any
performing, and through Colere most commonly consider not what they say.

The doubts of Signor Mi^^^l Car^ra.
Whereof comes it that they which have a shirle voice, are most commonly
enuiouse and maliciouse?

The sharpenes of the voice proceeds from the sharpenes of the pipes and
conduictes of the longes, which rises through dryness and coldenes. Such be
melancholic persons, who being naturally fearful, dare never disclose that
which they think.

Wherefore be ye A^maines accustomed in their hu^ting to hold their breath, when
they desire to here ye noise and rustling of beasts

At all times when the breath is kept in, then has the hearing greater force
abroad, and so consequently receives and comprehends the better that which
is presented, whether it be sound or noise. Moreover blowing or breathing does
somewhat let the hearing. And therefore the same being retained, the hearing is
more free.

But whereof comes it that many having the knowledge of natural things, do
think it not good to drink after fructe and specially after Melons and
Pompions?

Wine of it self is penetratife, in such sort that it easily draws with it
the undigested fructes to the veins, where they do sone corrupt, and so
engender very great fevers, and other lingering sicknesses.

What is the cause that ye gentle women of Milan, to make themselves fat, do
love and use sweet wines?

Sweet wine does engender gross blood, and does easily penetrate into all the
parts of the body, and is converted into nourishment, whereof they become so
fat, and of good liking. Grene wine and sharp does not the same.

Whereof comes it that all they which be extreme thirsty do love no sweet
wines?

All things which may engender and inflame choler are apt to make men
thirsty, and such is sweet wine.

Whereof comes it that diverse religiouse persons, which naturally are very
zelouse of Chastity, do abstain from wine?

Wine is hot and full of vapors, and therefore provoke lust, his heat
dissolueth seed, and with his ventositie causes the courage to rise.

What is the cause that the Florentines* after they have put water into wine,
The doubts of Signor Traiano Calzauelo.
do let it rest a certain space before they drink it

The more the water is mingled and incorporated with the wine, the more the
fume of the wine is quenched, being reduced as it were into one body and
nature. Therefore after my judgment it should be better when the wine is new
pressed to put in water, then otherwise.

Why be the Arabians accustomed to sleep with their bodies bowing or folded?

It must needs be, that Nature or they which know his effects have taught
them the same. For sleping so folded together, their stomachs do wax warm
and digest the better, and there is no windines that can hinder their
digestion. The body being bowed as aforesaid, causes that the belly does
receive al ventositie, eue^ like unto an open purse. Contrariwise ye body
stretched forth makes the belly to close and shut in such sort that it can
receive no windines: the belly being bent and stretched forth, stuffed on
every side with bowels and inward parts, which causes that the ventosities
finding no place in the belly, are forced to retire else where, and to hinder
digestio^

Why do the Polonians eat colewortes to make them selves sober when they be
drunk?

The property of coleworte is, to send down to the bowels, the most
material and gross part of the wine, and that which is most subtillest and
fynest to the blader: and that comes of the participation that it has with
Nitrum of saltenes. And for to use it to this effect, the colewort must not be
to much sodden.

Wherefore did our forefathers make difficulty to use at their tables diverse
meats and sorts of dishes?

The diversity of meats can not be digested with one proportion of heat And
so nature being troubled with indigestion of such diversity of meats causes
noysomnes to the stomach, and specially when it is weak.

Whereof comes it that the sea is so profitable and delectable for Lazermen,
and such as have the dropsy?

The sea provoke vomit, and through vomiting, ^^eame and all other
superfluouse humors which cause such diseases do avoid. And so those that be
infected, do love the Sea.

Wherefore is the City of Auignion rather subject to the plague then any other
place round about it?

The subtle air is sone infected, and soon purged of the infection:
contrariewise, the gross air is not so lightly infected, nor yet so soon
purged.

How may the fine and subtle air be known from the gross and corrupt air?

The tenuitie and subtlety of the air is known, for that at the rising of
the Sun it is soudenly heated, and waxes cold at the going down thereof.
The contrary does chance to the gross and vicious air.

Whereof comes it that the winter in some countries is longer then the Somer,
and in other cuntries the Somer longer then the winter?

The cause of the Sun in the Zodiaque does cause mutation of the four
seasons of the year: And where the sun continues longest, over the heddes of
those that dwell in that region, there is Somer greatest: and where it is far
of, winter does longest continewe.

Why is Music more delectable in the morning, then at any other times?

Because that all things be then in silence, the senses be more lusty and
waking, and the mind in great moderation and temperaunce.

Why be fructes commonly beloved of all men?

For the natural swetenes which is in them: or else because they be of
temperature hot and moist.

Wherefore is the sight above all the other senses most esteemed?

Because by the sight we see the difference of all things. Or else we may say
that it comes by the impression of Love, which takes his first force and
strength by the sight.

Whereof comes it that they which have a feeble sight, write smaller letters
then other?

Because they write their eyes being in a manner half closed and shut.

What is the cause that all ill factes do discover themselves by the eyes and
the heart?

Because the eye is messanger of the heart. It may also be said, that the face
being tender and open to all vapors the same may easelie be judged and
discovered by the alterations, that it shows principally from the heart.

Why be they that have little heads naturally more cholerike and disdainful
then others?

Because that the heat coming from the heart, from whence anger rises can
not well be cooled, and the Choser proceeding from the blodde, moved and boiling
about the heart causes heaviness.

Whereof comes it that by and by after we have made water, that part by the
which the Sperme and seed passes, does immediately retire and wax less?

Because the same part being empty and void is incontinently filled with air
which cools the members that it replenisheth.

What is the cause that man of all creatures is the wisest? The doubts of
Conte Giouanni Michas.


The pureness and subtlety of his blodde.

Whereof comes it, that by thinking upon strange and horrible things our
flesh does quake and tremble?

Because the heat does retire to the inferior and inward parts.

How comes it that in the heart of a Stagge there is a bone?

Nature has there placed it to serve for a stay and foundation of the
continual moving and motion of his heart, both in rest and travel.

What is the cause that the blodde is read? The doubts of M. Giouanni Antonio
Saluagno


Of the affinity that it has with ye Liver which is the very seat of blod.

How comes it that women have more thicker blodde then men?

That proceeds of coldenes which is natural to women, and the property
thereof is to thicken.

How comes it that in Horses, Mules, Asses and crows men find no gall?

All they have galls, but it is not in one proper place, but disparsed
throughout all the veins.

Why are they commonly lean which have great Miltes?

The Milte does draw unto it much matter and substance, which would else
turn to nourishment and fatnes.

How come hears to be placed upon the hedde?

The Brain brings them forth, discharging it self of gross vapors which
coming forth by the poores of the flesh do wax dry, and turn into hears.

Why do diverse feed upon bones and not upon hear?

Because of the overmuch drynes thereof.

By how many ways may the brain be purged?

The watriche humors be purged by the eyes: the melancholic by the cares: the
cholerike by the nose: and the flematike by the hear.

Wherefore was man created with the face upright toward heaven, and other
beasts clean contrary?

To every thing ought to be assigned the figure that is most proper to his
moving, as to the sky, roundnesse, to fire the figure Piramidale (that is to
say, upright and straight,) To man also because of his two fete, the figure
Diam^trale and Piramidale is very convenient and mete.

What is the cause that the heart does always stir, and is in continual
motion?

The air and the most subtle spirits have chosen the heart for their seat.
They being then so pure and subtle do seake means to stretch and enlarge them
selves, so far as they may, and to fill that which they find to be void,
which causes the heart to move and pant. It may be said also that the heart
being made as it were in a triangle form, although not perfectly, do open
and shut in the less part, and therefore it continually moves.

Wherefore has nature made the longes of al creatures like a sponge?

To receive air the better, for the refreshing and cooling of the heart, and
to drive away all hurtefull vapors.

Wherefore has nature placed the heart in the midst of the stomach?

To give life equally to all the members, even as the son placed in the
middle of the heaven does equally give light to all things.

Wherefore does it decline somewhat more to the left side then to the right?

To temper the coldenes of the milte, which is the seat of melancholy, and
placed on the left side.

How comes it that all those creatures which have little hearts be more
hardy then they which have greater?

In little hearts the heat is better compacte and kept: and so by consequence
the more vigorouse and of greater force.

Whereof comes it that some do dye through joy, and some through sorrow?

Great Joy does choke the interior parts, and heaviness does extinguishe and
cool them, so that life can not endure where heat lacks.

Whereof comes it, that Mermalade of quinces taken before the repast does
bind and close up the belly, and taken after the repast, does unbind it?

Through his great stiptisitie or costifnest it closes the nether parts of
the ventricle: and if it be taken after repast, it closes the superior parts
of the stomach, which being shut, the meats be constrained to avoid by the
inferior part.

Whereof comes it that the Radishe rote does greatly aid and help digestion,
and yet of it self almost can not be digested?

The Radish is compound and made of diverse qualities. The more subtle parts
thereof are very proper and mete to cause digestion. The Other which are gross be
contrary to heat, and so let digestion.

Whereof comes it that the Cholerike complexions do sonest atteine to berdes?
The doubts of R. Siluio Luzzago.


For their great heat, and because they have the poores large and wide.

Whereof comes it that some have curlde hear, and some other smothe and
straight?

The curlde hears do proceed of the abundance of heat, which evidently may
be seen in Mores and Ethiopians, who for the most part have curled hear. And
plain and straight hear comes of humiditie which through his heaviness does
draw the hear downewardes.

Whereof comes it that women have their privy parts heary, and not their
visage nor breast?

In the nether parts is more moystnes, as well by reason of the bladder as of
the Matrixe: there is also great resolutions of vapors which cause hear to
grow.

But how comes it that hear does also grow in them that be hanged?

They be continually in the Sun, and all the humors of their body do
resolve into vapors, which causes the hears to increase and grow.

Whereof comes it that some have harshe and hard hear, and other soft?

The soft hear does come of the little pooers, and the stiff and hard does
proceed of the greatness of the pooers, for this cause women have their hear
more fine and soft, because their natural cold does restreine and make their
pooers less.

Whereof does it come, that they which be bashefull and shame faced ware read,
and yet they ought rather to be pale, because shame is a kind of fear?

Shame is a certain affection mingled with anger and fear: for we be angry
many times as well against our selves as against other, when we see a thing
discovered that we would should be kept secret. Anger then in that conflict
does overcome fear, and so the blodde often moving in and out, stays at
length in the upper part, until the motion of the spirits be appeased.

Whereof comes it that in a manner al they which in their youth be to fat do
dye suddenly?

The veins of such people be to narrow, and they are so pressed, and as it
were bound together with fatnes and grease, that the air and the spirit
cannot freely pass. Whereof it comes, that the natural heat, having no
refrigoration of the aier, of very force does mortify and extinguish

What causes young men sooner to have an appetite then old men?

It is because they be of a hotter complexion.

Wherefore do Physicians forbid us meats that be to hot?

Because they burn the blodde, and do dispose it to Leprosy.

Whereof comes it that women have no beardes?

Because that substance which should convert into the bearde does turn into
the hear of the head.

Whereof comes it that Infantes and children for the most part do resemble
their mothers, notwithstanding after the opinion of many Philosophers the
action and deed of generation is not of the woman?

That comes of the ymagination of women.

What means it that Garlike and Onions (although they be not in the ground)
do sprowte and grow?

That is of the great abundance of the humors that they have.

Whereof comes it that study is noisome and hurtefull after repast?

Natural heat can not travel both in digestion and speculation at one instant.

Whereof comes it that when the stomach is grieved, all the body languisheth?

The stomach has certain aliaunces with the heart, the brain, and the
Liver, which are the principal parts of the body,

Whereof comes it, that some do things best with the right hand, and other
some with the left?

That proceeds of the heat that comes from the heart, which makes that
side more apt and mete unto labor, whereunto it has his principal access.

How chances it that all kinds of creatures be more lean in the beginning
of their youth, and when they be old, then in their middle age?

Before old age natural heat is in his greatest force and strength, which
dissolueth the fat. Old Creatures be never fat, and if they be, their
fat is as nothing through their great cold and drynes, for the fa^te is
sustained and nourished with moistnes and heat.

Whereof comes it that they which have the hicket by retaining their breath do
ease them selves of it?

The blowing and breath retained does heat the interior parts of the body,
and the hicket proceeds of nothing else but of cold.

Why do old people nese with great difficulty?

Because their conduictes be very straight.

Why does wine mingled with water cause vomit?

Mingled wine is noisome to the stomach, and does weaken the virtue
retentiue: contrariwise, pure wine does comfort it.

Why be they so subject to sickness that love to drink strong and mighty
wines?

Strong wine excessiuelye drunk, does extinguishe natural heat, and the
liuor being therewith weakened, cannot engendre good blood, but does rather
engender a certain aquositie and waterishnes, that conuerteth it self into a
dropsy.

Why be not young children so thirsty and dry as men of greater age?

The moistnes of young children does keep them from being thirsty. For thirst
is nothing else but a desire of moistnes, whereupon they that be of greater age
be naturally more dry, and therefore more thirsty.

The doubts of ^^. Francesc^ (...).
Why does the dronken person think all things which he sees do run and
turn round?

That comes because the spirits serving to sight, be mingled with the
vapors and fumosities of the wine, the heat whereof causes the eyes to be in
a continual motion, and so the eye being round, makes al things to seem as
though they turned round. And if the eye were of other fashion then round, the
things he sees would seem also to be of the same shape.

What might be the cause that Asses when they be young, do seem nimble, quick
and pleasant to look upon, and as soon as they begin to wax and grow, then
do they appear the contrary.

The Ass is of nature melancholic, youth is hot, and therefore lively and
pleasant which nevertheless afterward does moderate and decrease, because
the melancholic quality begins to augmente, and the heat of youth to
diminishe.

Why do hens keckle and make such a noise after they have laid.

Because the place where the egg lay now being void, is incontinently
filled with air which coleth the belie. The like happens to women
incontinently after they be delivered: and to the yard of a man after he has
pissed. It might also be answered that the hen cries out so for fear that
some will take away the thing she has laid.

Whereof comes it that the bottom of a cawdron or kettle is cold, although
scalding water do remain in it?

It is because of the hot vapors which mount on high whereby the upper
parts being made hot, the bottom is cold, through the continual water that
is in it.

How chances it that the grain which the Antes do lay up in the ground is
evermore bitten on the one side?

Nature has taught them to do so to take away the growing thereof for their
own better sustentation, For corn in the earth does naturally grow, which
if it should, the pore beast should be defrau^ed of his living.

Wherefore do the Physicians say, that it is daungerouse to let one blood that
is fat?

The veins of gross men be hidden and small, and besides that they have little
blood.

Why does the Camelion change colors so often?

That comes of ouermuche fear, and for that he estemeth his blodde so dear.

Why be rich men more subject to the gout then the poor.

Because they stuff them selves with many and diverse meats, or that they be
to much idle, or else because they use not convenient exercise. The same may
also come through to much company with women: for there is nothing that
corrupts more the virtue digestive, then such excess.

Wherefore is it not good to speak when one eats?

Because speech does much let and hinder the chawing of meat: or else it
is for fear of entering or failing into some coughe and strangling.

Why be they that have few tethe of a short life?

They that lack tethe can not chawe well, and by that means they do not make
such digestion as is convenient. We see also that they which have their tethe
thin set, are of weak complexion, even from their generation. For if they
had been of good and strong complexion in their beginning and generation, and
that the substance had been according, they should not have had such scarsitie
of tethe.

Whereof does it come, that the birds and foul which be fat in this
cuntrie) if they take their flighte into the Southe parts, or into Ethiopia,
they return leaner then when they departed?

The southe parts be hot and dry, and does dry that which dwells in
them. Or we may say that in all places that be hot and cold, both in Somer
and in Autumn there be found fructes and seeds, and the days are more longer.

What is the cause that birds do bread in the spring, when they be lean, and
in Autumn when they are fatt and in good lyking they do not bread?

The springtyde is a moderate season, and all living things at that time be
most temperate, and by that means are more apt to generation. Contrariwise
Autumn is cold and dry, and by that means less fit to that matter.

Wherefore do we sooner vomit upon the Seas, then when we travel on foot or
horseback?

Because to sail upon the Seas is a motion the which is not after our nature,
but to run is. To sail is a moving vnaccustomable, and all extraordinary
things do trouble man.

Whereof comes it that the first fructes as well of beasts as of trees, if
they come in their season, be fairer then those that come after?

At the first bearinges Nature is fresh and lusty, in the other she is
somewhat weak and impotent.

What is the cause that a dead corpse is more heavy then a living body?

A living body is replenished with air and fire, which does keep it tight up,
for their nature is always to mount on high.

Why does the excessive use of women make us weak? The doubts of Conte Curtio
Martineago.


Because it takes away from us our natural heat.

Why do the Physicians command salt to be cast among the cloutes of
little Infantes, when they be swadled?

To harden the skin.

Why did Democrites forbid his scollers (whom he desired to be chaste) to eat
rapes?

Because rapes through the great ventositie wherewith they fill our bodies,
provoke lechery.

Wherefore do women with child forbear to eat rue?

For that it causes them to be delivered before their time.

Whereof does it come that all oily things do take away the appetite?

The things which are oily, do swim at the mouth of the stomach where the
appetite is engendered, even as the digestion is made in the bottom of the
stomach.

Whereof comes it that by to much use of egre and sour things, men wax old
before their time?

All things that consume natural humiditie, does cause age.

What is the cause that things which are salt, be noisome for the sight?

Because they perce to much.

Whereof comes it that women if they chance to fall do fall most willingly
backewarde?

Because their hinder parts are more gross and heavy then the rest through
coldness which unto them is natural.

What is the cause that we be evermore fatter in the belie and in the guts,
then in any other part?

Because the belie is nere the stomach where digestion is made

The doubts of M. Gabriel Giliota.
Whereof comes it that all melancholic creatures have long ears?

The ears are made of a cold and dry matter, which quickly is transposed into
matter of bones and because that al melancholic bestes be of a cold and dry
complexion, we ought not to marvel that they have great ears.

Why have women smaller feet then men?

Heat being far greater in men then in women, causes them to grow in
height, ingrosing and enlarging the superior parts.

What causes man to be more inclined to laugh the^ to weep?

Because it is a pleasure to laugh, and a displeasure to weep.

Whereof comes it that some men do route sleping, other sleep without making
any noise, some do speak between their tethe, and some aloude and clear?

This diversity does proceed of the let that is in the apprehensiue senses
accordingly as they be stopped or free.

Wherefore is smoke so contrary to the sight?

For the grossenes and sharpenes thereof. The grossenes is showed in the fume
that it engenders: The sharpenes is manifested in that it mounteth alofte
unequally, and as it were like clouds.

Whereof comes it that a vine having ashes at the root, shall bring forth
better wine then any other?

It is because ye vine of it self is meruailouse moist and full of veins, which
appears when it is cut and primed in the spring tide, for it auoideth forth
much licor. Ashes also being at ye foot of the vine, does not only dry up the
humi^itie of the root, and stops the same from mounting, but also
diminishes and fineth all the moisture which the vine has already received.

Whereof comes it yt bread ^alted, is lighter the^ other, notwithstanding that
salt joined to water should make it heuier?

The heaviness of the bread comes of the humiditie, and the more it is dried,
the more the bread is the lighter.

Wherefore is not hot bread wholesome?

Hot bread is yet full of moistnes and vapors which do corrupt the blood.

Why is not hot bread so white as stale? And why is old o^^e whiter then new?

The vapors and moistnes of hot bread does cause the blacknes thereof, by reason
of ye water which does naturally make black: Oil also when it is fresh, is
replenished with a certain waterish humiditie, which at length is converted into
vapors, whereby the oil yt is old, is clarified and made white.

What is the cause that when a dog begins to bark, all other there about do
follow him and do the like?

A dog because of collar wherewith he naturally abounds, has both his
senses and his hering very sharp.

Why is not bread made of pure meal, or that which is made of clean branne
esteemed good?

All extremities are viciouse, the branne because it naturallye dries to much,
has no nourishment: The flower of meal contrariwise, causes great
nourishment, but is slimie and gluing, and consequently of to hard digestio^.

Why do gross men and those that have the dropsy, delight to eat bread made
of pelt meal?

It loses the noughtie humors in gross bodies, and dissolueth the watery
humor which hurts them, and is temperate between hot and cold.

Why has man longer hear then any brute beast?

Because they receue greater nutriment, and also because brute beasts, do
often change their hear, which happens not to man, except through some
great hurt.

Wherefore do the sweet sauors delight us, and the stinking offend us?

Like as in tunes there be both consonantes and dissonantes, whereof the one
delights us and thothet offends us: Even so in sauors sweet smelles are the
concordes, and agreeable to our nature, and stinking are the discordes and
dislike us.

Whereof comes it that above all other meats, we love flesh best, and that
it does profit us most?

Because flesh does yield more strength, replenisheth better our bodies. Or else
because it approaches more nerer to our substance.

What is the cause that of wood which is white, The doubts of.M. Hercole
B^^nacciolo.
the cole is black? and the cole being kindled dissolueth into white ashes?

So often as heat is mingled with moisture to work his effect, it ingendreth
blacknes, and for that cause wodde becomes cole: but when heat works his
operation in the thing that is dry, it is made white, and so of cole the ashes
are made: or else we may say very well that it comes by now toking and now
leaving of the whitnes, with a certain generation and corruption.

Whereof comes it, that how moderate soever the air be, we evermore love
better to be in the shadow then the sun?

The Sun is hotter then the shadow is cold, we being then temperate of our
selves, are more offended with that which is most contrary to temperature,
which is the Sun. Or else we may say, that although we be temperate in deed,
yet we be evermore disposed to avoid the heat of the sun, and so the
shadow is more agreeable unto us.

How comes it, that such as have the disease called Gonorrhea, avoid their
seed without any pleasure?

Because their seed is thinner and less digested, and their conduictes made
wider.

How comes it that they which be cholerike have loud voices?

That proceeds of the extremity of heat.

What is the cause that Turpentine is commenly smelt in the urine of those that
use it?

Turpentine is of a substance very subtle, and therefore it does easily
penetrate and pass to the bladder where the vri^^ie, and infecteth it with his
odor.

Whereof comes it that saier wether beginning toward night, most commonly
does not long continue?

Of the inconstancy of the Moon, which has her principal domination and
power in the night.

What means it that Cranes do pronosticate faier wether?

Cranes do naturally feel the mutation and change of the wether, and
accordingly go and depart into other countries.

Whereof comes it, that old men remember so well that which they have seen
and done in their youth? and forget that which they learn and do in their age?

Things learned in youth have already taken a certain habitude in the person.
But things which they learn in age, because their senses be weakened, are
easily lost and forgotten.

Why do men say, that to grow fast is a figure of short life?

Because the humor that causes the growing, as it is easily enlarged, even so
it sone consumes.

Why do Cranes set them selves in array, when they prepare to fly?

To trouble them selves the less in flying.

How comes it, that vnhorned beasts have not tethe on both sides?

That comes for lack of the matter or substance which causes the same

Why be sodden stones more heavy then other?

It may be because the fire has rendered them more solid and better compact

Whereof comes it, that Bees are more fierce then other beasts?

Because they are of nature dry, and be void of excrementes and other
superfluities.

Why do not fat things sone corrupt?

Because they be replenished with air.

Why do trees that grow in marshes dye so sone?

Because they are of great moisture, and do receive little nourishment.

Wherefore can not fire endure, except it be continued and nourished?

Because of the great vehemency and impetuositie of his heat.

Why did not nature create birds to go vprighte accordingly as she did man?

Because they be void of reason and have no care of heavenly things.

How chances it that Nature gave no wings to man?

Because man is not created to fly, nor to walk in the air, but upon earth.

Why do the poulces of young Infantes beat so swiftly?

Because their heat receueth air without any let, and are again suddenly
cooled.

Why do Dolphins when they appear above water, signify some storm or Tempest
to come?

Because at the beginning of the Tempest there do rise from the bottom of the
sea, certain hot exhalacions and vapors, which do warm and heat the
Dolphins, at what time they mount to seek for cold.

Why be the poulces of young people more vehement, then the aged?

Because their complexion is whotter.

Wherefore do aged people dye, as it were without dolor and pain?

Because all their senses are debilitate and weakened.

Wherefore has nature given the Milt to the noblest creaturs

Because they have need of greater respiration and breath.

Whereof comes it, that beasts which live partly on the land, and partly in
the water, do always bring forth their young ones upon the land?

Because they are more participant of the earth, then of the water.

What moved Democritus to say, that the soul was made, and composed of Atomi,
that is to say, of things indivisible, as those things be, which we see in
the beams of the Sun?

Because the soul is the fountain and spring of all our actions: and those
Atomi be about all other things most apt to motion.

How comes it that creatures bred upon the land be stra^gled in the water,
and those of the water be choked with the aier?

Because that land creatures can not breathe in the water: and those of the
water be ^^uffed up with the heat of the air.

Whereof comes it that overmuch fasting causes thirst?

Through default and lack of nourishment, whereby natural heat does extenuate
and dry up the body.

Why does not fire go out, being covered with Ashes?

Because the same being covered, has the nourishment that it requires.

What moved some of the Sages to say, The doubts of M Girolamo Libanoro.
that death is cold, and without blodde?

Because our life does consist of heat and blodde.

Wherefore is there more understanding in the hedde, then in any other part of
the body?

Because the hedd is as it were the bulwark and chief part of the body.

Whereof is it that among herbs and plants, some come up and grow of the
seed, and other of the root?

That comes of their perfection or imparfection.

Wherefore do herbs and trees continue longer then other creaturs?

Because their nutritive virtue is more lusty, and do easlier find wherewith to
nourishe them.

Why is it that the greater the creature is, the longer he endures?

Because the greater they be, the hotter they be: and in heat the life and
strength consists.

Wherefore can not heaven be subject to corruption?

Because it is not composed of contrary elements.

Why does fear make the heart to beat?

Because the blodde when we be afraied retireth to the inward parts, and has
need to be refrigerated and coled, which thing comes by the beating of the
heart.

Why did nature make man high, and straight of stature?

That proceeds of his heat, which following the quality of fire, causes him
continually to mount and grow in height: or to the end he might with his
hands apply him self to handie work, and hardy exploites.

Why can little children neither go nor stand upright?

Through the feebleness of the inferior and nether parts, and by reason of the
greatness and heaviness of the upper parts.

Wherefore are the nights more quiet then the days, and less windy?

The motion of the air is let by the coldness of the night.

Whereof comes it that men of read complexion have more revelations by
dreams then other?

Because they be of Imagination more free and liuelye.

Wherefore did the auncientes use to drink the blood of those that were called
Gladiatores, which were hurt and wounded in the combats and fence plays?

Because they were persuaded by the Physicians, that it served against the
falling sickness.

Why is bread hard of digestion?

Because it lies long in the stomach, besides that if it be not well baked
it causes the Liuor to fill the veins called by tht Physicians Meseraiche.

Whereof comes it that they which are drowned, at the beginning do sink to
the bottom, and afterward when they begin to corrupt, do rise above the
water?

The body being partly corrupted, has many open places called vents to
receive the air: which breaking the powers, the body becomes very light.

What is the cause that round eggs do bring forth males, and they which be
long, females?

Because in the round eggs all the virtue is equally divided throughout all
the extremities: and in the long egg the virtue is much extended, and less
closed, and so less hot then the other.

Why is not wine good fasting?

Because it engenders the crampe, and makes a man dull and heavy.

Why do Physicians use to touch the poulse of the right arm?

Because it is the part that is most hott.

But wherefore will they not that the pacient hold his hand hard closed, nor
yet stretched forth?

Because the Synewes and Arteries be streined, the hand being either stretched
or closed.

Whereof comes it that Hares have so feeble sight?

Because the hare is a beast very slepie, and to much sleep hurts the sight.
Or else it is of to much swiftnes: for ouermuche swiftnes is hurtefull to the
eyes.

How chances it that the paws of a Bear are better veneson, then any other
part of his body?

That comes of their continual agitation and stirring: for the Bear does
continually walk and beat with his fete.

Why do Physicians call a disordinate appetite ( fames Canina) the hungre of a
Dog? The doubts of M. Pietro Spino


Because Dogs are without measure in the appetite of eating.

Why do Dogs skommer with so great pain?

Because their bowell and receuing gutte is larger at that part where it
joins with the belly, then it is at the place where it ends.

Why are they more slepie that have great heds, then others?

The greater the hedde is, the more vapors it comprehends.

Why do Dwarfes love to sleep much?

Because great plenty of humors get forthwith into their heddes, which engender
in them a desire to sleep.

Wherefore are they most hungry, that have large and gross veins?

Because they be of nature dry and adu^t.

What causes them that dwell toward the South, to be less subject to the
falling sickness, then other people?

Because they be sound within, and full of heat.

Whereof comes it, that the oil of Lentils does heal the inflammation of the
gummes?

Because it is good to take away all hot and burning humors.

Why does the edge of a knyfe turn, when one does cut wax?

Because that every agent, in his accion is also pacient, that is, subject to
contraries.

How comes the humor in the eye called Glauconia, which is like Cristall,
and hurts the sight?

Eyes infected with that humor, be like the eyes of a Ciuet, and does come of
the abundance of the Christallin humor.

Why does Licorise take away thirste?

Because of his moystnes.

Why is the Liver of a Wolf medecinable for them that be diseased in the Liver?

By reason of a certain secret virtue in the same,

Why be they more hardy tha^ other, that have hearie breasts?

Because they have a boiling heart.

Wherefore is milk evil for the tethe and gommes?

Because of the immoderate coldenes.

Why does Lettis provoke sleep?

Because it engenders gross humors.

Whereof comes it, that Lentilles and Colewortes be hurtefull to the sight?

That comes of their crassitude and thicknes.

Whereof comes it, that by to much eating of Lentilles are engendered Cankers?

That comes of the melancholic blodd, which Lentils do engender.

How chances it, that Lions have no marie in their bones?

Through thextreme heat of the said beast.

But why does the shining and brightness of the moon hurt the hedde?

Because it moves the humors of the brain, and cannot afterward resolve
them.

Why do some dye by to much Joy?

Because the spirits do abandon and forsake the heart.

Why should men beware of tomuch fasting?

Because long fasting ingendreth a heap of ill humors, and causes feebleness
and lothesomnes.

Why is vinegar very good for Cholerike persons, and hurtefull to them that be
melancholic?

Because it refreshes Choler, and dries melancholy.

What causes the eyes to shed forth tears?

Coldenes is thoccasion which naturally does make thick and restrain, whereby
tears do proceed.

Why have things that be very sweet and odoriferouse, a certain spice of
bitterness?

Sweet smelles do always search hot places, which commonly are somewhat
bitter.

Whereof comes it, that things that nourishe and increase milk, do warm
moderately without drying?

Because such things do engendre blodde, whereof milk comes.

Why he all nourishing things perticipant with swetenes?

Because all sweet things be very temperate.

Whereof comes it that wine in process of time is of greater heat?

Because the waterishe parts do vanishe and avoid.

Whereof comes it that some wines wax sower so sone?

Because in the vintage time they were replenished with superfluouse humors.

Why do men rather use Sorrel then vinegar, against the inflammations of the
intestines and Bowels?

Because that Sorrel is more moderate then vinegar. And whosoever is diseased
therwithall should not use any medecin, that is sharp or violent, but rather
pleasant.

Whereof comes it that yealowe Choler is always bitter, and the black agree
and sharp?

Heat causes bitterness, and cold causes sharpenes.

Why is the Catarre or Rewine, sometime sweet, sometimes sharp, and sometimes
salt?

Of a certain mixture of the humors.

Why does the wild Bore piss before he does run or fly away.

To dispatche him self of the heaviness of his urine, the more swiftlye to
run.

Wherefore do Physicians give to infantes and young children a herb called
Abrotonum, in english Sothernwood?

Because it kills worms.

How chances it that scorpions do smite and hurt sidewise?

Because their prick and stinge is crooked.

Why do men wax pale when they be afraid?

Because the blood flies away, and retireth to the vital parts.

Why does the sea called Mare mortu^m bring forth nether plant nor fish?

Through the great bitterness of the same.

What is the cause that a salt thing being heated again, waxes bitter?

Bitterness comes of adustion.

Why has the Scorpion venime in her tail?

Because venime is the excrement of the Scorpion.

Wherefore did nature make men's ears so eminent standing out, The doubts of
Georgio Di Poggi.
and of gristles?

To be more quick of hering, and to be less grieved when they be hurt.

Why cannot milk cream or curde being incorporated with honey?

Because honey with his virtue incisiue and abstersive does let it.

Why does not an arter or sinewe being cut grow again as flesh does?

Because they be spermaticke members.

Wherefore do the leaves of a Seruace tree fall together at one instant?

Because he has no viscous or slimie humor.

Wherefore is a Baye tree always grene?

Because the heat of that tree is always tempered with humiditie and
viscositie.

Wherefore is the female more imperfecte then the male?

Because she is more cold.

What caused Hipocrates to suffer those that had hot and sharp fevers to
drink wine?

To aid and help digestion, and to strengthen the pacient.

Whereof comes the Cotidian fever?

Of the great haboundaunce of the fleame.

Why do the herbs called Pener^ial, ditton and Nil cause women to have their
flowers?

Because their virtue and property is to open.

Wherefore is the meal of beans good for ye spots in ye face?

Because it is meruailouse abstersive and clensing.

Wherefore do we sleep better when we have traueled, then otherwise?

Because the spirits have then more need to be refreshed.

Whereof comes it that sometimes we be laxatiue and sometimes to much costiue?

It is because of the feebleness of the virtue retentiue, or through sharp humor
that vexes and troubles us, and the cause why we be bound, proceeds of
contrary occasions.

Whereof comes the Tertian agues?

Of yealowe choler corrupted.

Whereof proceeds the falling sickness?

Of gross fleame or rather of a melancholic humor which is retained in the
ventricles of the brain.

Wherefore did nature make the scull of the head gross, thick and hollow?

The s^ul is gross and thick to defend the brain the better, and holowe that
the vapoures of the brain might issue out of the same more easelye: for the
head is a way through the which all the vapors of the body do pass.

Wherefore is not wine good for them that be growing still in greatness?

Wine does straight go into the head, and children in there infansie have the
head grosser after the proportion of the rest of the body then in any other
age.

Why do melons and cowcumbers cause men to make water?

That comes of their great humiditie.

Wherefore is it not good to sleep with the face vpwardes?

Because it heateth the raines, inflameth the blood, and not only the blud
but the spirits also, which are in the hollow vain and in ye great artery.

How comes it that trees are more hard and strong of the Northside, then
they are of the South and West side?

Because the North wind does better harden.

Wherefore do not those little beasts or serpents that of the Latinists are
called Cerastes, Cerastes is a serpent which has horns like a Ram.
bread nether in Cipres trees nor box trees?

In Cipres trees bitterness and sharpnes, and in box trees hardness is ye cause

Whereof comes the disease which Phisitia^s do call Diabethe?

It is a disease in the raines, and comes of the feebleness of the same.

Whereof proceeds the swetenes of fruictes?

Of moderate heat.

Why do old men doat so much?

Through the great cold that is in them.

Whereof proceeds ye lasque and flux of ye belly called Dissenteria?

Of biting and sharp humors.

Why do hearinges in so great multitudes leave the Northern, and go to the
Western Sea?

To enioie the temperature of that climate.

Why does eating of ye brain of some beasts provoke vomit? The doubts of
Caualiere Alessandro Da Castello


Because ye brain is oilie and swimmeth upon ye orifice and mouth of ye stomach

Why is grossest meat given ^uer at supper?

Because with sleep they make good digestion,

What is the cause that the pulse commonly called chich^ peason, does provoke
Lechery?

By reason of the saltenes, whereof the hul is participant.

Whereof comes it that men to see the better, do close one of their eyes?

Because the effect and spirits of the one may help the other.

Whereof does it come that the higher the Sun is, the lesser is the shadow?

Because the sun beams do then reuerberate directly downewardes.

Why does the force of wine make some to be eloquent, and some to be dombe,
other astonished, and other fresh and lusty?

That comes of the diversity of their complections.

Whereof comes it that the leaves of certain trees in some part of Scotland
falling into the sea, be turned into duckes and malardes?

By the secret virtue of the Occean Sea.

Wherefore do men make collers of Aumbre for children?

Because aumbre is good against the sqinance, which is a swelling in the jaws
and throat, and it is good also against a disease called of ye Physicians
Tansille.

Whereof comes the Dropsy?

Of a great cold in the Liver.

How happens it, that we become balde upon the foreparte of the hedde?

Because that part is dry, and of drines comes baldenes.

But why be the hears of the temples graye, sooner then of any other parts?

Because the Temples are very moist, and full of muscles.

Wherefore do Physicians think them to be of small capacity that have sharp
heddes?

Because the spirits find not the conduictes so free and open.

Why be there no Serpents in Ireland?

Because that region is nothing waterishe.

What causes those that have the Iaundis, to think honey to be bitter?

Because of the great c^ller, wherewith they have the tongue and pallat infected.

Whereof comes it that the meats oftentimes wax sower in the ventricle?

That proceeds of the coldenes of the Stomach.

Why is not that air good, which is both hot and moist?

Because it is very subject to be corrupted.

Whereof comes it, that the Aethiopians have curld hear?

Of the great siccitie and drynes of their humors.

Why be dronken persons commonly cold?

Because wine immoderately dronken, does cause cold effects.

Wherefore is veneson more esteemed and praised of the learned Physicians, then
other flesh?

Because it is of good nourishment, and engenders good blodde.

Why is the white of an egg hard of digestion?

Through the great coldenes thereof.

How comes it, The doubts of M. Dio^^ gi da Castello.
that such beasts as have no tethe above have a double ventricle?

To digest the better, and to supply the default that they have by the want
of tethe.

Wherefore do men drink water, and yet it nourishes not?

Water causes the nutriment to spredde throughout all the body.

Why is not the hand hearie within?

Because the skin is thick and hard,

Why is Autumpne so unwholesome and full of diseases?

Through the inequality of his temperature.

Why be the ears immovable?

Because they have no Muscles.

Why be no remedies convenient to be receued, in the greatest extremity of
sickness?

Because nature should be let.

Wherefore are bathes of sweet water esteemed?

Because they do heat and moysten, and are good against tercian ague^.

Why does the Northern wind preserve things from putrefying?

Because it dries much.

Whereof comes it, that Buglosse tempered and dipte in wine, reioyseth him
that does eat it?

Because it augmenteth the blodde, and restores the forces of the heart.

Whereof comes it, that Peone hanged about ones neck^ does heal the falling
sickness?

That herb sends certain vapors to the head, which do dry the brain.

Why be stockdoues better then pigions of the douehouse?

Because they have less donge and excrementes.

Whereof comes it, that Asur color is pleasant to the eye?

Because in that color is a mean of all other colors.

The doubts of the reverend father Barthol^meo Stephani^
para; How chances it, that although Infantes be naturally moist, are not for
all that graye hedded?

Because that with their moistnes, heat is conjoined.

Why does a Boar foam at the mouth, when he bremeth?

Because his cundittes and generati^e parts be narrow.

Why does a tame Sow bring forth mo Pigges, then a wild Sow?

That comes of the abundance of meat, and of the warmenes of the places
where they live.

But why can not Sowes give milk, without groaning or grunting?

Sowes have little milk, and the same is spread in diverse tetes, and therefore
there must needs be great force to draw it.

Wherefore do we sweat more in the upper parts of our body, then in the lower
parts?

The property of heat is, to ascend, and not to discende.

Why does not the dunge of wild beasts stincke so much as other?

Because they be dry of nature.

Wherefore has nature shaped a brain in living creatures? The doubts of
Monsignor Labbate L^^^dano.


Because they might easily receue and comprehend the impressions and
imaginations of the things that they smell and understand.

Why made nature the brain rather cold then hot?

To temper and moderate the heat of the heart, for the confort and refreshing
of the same.

Why be our eyes greater in our Infancy, then when we be of more age?

Through the great humiditie and moistnes. Whereof in like manner it comes that
we are more desirouse of sleep in our Infancy, then in any other age

How comes it, that men's eyes do differ so much in culler one from another?

Of the diversity of the humors, whereof they be composed.

Wherefore is sodden water better then the cold?

Boild and sodden water has less ventosities and is more ^lighte and subtle,
because the earth and heavy substance is separated from it.

Wherefore has nature ordained nesing in man?

To purge the superfluity of the brain even as by the cogh the milte is
purged.

Why do we nese sooner in the Sun, then when we be nere the fire?

Because the heat of the sun, resolves the humor, and consumes it not, but
the fire resolves and consumes it.

Whereof comes it that the ears of all creatures do move, except the ears of
a man?

That proceeds of a certain muscle which is in the Jaws, and does let and
hinder the moving of the ears.

Whereof comes it that asses do sooner lift up their ears, when it will rain,
then at any other time?

Their melancholic nature causes it, the like happens to many other
melancholic beasts to pronosticate of rain: as frogs, dolphines, crows and
Cuckoes.

Why have birds no ears?

Because they would hinder their flying, for which cause they are created and
made, as man is made to travel.

Wherefore are the waters of marshes and pondes so euel?

Because they are so flematike, and in summer they do corrupt. In so much as ye
finest of ye water is converted into vapors, and ye erthines does remain.

Whereof comes it that they which have hollow eyes do see better, then those
whose eyes do stand more outward?

Hollow eyes have their virtue more fast and better compacte, and so they see
the better and further of.

Why do the eyes of Wolves and Cattes shine in the night and not in the day?

The greater clerenes does ob^uscate and darken the lesser.

Whereof comes it that when we look and behold our self in a glass, we do
imediatly after forget our favor?

The Image seen in a glass does represent it self to our visible sight very
slenderly, and by a certain reflection, and therefore can not long be retained
in memory, but quickly vanishes away.

Whereof comes it that man smells so little in comparison of other Creatures?

That comes of the great humiditie of the brain, whereas Ravens and other
birds having it dry, are not hindered by moisture, but do receive the smell
through the air a far of.

Wherefore does that water keep better which is open in the Sun and the wind,
then that which is covered and hidden?

That which is open to the Sun is better pourged of all gross vapors, and is
made thereby more subtle and better digested.

Whereof comes it that Infantes are sooner inchaunted or bewitched, then they
which are greater?

Of the delicatenes and tenderness of their bodies, which are not strong enough
to resist such impressions.

Whereof comes it that a bird called in latin Rupex, does fear to behold
those that have their gall spredd throughout their bodies?

Because the same bird is sorye for the remedy that she gives them, for she
draws that sickness to her self.

What means it that the lee made of ashes of a figg tree, is so good to
cleanse things which are foul and spottie?

That comes of his nature, which is very absterciue and clensing, through the
sharpenes whereof, it takes away the filthe or sweat of our bodies better then
any other thing.

How comes it that Rue planted under a fig tree, does grow the better, and
takes better nourishment?

Because it draws unto it self the swetenes of the fig tree, or else the fig
tree does draw part of the bitterness of the rue, and so being somewhat delayed
it grows the better.

The doubts of Monsignor ^orquat^ Bembo.
Whereof comes it that the fig tree, the laurel tree, the Egle and the Sea
Calfe are never smitten with lighning?

It may be that it comes of their bitterness and sharpenes.

What caused nature to give us ears?

It was for no other thing, but that thereby man might hear and judge the
difference of voices and soundes. And that by the ears the head might be
pourged of his choleric superfluity, even as by the nose he is accustomed to
be pourged of his flematicke.

But what moved nature to make the lips?

To the end that the tethe being of nature cold, should not be harmed with
external hurt, or else because that in our talkinge they might somewhat help
and temper the tongue, that it should not be to lauishe.

For what respect was the mouth made?

Because it should be the door of the stomach, and because the meat should
be chawed and prepared for the first digestion.

What causes a man to yawne?

The gross vapors that replenish the jaws, which willinge to come forth,
constrain men to stretche their jaws: or else yawning comes of vnlustines,
or of being to full.

How comes it that the tethe have the sense of feling, and the same to other
bones is denied?

Because the tethe might discern hot and cold.

What means it that the tethe do grow daily?

If nature had not ordained the tethe to grow dailye, they would consume them
selves, and should be reduced to nothing by continual chawing

What causes the tethe to grow again, and the other bones grow not?

Other bones be engendered and made of the natural humor in the mothers womb,
but the tethe are engendered of the nutritife humor, which daily grows, and so
increases them.

Why have birds no tethe?

The substance of tethe is converted into the bill.

Why do diverse stutte and stammer?

Through the great moistnes of the tongue or of the brain.

Why do diverse hold opinion that the tongue of a dog is medicinable, and the
tongue of a horse clean contrary?

The tongue of a dog is full of pores, and by that means it draws from the
wound all viscositie and slimines: Or else there is in it some humor mete to
heal wounds by licking, which is not in a horse tongue.

Why be young people more sharp set and hungry then old me^?

Because they be more hot, and do digest better.

Whereof comes the whitenes of the spittle?

Of the continual motion of the tongue.

Whereof comes it that spittle being taken and applied fasting, is good and
mete for impostumes?

Because then it is more subtle, and better digested, then at other times.

Whereof comes it that the breath of diverse does stink although they be but
young?

Of the euel vapors of the stomach: or else of the corruption of the members and
instruments of the spirits.

What is the cause that Lazermen speak so hoarse?

Because the organes and pipes of their voices are corrupted.

Whereof comes horsenes?

Of a rewme descending from the brain, which fills the passage of the longes.

Why be men's speches sometimes taken away, when they look upon a Woulfe?

The Woulfe has a very cold brain, which causes him to have a very heavy
head: and when the virtue of the sight does appro^ce to behold him, it draws
unto it some part of that cold, which being sent to the stomach where the
Organes of the voice be placed, restrains and stops ye same*

Why do little birds singe, and chirpe much better then great ones?

The spirit of little birds is more delicate and light, then of the great
foul, and therefore at every motion they are disposed to singe.

Why does the male singe more then the female?

Because he is more hot.

What moved Nature to make the neck of bones?

Because it might the better sustain the headd.

Wherefore is well water the better, when the well is often drawn?

Because by the often times drawing, the water has no leisure to be corrupted.

Why have Cranes and storckes so long necks?

Because such beasts take their food and nourishment in deep places.

Why do Pullets and Hens, their throtes being cut, move and stir very
long after, which to man does not chance at all?

Hens and Pullets have small and little synowes, whereby the spirits ^arie the
longer,

Whereof comes it, that some by sleping wax fat, and some lean?

They which be of complexion hoate, when they sleep do digeste all the
superfluity of meats the better, whereby they wax fatt: But they that are
cold, do cool more with sleep, and digest less. There is no doubt but to
take vnmeasur (...) exercise, does burn and resolve the humors: and that
moderate exercise opens the conduictes, and reuiueth and wakeneth the
spirits, which causes the nourishment to have his course the better, and by
this means nourishes and makes the body fat.

What is the cause, that Barley bread makes them to be ill colowred that use
to eat it?

That comes because Barley bread tarieth no while in the stomach, and has
an abstersive and a clensing virtue, and so does suddenly alter and change the
digestion, which thing causes that nature can not with any small nourishment
give good coler to any person.

Why should wheaten bread be both salted and leauened?

Because that wheat of it self does stop and is slimie, but salt does
dry, and the leaven renders it much lighter.

Why do they serve fruit after meat, and not before?

Because that a full belly demands sweet things: or else the heaviness of the
fruicte drives down other meats.

What causes the hears of sickemen to fall?

Because the nutriment wherewith hear is nourished and enterteyned, is consumed
of the adust and burnt vapors.

How chances it, that diverse have never any beardes?

Because they have the poores so great, that the nutriment which causes the
hear, is vanished before the hear has taken root, and therefore can bring
nothing forth.

Whereof comes it, that in old folk the hear of the brows grows more,
then in other members?

Because in age the bones of the brows be enlarged, and do open the way to
vapors.

Why is the water better, that runs upon the gravel of sand, or upon the
earth (so that it be not stinking,) then that which runs upon the rock, or
upon stones?

Because that earth and gravel does cleanse it better, then either stone or
rock.

Whereof comes it, that the hear waxes hard and sharp when one is dead?

Because the hear is no more nourished with the vapors of the body, and
because the powers be closed up.

But whereof comes baldenes?

Of corrupt ^leame.

Why be men sooner balke upon the hedde, then in other parts of the body.

Coldenes of the brain is the cause.

Why is it that studious and learned men be so sone balde?

Of the great diminution and weakness of their spirits, or else of great
indigestion that causes ^^eame to abound.

Why do we sweat more sleping, then waking?

Because heat in sleping is united and joined, which has more virtue to drive
away all superfluouse humors.

Whereof comes it that Whales, Dolphines, and Sea calue^ stincke more then
other beasts?

Because their seed is more moist and waterishe, and more subject to
corruption.

Whereof comes it that water put into claret wine, does refreshe it more, then
if it be put into white wine?

That proceeds of the nature of the Claret wine, which is colder then the
white, being more earthie. For the white is hotter, and holds more of the
air.

Why do we count Rain water to be the best?

Because it is better fined and sodden in the air, and so more proper and mete
to nourishe.

Whereof comes it, that many are healed of a Quarteine by a soudeine fear?

Like as the quarteyne is engendered by sodeine mutation, even so soudeine
mutation does drive it away: for by such soudeine accidents our spirits be
moved, and all their forces awaked.

Wherefore are those waters better that have their course toward the East,
then they that run toward the West?

Because that by running against the Sun they do ^yne, and wax warm, and do
lose of their natural coldenes.

What is the cause, that a beast being with young, does not care any more for
the male?

Because that her matrix is shut, which does reteyne the menstruall blodde,
and causes her to lose her lust of the male.

Wherefore do Musicians when they entend to sing, and Advocates before they
plead, eat Lekes roasted in the imbres?

Because that Lekes have a certain slimishe moystnes, that cleanses the pipe
of the longes.

Why do women when they have their flowers, spott their glasses if they look
very nere them?

That rises of the corrupted vapors of the menstruall blodde.

Whereof comes it, The doubts of Doctor Barnardo Schio.
that women have small voices?

The organes of the voice in women are small and little, and so gathering little
air, it must needs cause the voice that issues forth, to be small and little.

Whereof comes it that deaffe folk, for the most part do speak through the
nose?

The Organ of hearing has perticipations with the Longes: which is the cause
that deafenes does commonly proceed of to great abundance of humors, which
remain and soke in the Organ of hearing, and consequently about the longes.
And when the longs are charged with humors it cannot well form the voice, which
causes that the deaffe person forcing and strayning his voice, does send it to
the cundittes of the nose. Therefore if the deafenes proceed of repletion of
humors, the pacient shall speak through the nose.

Why do Physicians give order, that meats in winter ought to be of a gross
nourishment, and in Summer fine and light?

Because in winter the natural heat flying the calde, and retyring into the
inward parts, does cause better digestion. But in somer, heat seking for
heat is dispar^ed, and is not of force to digest.

Why does to long watch make the brain feeble?

To long watthe does engendre and multiply choler, the which by that means
does dry and extenuate us.

Why be all sweet things stopping?

Because we take them with to great appetitite: whereby, considering their
viscositie and slimines, and that they be not digested, they stop the veins,
through the which the nourishment of the members of the body should pass.

Why be mothers more tender over their children the^ fathers?

Because they have had more pain in nourishing them and bringing the^ up.

But why cannot the child borne in the eight month live, and the child of the
seventh month customably does live?

Because the number of seven is a perfect number. If the opinion of the
Pithagorians be true.

Wherefore be the males more higher and greater then the females?

Because they have in them more heat then the females.

How comes it that brute beasts in their sleep, do not corrupt nor lose
their sede?

Because they sleep not lying upright, or with the belie vpwardes.

The doubts of ^. Alexandro Federici.
Wherefore is it more easy for women to bear upon their heddes, and for men to
bear upon their shoulders?

Because that women having a burden upon their heddes, have their body right
under the burden, and do bear it more easily, being as it were a pillar under
a roufe. The man contrariwise, having his head of many pieces, and the body
more hard, does bear upon his shoulders.

Wherefore be stele glasses better for the sight, then other glasses?

Because stele is harder and does represent unto us more substanciallye the
air, that receaueth the light.

Whereof comes it that vinegre does stop blood?

Because the nature thereof is binding.

Why do women make water, the body bowing, and not men?

Because their bladder is placed higher then the man's.

Why have women longer hear then men?

Because they be more flematike: and the substance which should consume to
engendre the bearde, is converted into the hear of the head.

Wherefore be women more tender and smothe then men?

Women do pourge themselves of all superfluous humors by the flowers, and so
all the substance that might engender hear is taken away: by the same reason
women blede very seldom at the nose, nether are they subject to fistulaes nor
impostumes.

Why do those women that be mankind (called of the Latinistes Viragines) less
purge then other women?

Such women be hot of nature: through which heat all their superfluous
humors, (which should convert into menstruall blood) are dispersed throughout
their bodies by an unspeakable manner.

Why is that water better that has his course from the South, then that which
runs from the North?

The South winds be full of vapoures and moistnes: and meting with the
Northern winds, which dry, they cause the water to be the better.

What means it that among birds, The doubts of S. Francesco Palaricine.
the males make greater noise then the females: And the clean contrary
happens amongst men and women?

Among brute beasts, the females are of more colder complexion: and among
reasonable creatures, the woman's head is lighter, and more full of vanities.

Whereof comes it that women and little children do so quickly weep?

Of the great humiditie and moistnes that is in them.

Whereof comes it that among birds the Sparrowe lives lest while?

Because he is to lech^rouse.

Why do Mulets live longer then Asses or Horses?

Because they be barren, and do not lose their sede.

Wherefore be women with child in more danger to miscarie in the first, second
and third month, then in the rest of the months that follow?

Because the infant is most tender, much like to an apple that begins to be
fashioned, not yet having the stalk strong enough to sustain it.

Why is the water of the Sea more bitter in summer then in winter?

That comes of the heat of the Sun, for it is not to be doubted, but that
a salt thing if it be heated again, will wax bitter.

Why be children borne more safelye in the.vii.viii. and.ix. month, then
before?

The riper that the fruit is, the sooner and easier it falls.

Why is the travel of some women greater and more painful, then of other some?

There be diverse reasons, for sometimes it comes of the strength of the
woman, sometimes according to the proportion of the substance received,
sometimes for that the child is dead, which causes that they can not bow nor
turn.

But why be men children for the most part borne with their head forewardes,
and females with their fete?

In Males the superior parts be always greater, and of Females the lower
parts of the body be always m^re gross and heuie the^ the upper: and so
either of them thrusts forth the heavier parts first, for every heuie thing
always tends downewardes.

But why are women being with child of a man child, less molested and in
better health, then they that be with child of a woman child.

The male is always more lusty, and bears him self better, troubling his
mother less the^ does the female, which is cold and heavy of moving.

Why do the stones of women remain within their body?

The want of hear causes them there to remain.

Why do we give Basell seed to Horses and Asses when they assail the female?

To provoke and stir natural heat.

Wherefore be not women hearie as well as men? The doubts of S. Ottauiano
Palauiciuo.


Because their spiracles and poores are restrained and stopte through coldness.

Why does women's hear wax hoare so sone?

Through cold, and also because they gather together many superfluouse humors,
whereby they be more idle then men.

Why is not wine good for children?

Because it heateth and moisteneth to much, and fills the head incontinently
full of vapors.

Why do not women commonly exercise both their hands as well as men?

To exercise both hands proceeds of the force and strength of the sinowes and
muscles, the which is not in women.

What thing is the sede whereof we be engendered?

It is a humor remaining of the fourth digestion. Some say that it is a pure
blood coming from the brain, and is sodde and made white in the stones. Other
say that it is the substance which remains of the second and third
digestion.

Whereof comes it that the matrix of a woman is so lusty and gredie of the
sede of man?

Because therein consists her perfection.

Wherefore are the flowers natural to a woman every month?

Because that the menstruall blood is venemouse: and therefore if it were long
retained and kept, it would bread many daungerouse diseases in women.

Why is the same called Menstruum?

Because it is the due space and course of the mones mocion, which is of.xxix.
days and.xiiii. hours.

Whereof comes the sterilitie and bari^es of women?

It proceeds of many causes, either of the coldenes of the man, which causes
the sede to be of none effect in generation, or because the seed is waterishe
and cannot abide in the Matrix. Or else because the seeds of the man and woman
be of diverse temperatures, as if the man be melancholik and the woman
sanguine: or the man cholerike, and the woman flematique. No doubt there must
be between the man and the woman a proportion, otherwise the act is of no
effect.

Whereof comes it that fat women commonly have no children?

Because their matrix is Lubricke and sliperie, not able to reteyne the ^ede.
The reason may be also, that the entrance of the matrix of fat women is very
straight and narrow, so that the seed can not enter easelye or if it do, it
is to late, for it is already cooled, and unprofitable for generation, and
does convert into flesh.

Why is a dronken person cold, the wine being hot?

Because natural heat is extincte, by the heat of the wine.

Wherefore have women most commonly the hedache, more then men?

The vapors of the menstrual blodde assende to the hedde, which causes the
same.

Why have men mo tethe then women?

Because they are more abundaunt both in blodde and in heat.

Wherefore do maidens voices change, when their breasts begin to wax great?

Because the Organes of the voice are then more loose, and less closed.

Why have women their breasts above their stomach, and other creatures
underneath?

If women's breasts had been placed under their belly (they having but two fete)
it would have hindered their going: which troubles not other creatures that
have.iiij. feet.

Wherefore is wine forbidden them that have pain in their sides?

Because it burns and sends to the sides diverse burnt and aduste humors,
which increase the disease.

Whereof comes it that some women bring forth no daughters, but altogether
sons?

If the seed fall into the right side of the Matrix she engenders a man
child, because the right side is hotter, and there is more heat requisite in
the generation of a male then of a female. Or else (as some say) when the seed
of the Father surmounteth the seed of the mother, then is engendered a son:
and contrariwise, when the seed of the woman surmounteth* then is engendered a
daughter.

To what end serves the Matrix in women?

It serves to be the place apt for generation. And it is set in the midst
of the woman's body, to the end to draw more commodiously the menstruall blodde
from all parts of the body.

Whereof comes it that some women bring forth long and lean children, and
other some fat and short?

The Child is fashioned according to the form of the matrix, whether it be
long or short.

Whereof comes it, that sometimes the child is both male and female?

The matrix has as it were seven purses or receptacles to receive the sede,
and a woman may have as many children as she has receptables: but if she
should have mo, that were a miracle. She has as it were.iii. purses on the
right side, where the male children are engendered, and.iii. on the left side
where the females are engendered: there remains one in the midst where the
Hermaphrodites is engendered, that is to say, such a one as is both man and
woman.

Whereof comes it, that Twins are not so strong as other children?

Because the seed which should serve to the generation of one, is parted into
two.

Whereof comes it, that our privy parts are more subject to catch hurt,
then the other parts of our body?

That comes of the heat and moystnes united together, which are the cause of
all corruption.

Wherefore is it taken for an ill sign, when the child cries in the belly of
his mother?

The crying is a token of some passion: and therefore if the child were well,
he would not cry.

Whereof comes it that women with child, which use to eat noughty meats, as
moldy flesh and such like, are in danger to be delivered before their time?

To eat noughtie meat corrupts the seed, and the Matrix can not keep
within it any thing which is against the stomicke: and therefore it causes it
to issue forth as a thing unworthy for the sustentation of the spirits

Wherefore do young women abhor and loathe sundry kinds of me^te, sooner then
they that be more aged?

Because that the bodies of young women are more tender and delicate, more open,
full of poores, and slender: and therefore they do the sooner take occasion of
lothesomnes. Whereas the bodies of aged women are more solid and toughe, and
are not so sone infected as the bodies of young women.

How chances it, that women sometimes through tomuch joy, are delivered
before their time.

Tomuche joy cools the Matrix, the which by that means can not reteyne that
which it has within it.

Why may we see in the water, and not hear?

We may see in the water because it is a pearsing and bright substance, but we
can not hear because it has no poores.

Why do aigre and tarte things cause appetite?

Because they dry, and so consequently make the stomach more sharp and close,
which causes appetite.

How comes it, that we wax dry in eating?

Because meat draws unto it the moystnes of the body, as it were a sponge:
the body then being dried, becomes thirsty.

Whereof comes it that vinegar quenches thirst?

That comes of the coldenes of vinegar, which quenches the heat of the
body, and so consequently the thirs^e.

Wherefore is there no fatnes in the tongue?

If the tongue were fat and not spongie, it could not so well taste.

Wherefore do we hear better in the night, then in the day time?

Because the day time is full of bustling and noise, yea even through the
beams of the son which move the air: but the night is quiet and still.

How happens it, that if the veins be cut which are behind the temples, the
party becomes barren?

The Sperme or seed comes from the brain through the veins, which are
about the temples, which being cut, the way also is cut, so that the seed
can not descend into the genitorie parts, which remaining void of seed,
causes barennes.

What is the cause that the Be dies, by pricking with her stinge?

It is because she can not draw back again the point without hurting her
self, or bursting her belly.

Whereof comes it, that fasting spittle is good to take away spots of the
body: and not spittle after meat?

Because the spittle after meat is full of great moystnes, and is partly
gross, by reason of the meat which is mingled with it, in such sort that it
can not so well cleanse as the other.

Why does the smoke of brimstone make the hear white?

Because it dries up and purifieth the gross matter which is disparsed among
the hear.

Why be not children nor such as be gelded, hearie?

Because humiditie abounds in them, and choketh up the natural heat, not
suffering it to cast forth any vapors which might engender either hear or
bearde.

How happens it that man only does become balde? The d^ubts of S. Nic^lo
Madru^cio.


Because he is of a more rare composition and matter, less fleshie, and
consequently more mete and apt to be dried.

Why does a man wax balde first upon the head?

The hedde is a member more moist then all the rest, wherein are united a great
number of flegmatike superfluities, and therefore the same sooner waxes hand.

Why be the waters of Marshes and of pondes unwholesome?

Because they be continually corrupted with modde and fylthines, and having no
manner of mocion do sone putrify.

Why do girls in their mothers wombes grow no faster, and being brought
forth do grow and become great sooner then boys?

That proceeds of the heat in the male, and of the coldenes in the female.

Wherefore be women more heavy when they be young with child, then when they
be great and have gone the most part of their time?

Because that the woman can not then so easily nor so well consume the humors
whereof she is full, as when the child is formed, which aydeth her to consume
them.

Whereof comes it, that blodde shed or powered upon the ground, does so
sone wax thick?

That comes of his great aquositie and waterishnes.

whereof comes it that he which slepeth soundely, dreameth very little?

Because that then all the senses do accord to do their duty, and do not
wander hither and thither for to provoke dreams,

Why is the Southwest wind so sweet and pleasant?

Because it is temperate, neither to hot nor to cold.

Wherefore has the wind (called Cecias) East and by North the power to draw
the clouds unto him?

Because that his mocions are round.

How comes it that wine dronken after a rotten or perished apple seems
bitter?

Because that all rottennes is bitter.

Wherefore do men blede so often at the no^e?

Because the nose has more participation with the brain, then any other
member.

Whereof comes it that neither the blodde of a heart, nor of a Camel does
commonly wax thick?

Because it is more gross and more earthie then any other blodde.

Wherefore is it that neither birds nor wild beasts do at any time feed
upon any empoysoned bodies? The dubtes of Conte Lodiuico Rangone


Nature has showed them the force of poison, which is to corrupt those that
do eat it.

Whereof comes it, that those Creatures which are without heads, for a
certain season do not sleep?

It is because that sleep comes from the hedde.

But why is that water which is sonest hott and sonest cold, better then other
water?

Because it is more subtle and more light.

Wherefore is the well water better, then that which passes by the mines of
Lead?

Water has always the nature of the place where it passes, taking then the
virtue of Lead, which is abstersyu^ or skowring, it fretteth and hurts the
guts, and thereby must needs endomage the body. The like is not in waters
that run by mines of gold and silver, for they comfort the body.

Wherefore is over great exercise or labor evil for the sight?

Because it dries the blodde to much.

Why do some beasts bring forth many young ones, and other not so?

That is according as they have bellies and receptacles for the seed.

How comes it that men sleep better and sooner on the right side, then on
the left?

Because being awake he does lean and rest more upon the left side then upon
the right.

Wherefore has Nature made the heddes of fishes so great, in comparison of the
rest of their body?

Because they may plonge them selves more easily into the bottom of the water.

Whereof comes it that a flower which is bruised, has not so good a smell, as
otherwise?

Because the earthie part is by that means mingled with the sweet smell, and
so does alter it.

How chances it that figs which are sweet and tender, do nevertheless
cause tothe ache?

Because they cleave to the gommes, through their viscositie and ^limines.

The doubts of the prince of Salern^.
What means it, that Gotes be evermore in an Ague?

That proceeds of their extreme heat, which is nothing else but a very Ague.

Why do we esteem Gotes milk to be better for our stomach, then any other?

Because the Got taking his nourishment rather of wodde and boughs then of
grass, causes his milk to be the more thick and less slimie.

How comes it that Cow milk is more medecinable then other milk?

Because a Cow being a great eating beast, does feed not only upon grass,
but also upon all sorts of grene herbs.

Wherefore is the milk of Sheep sweter then other?

Because it is fatter, and albeit that it does fatten, yet it is noisome to
the stomach.

Why is the blod of a Bull hurtful to them that drink it?

Because it is very fat and full of threddes, and soon waxes hard,
^^gendring thereby hurtefulnes.

Why do al beasts refuse to eat of any thing that a Bear has blown upon,
or smelt unto*

Because the blowing or smelling of a Bear is pestiferouse.

Whereof comes it, that among beasts some do sooner follow their d^mmes then
other?

That comes because some sone, and some late do receive knowledge to do it

Why be gardens watered either late in the evening, The doubts of Madonna Medea
Pauona.
or rathe in the morning?

That the heat of the sun may not suddenly dry them, and consume the
moystnes of the herbs.

What is the cause that every sound or voice is more sharp toward the end,
then at the beginning?

Because the voice then waxes more f^oble.

For what respect be they fearful that dwell in hot countries, and they
strong which dwell in cold countries?

Cold does restrain and thicken the flesh, which causes the heat to be
better gathered and compact within.

Why do old men, when they will behold a thing, hold it somewhat far of
from their eyes?

The light of old men is small, gross, and troubled, and has need therefore
to be sharpened: and there must be between their eye and the thing which they
will behold some light, to aid their sight, which causes that they hold a
space of that which they would behold and see.

Wherefore be they that have their eyes rolling and tourning and their sight
stern, deceuors, thieves, and of hot nature?

Deceit and theft proceed of the subtlety of the mind, and the subtlety of
the mind comes of the subtlety of humors caused of heat, that causes the
eyes to wander, and the sight to be stern.

Whereof comes it, The doub^s of S. Anerigo Sans^uerini.
that if one be drunk with to much grene or new wine, and afterward drink
sweet wine upon the same, the wine does him the less hurt?

Grene and sharp wine remains long in the stomach and does trouble it, and
by his heat pearceth the brain, whereby it does inebriat man the sooner: but
sw^te wine through his viscositie does stop ye cundites, whereby the vapors and
fumes of the grene and sharp wine should ascend to the brain.

How chances it that the head is worse at ease, when one has drunk tomuch
wine mingled with water, then when he has drunk to much pure wine unmingled?

It comes of this, that the pure wine does digest better, and so his
fumosities do not offend the head, whereas the wine mingled with water,
penetrating the substance of the brain, can with great difficulty be
dissolved. Thereof also it comes that they which travel much drink more and
be less drunk, then they that be Idle: and if perhaps they be drunk they
wax sooner sober.

Whereof comes it, that to much drinking of wine does alter the bellies of
those that are melancholic?

They that be melancholic are dry of complexion, and therefore their bellies
being moystned with wine, are more laxatiue: Or else the wine fyndeth in the
bodies of melancholic persons many undigested humors, who^ it resolves and
digesteth through his heat: and being so resolved and digested, he sends
them to the guts and inward parts.

Whereof comes it that they which are lean, do many times dye with to much
drinking of old and strong wines? And they that are fat by reason of the wine
do sone wax lean?

The slender body has but little heat and substanciall moistnes in it.
Nevertheless it seems strange unto me, that those which be fat, consuming
(by virtue of the wine) their natural moystnes, can in the end wax lean.

Whereof comes it, that the eyes of dronkardes do still water?

That proceeds of the humors that the wine has engendered in the brain,
whereof feling it self laden, it sends the same again to the eyes, which of
their nature are full of poores.

The dubt^s of Gir^lam^ Spagna.
Whereof comes it that oftentimes the hears do wax graye by reason of
sickness, and do fall away; and being recovered again, do become black as
they were before?

They that do affirm sickness to be a kind of age, which comes at the
appointed time, and that age is a perpetual disease of Nature, have judged
well: knowinge that in deed they both proceed of the great superfluity of
humors which hinder the digestion: which being corrupted through the outward
heat causes the hear to wax graye, but retourning to health, and recovering
his first strength, the body also must needs change, whereby the hear comes
again to his first estate.

Whereof comes it, that to much vexation and grief b^ingeth age?

Bicau^e it dries: and age is nothing else but a very drought.

What means it, that they which dye of age feel no grief

It is through lack of heat, which causes the life to vanishe away without
pain.

Whereof comes it, The doubts of Dottore Carretton^.
that the Rainebowe is of so many colors?

That comes of the mixture of the Clouds, of the air, and of the fire.

Why are our eyes so moveable?

Because they should not so easily be hurt, with that which happens to come
before them.

Whereof comes it, that Oil swimmeth above any other Licor?

Because it is fatter: And all fat things do participate very much with the
air.

How chances it, that the Oestriche only above all other birds has her
claws cloven?

The Oestriche is rather a beast of the earth, then a bird: and his wings
were given him rather to help him to run, then to fly

Why be not fat things soon corrupted?

Because they hold very much of the air, and the fire.

Whereof proceeds it, that most birds do soonest assail the eyes?

Because they see them clear, shining with great brightness.

Why can not the Diamonte be burnte so well as other stones?

The fire can not hurt it, by reason of his great hardenes.

Whereof comes it, that the f^athers of an Eagle mingled among the feathers
of other birds, do consume them?

It is by a secret virtue that is given to the Eagles feathers, to have the
power to consume all other feathers.

Whereof comes it that he that has the thickest blodde, is always most
meriest and frollike?

The blodde that is gross and fat makes the spirits firm and constant,
wherein consists the force of all Creatures.

The doub^s of S. Ferrat^ Martina.
How chances it that some can better endure hongre, then other?

Because that some are cholerike, and other some flegmatike.

But what is the occasion that women be not balde as well as men?

It is their great moystnes: for baldenes comes of drines.

Why do diverse use to lay chalk to the rotes of Chirietrees?

To make them ripe before their time.

How chances it that the Uine and the R^pe or Radish, do not love to grow
one nighe another?

Because they are of diverse natures. For the Rape loves cold places: whereof
it comes that in Alemaigne they are as big as little children: But the Uine
loves those places that be warm.

Why do not the Elephantes and Cammels drink, but in puddles or troubled
waters?

Because they are a^raide to see them selves in the water*

Why does a man nese against the Sun?

The Sun through his heat, does provoke the humor that remains in the
condithe of the Nose, to be open to the air, which causes ne^sing.

Why do Melancholic people sleep so little?

Because they have little moystnes: whereby few vapors ascend up to the brain.

The doubts of S. ^io de ^li^bici.
How chances it that they which be but half drunk, do make more sport,
and show more follies, then they that ar^ altogether drunk?

The senses of them that be extreme dronken are choked with wine. But they that
are but half drunk, have their spirits but a little troubled with the fume of
the wine, which causes those follies which they utter.

Why does metal melte better when it is very cold weather, then at any
other time?

Because then the heat is wholly retired inwardly.

Whereof comes it that they which have grene or graye eyes, do see well,
neither in the day time, nor yet in the night: and the contrary chances to
them that have black eyes?

Because that grene eyes do abound in fire: and the black abound with water.

Why be those Creatures of short life, that engender very often?

Because with the Spermatique superfluities they lose much moisture, which is
the true reteyner of natural heat.

How chances it that the Lion does so much fear the flame of fire?

Naturally the fire is hurte^ull to the sight: and specially to those that are
hot and dry, as chiefly the Lion is.

Why do not Asses engender in the equinoctial time (that is to say, about the
midst of March) as other beasts do, but tarrye a longer time before they
do cover the female Asses?

Because the Ass above all other beasts does fear the cold.

Whereof comes it that mankind has the hedde more hearie, then any other
Creature?

By reason of the great coldenes of the brain, and heat of the heart, which
pants continually, and brings forth many vapores, which do engendre hear.

Whereof comes it that the Serpent does so much fly the herb called Rue,
and especially the wild Rue?

Because the Sarpent is cold, dry and full of Synewes, and the herb Rue of a
contrary nature.

The doub^s of Conte Sigismondo Diarco.
Why are we more hearie before, then behind?

Because the foreparte is more hotter, and more tender: whereby it follows,
that hear comes forth the sooner.

How chances it, that all gelded Creatures are weaker, then the vngelded?

Because the strength comes from the Coddes.

Whereof proceeds it, that when one is hontrie the spittl^ is more bitter and
salter, then at other times.

Because hunger augmenteth cholere: the which easily turns into bitterness, by
reason of his sharpenes.

Whereof comes it that milk sometimes does loosen the belly, and sometimes
binds it?

That proceeds of the diverse qualities which are in Milk.

The doubts of M. Al^ssandro ^ressino.
Why are tame beasts of greater moisture, then wild beasts?

Because they live in a more moist air, and do less exercise them selves.

But why is the air moyster in the Town, then in the fields?

Because it is less beaten both with the son, and with the wind.

Whereof comes it, that most commonly women are fatter then men?

Because they are colder, and do less labor.

Why are women less heary then men?

Because they are colder, and do avoid by their flowers, all superfluities
that might engender hear.

Whereof proceeds it, that when a man is in fear, his Coddes do retire and
clinge together?

Because that in fear the natural heat does abandone and leave the extreme
and uttermost parts, and retireth into the inward parts, and takes with him
both the blod and the spirits. And although that heat be placed in the lower
and inferior parts, yet nevertheless for that it is retired inwardly, and
draws with it all the moystnes of the Coddes: it causes that the Coddes do
remain, as it were, retired and clonge together.

Why have not men so great breasts as women?

Because they have no menstruall blodde: and further, they have no vessel to
reteyne it.

Whereof comes it that great Nipples or Teates, are not the best?

The heat is better enclosed in a little and round Nipple, then in gr^a^
Teates, where the warmnes of the milk issues out.

Whereof proceeds it that between thirtene and foretene years, the Nipples of
young maidens do begin to prick?

Because at that age the menstrual blodd begins to increase in them.

Whereof comes it, that the milk in a woman's breast soudenly decays, if she
give her self to be immoderate in lust?

Because the menstruall blodd does not ascend to the breasts to nourishe the
child.

Whereof comes it that those women that are with child of a son, have their
right breast harder then the left?

It is because the male bredeth in the right side: and so the menstruall blodde
coming to that side, to nourishe the child, makes it more hard and styffe.

Wherefore has Nature given unto woman but two teates only, and unto other
Creatures mo?

Because other Creatures do bring forth many young ones at once: and women
most commonly have but one or two children at the most.

Whereof comes it, The d^ubts of Conte Camillo da Castiglione.
that many times women do bring forth their children before their time,
through to much Joy or mirthe?

Great Joy takes away the heat of the Matrix, which causes untimely birthe.

But why is the thick and plentiful milk a token of a man child, and the
milk that is clear and thin betokens a daughter

The woman being with child with a son, is of greater heat, which thickeneth
and makes the milk to digeste: contraryewise the milk of a woman being with
child of a daughter, is less digested, by having of less heat.

Whereof comes it that the milk of women (which without respect, and at all
times be content to be imbrased) is not good for children?

At that instaunt that the woman is embrased, the best and subtillest part of
the milk does return to the Matrix, and to the generatiue vess^lles, and
that which is the worst remains in the Pappes: whereby the childs fare is
full slender and thin.

Whereof comes it that the milk of fayer women is not so good, as of black
women?

Brown women are of hotter complexion, and therefore have their milk better
digested.

Whereof comes the disordinate desire that women with child have to eat
things that are lothesome, most commonly in the first or third month after
they be conceued.

Such is the appetite as the humors be which are within. And because the
humors of women with child are corrupted, it is no marvel although their
appetite be without reason.

The doubts of S. Giouan Michas
Whereof proceed the spots that we see many times in the Moon?

Of the corruptions of the earth elevated with vapores. Many learned men in
Astrology, do affirm that the stars do receive their nourishment from the
humors of the earth.

Whereof comes it, that they which have the falling sickness do see nothing,
although their eyes be open?

That proceeds of the understanding which is then (as it were) blind: and the
understanding causes the sight. For the sight is no other thing* but a certain
power, able to receive and comprehend that which is presented unto us, and to
return it again when we will.

Why do they that are fat live but a little while?

It is the want of blodde, which by fatnes is consumed: for the less blod
(...), the more they are subject to heat and cold: and that is the cause
(...) why they be fructeles and barren.

Why do Physicians appoint the bread for those that be sick to be first
tempered before it be given them?

The Leuaine has a certain corrupt heat in it, which augmenteth fevers, in
such sort that it corrupts the bread if there be to much.

Whereof comes it that the paste, the more it is kneded, the better it is?

It is because the licor, the meal, and the leuaine being well incorporated,
and the moystnes resolved, the bread is more wholesome and better.

Whereof comes it that the outward parts of the body are more subie^t to
cold, then any other part of the same?

Because they are thinner, and further from the heart.

Whereof proceeds it, The doubts of M. Vincentio Brusantino.
that they which have the ball of their eye great, have not so good sight, as
they which have it small?

Because the virtue of the si^ht fills better, and is closer in a little ball
of the eye, then in a great.

What is the cause that strypes laid on with rodds, do smart more then blows
with sticks?

Because Rods do enter better into the body.

Whero^ comes it that the herbs Pursline and Lettice, do first cool and
then warm the bodies of them that do use to eat them?

Until the digestion be made they do cool the body: but the digestion made,
they change into good blodde, and so increase heat.

Why was the thing called of the Italians Nimphae, placed in the orifice of a
woman's matrix?

To be an Ornament: or rather to keep her matrix from cold, and that it should
serve the same as a couerture.

Why is the Capon better to be eaten then the Cock?

The Capon leseth not his moistnes, because he treads not the Henne^ ^^ the
Cock does: and therefore is better.

The doubts of M. Alberto Schiad
Whereof comes it, that they which have the etique fever or consumption, do
feel no pain in sickness?

Every unequal temperature is without pain.

What is the cause, that after sleep we use to stretche our selves?

To drive away evil vapors.

Why do they that have traueled, sleep better then others?

Because the spirits desire to be at rest.

Whereof comes it that they which are drunk, in beholding one thing, do
think that they see two or many?

That comes of the continual and souden mocion of the eyes, proceeding of the
vapors and exhalacions of the wine.

Why is a Dronkard of better judgment in things that are bitter, egre, salt,
and of evil taste, then any other?

A Dronkard has his tongue better seasoned with the licour and swetnes of the
wine, and has more moystnes in his tongue, then he that lives soberly: whereby
he may the better judge.

What difference is there between heaviness in the hedde, and dronkennes?

Heaviness in the head causes oppilacions and stopping: Dronkennes comes of
subtle vapors, which trouble and mingle them selves with the Brain and the
vital spirits.

Why do men judge him that has a short arm, to be fearful, and of evil
disposition?

As the length and bigness of the arm is a token of heat: even so the short
arm does betoken cold, for the property of cold is to shorten, and
restrain. And as of heat proceeds hardenes: so of cold comes fear. Being
then in continual fear left evil should happen unto them, it is no marvel
though they think always of some evil.

Whereof comes it that they which have gross chekes, are of dull and hard
understanding?

Gross flesh comes of gross humors, which also causes gross spirits,
and so consequently dull understanding.

Why do they rub their eyes that wouldnese?

Nesing comes of heat: and the rubbing provoke heat.

Why do the Eagles drive away their young ones, before they be ^ethered or
fligge?

Because that without feathers they be very evil ^auored: or else because they
be very rauenouse.

Whereof proceeds it that most commonly a man does nese twice together?

Because there be two holes or breathing places in the nose.

Whereof comes it that cold water being cast in the face, does staunche
bleding of the Nose?

It is because that by that means heat is driven in.

Why is smoke painful to the eyes? The doubts of M. Francesco Codazza


Because the eyes be of a weak complexion.

Why do they live longest that dwell in hot countries?

Because they are drier: and their natural moisture and heat does preserve
them the better.

Why do we smell a thing less in winter, then in Summer?

Because the air is thicker, and less moveable.

Whereof comes it that the urine, the longer it is retained within the body,
the worse it smells: and the excrement, the longer it is kept, the less it
stinketh?

The excrement the longer it tarieth in the body, the more it dries, and is
of less corruption. The drive contrariwise, the longer it is retained in the
bladder the thicker it waxes, and more fylthie.

Why does the hear burn so quickly?

Because it is cold and dry.

Why do we cover our heddes close in cold weather?

The hedde does wax warm when it is kept close: for by that means the heat
is kept in. And the kerchef or hoode serves for the hedde, as the gown does
for the body.

Whereof comes it that they which have their shoulders and neck hearie, be
foles and obstinate, apt to do evil?

Folly and obstinacy proceed of Melancholy, engendered of adust and burning
cholere. And for so much as the hear of the body and shoulders, com^eth by
extrem^ choler and heat: the choler does never leave, until it burn with
extreme heat, and so conuerteth into Melancholy. The neck and shoulders be
very seldom hearie: but if they be it proceeds of heat and drines, which
complexion does easily change into (...) Melancholy, and makes them fools
and perverse.

The doubts of Cauali^r Gasuola.
Why do they not think well water to be good and wholesome?

Every water which stands still, and is not heated with the sun is earthie,
heavy, and consequently naught.

Whereof comes it that Rain water corrupts so soon, and is noisome both to
the voice and stomach?

Rain water for that it is engendered of vapores, is very subtle, and
therefore subject to corruption. Being putrified, it engenders corruption in
us, and through his stopping, it dries the stomach, and the pipes or veins
of the Longes. And although that by digestion the corruption does diminishe,
yet the virtue astrictiue does still remain.

Whereof comes it that bitter Almondes do keep one from drunkenness?

Because they dry the body: and will not suffer the veins to be filled,
resisting the strength of the wine.

Whereof comes it that women be not suddenly drunk, and old folks are
incontinently overcome with wine?

The wine remains longer in the stomachs of old people, being dry by
nature: even as water does in a tronke of wodde, dry and half putrified. But
women are to cold and moist, by means whereof they do better resist the force
o^ the wine.

The end of Natural Questions.
Moral and politic Questions The.III. Book.
WHy did the Auncientes painte Fortune with a double forhedd, the one side
balde, and the other hearie?

The shaven side signifies adversity: the hearie part prosperity, which we
enjoy when it pleases her.

What has moved many to think the seat of the spirit to be placed in the
eyes?

Because the passions of the spirit do appear in the eyes.

Why did the Romans deem him hurtefull to the Common wealth, Every Iugeru^
or yoke is as much ground as.i. yoke of Oxen will ploughe in a day: It may be
termed our English acre.
that would not content himself with.vii. yokes of land?

After the Kings were chased from Rome, the Romans desirouse to content them
selves with a little, to avoid all occasion of Tyranny, assigned to every
Roman Citizen.vii. yokes of Land, and no more.

Why was it so long before the Romans did plant any Uines?

Because they foresawe, that wine made them dull, debilitated their synewes,
weakened their forces, troubled their brains, and made them have a stinking
breath.

Whereof comes it that the Persians breath commonly stinketh?

Because of the diversity of meats, and excess of wines.

Why did the Romans esteem the men of the country to be more mete for the
wars, then the Citizens?

Because the Peysant and Cuntrie man is more accustomed to sleep upon hard
places, to endure cold and heat, honger and thirste.

Wherefore is he esteemed more vilanouse and infamouse that denies the thing
which is delivered him to keep, then he that renders not the thing he boroweth?

Because there is nothing more vilanouse then a man to do wrong to his friend,
for no man delivers any thing in keeping to any man, but to him in whom he
has reposed his greatest trust.

What meant the Romans to have no Bakers in their City, before the wars of
the Persians, which was.v.C. and.iiii. score years after the building of Rome?

The Romans esteemed the science of Baking to be but the work of women.

But tell me I pray you, why had they no Cooks as we have?

Because they are strong and lusty men, not given to delicates, which makes
men fainte and effeminate.

How chances it that the drowned bodies of men do swim vpwardes, and
those of women downewardes?

Nature her self has a special regard to the honesty of women, desirouse
to cover their secret places. Whereof I would (it might please god) that women
themselves had better consideration and regard.

Wherefore were the Carthaginians counted deceauers and mockers?

The situation of Carthage did cause the same. For by reason of the
marchaundize and tra^ique which they had with all the nations of the world,
they were very much used and frequented to tromperie and decept.

But why were the Carthaginians so desirouse, that all their magestrates should
be rich?

Because they thought that the poor man could nor faithfully minister Justice.

What mente many brave and lusty nations continually rather to love war then
peace?

Because war stur^eth men to virtue and valiaunce, and peace draws them to
Idleness and all kind of wantonness.

Why have diverse in times paste allowed and commended Flattery?

Because Flattery sets forth before our eyes what we ought to be.

Why does the vice of Anger daily displease the wise?

Because it is a spice of Folly and Rage.

Wherefore ought the virtue of Justice to be in Princes commendable above al
other things?

Because it is the mother of all virtue, But what shall be demed of that Realm
that is without Justice, if not a very sanctuary of thieves and pirates.

Wherefore were they of the Country Campagnia esteemed proud and brave?

Because of the fertility of the Country, and beauty of their Cities.

Why be the people of Boetia more then any other counted blockeheddes and Asses?

Because they eat to much.

What moved them of Locres to make a law, that whosoever would go about by any
law or ordinance to establishe some new devise or innovation in their City,
ought without remedy (the Rope about his neck) to recite openly before the
people the law which he would establishe, and the reason wherefore?

That was to chastise and correct those that love novelties and new devises:
for if the law proposed pleased not the people, or was found to be wrongful
and unjust, the proposer of that law had no more hurt, but soudenly was
strangled. Which ordinance and decree kept the good citezens of Locres more
then two hundred years in good estate of common welthe without any alteration
and change.

Why did the Auncientes in old time arm their soldiers only with the
plackard, without any other Armure?

To cut from them all hope of running away.

Wherefore did the Ancient above all things desire to dye honorably?

Because honorable death covers the faults of the life paste.

What mente the wise continuallye to ioygne wisdom with puisaunce?

That puisaunce might not be converted into tyranny.

Wherefore did the Auncientes say, that their minds and souls were like unto
Lamps?

Because through good instructions they might give light each to other.

What mente many sinculerly to commend poverty?

Because it made men industriouse and vigilant.

Why did the Auncientes ordeine, that if there chanced any disorder or
murmuring among the soldiers, they should cast lottes, to punish a few of
them: and that they to whom the lotte should fall, incontinently should be
dispatched?

It was to fear a great number, through the punishment of a few

Why be those that be expert in the art of war always blamed, if they enter
rashely into combat?

Because that the issue of the battles are uncertain.

Why did the Auncientes paynte the ymade of virtue, girded?

To declare that the virtuous man ought to be diligent in his affairs, and
not slothful.

What means it that women are desirouse of reuengement above all other
creatures?

Their weakness is the cause.

Why were the Persians so curiouse to accustom their children to avoid lying
and to tell the truth?

Because they demed verity to dwell among the godds. And that they ought not
to premeditate what to say.

Wherefore ought Intemperaunce to be avoided?

Because it brings with him all disorder, necligenge, and inordinate life.

Why do some praise poverty?

Because she teaches all good manners, nourishes and enterteyneth the good
spirit, and causes assurance in man.

Why is a rich wife to be eschewed?

Because she does not content her self with the estate of a wife: but would
be maistresse, and more then a maistresse.

Why do many desire death: when as for the honor of the same, there never was
any altar edefied, nor Himpt song in his praise?

Because it is a remedy for all evils, and an assured port for the dead.

Why is it better for a prince to be loved, then feared?

Because fear can not always last nor endure.

Whereof comes it that some do love death, and other some fear him?

Death is fe^rfull to them that forgo all things with life. But death is
sweet to them that leave some eternal memory of them selves: and hope to go
to the place of comfort and felicity.

Why do men commend dry, hard, and barren places?

Because such places make men careful, industriouse and diligent, which thing
no men can bear better witness then the Bergamasques Geneuois, Ragus^is and
Lucho^s, cities in Italy.

Why is it said that in giving of benefits we ought to immitate the fertile
fields?

Because they yield more then they receive.

Why is delicate fare to be eschewed?

Because it corrupts good wits.

Why ought no credit to be given to Fortune?

Because she is inconstant.

Why is it not good to follow the opinion of the common people?

Because they judge all things by their opinion, and not according to the
truth.

Why is age when it approaches to be feared?

Because age is sickness it self, and the shop of all infirmities.

What moved some to give counsel indifferently to avoid the conversation of
women?

Because they be all equally instructed in the schole of Malice, as the Comicat
Poet Terence affirms.

Why ought a man to beware of extreme poverty?

Because it destroys good wits.

Why do some desire to become old, and to have no children

To be the less fearful of Tirantes.

Why did the Auncientes ordeine that in civil dissentions there should no part
be taken with the common people?

Because there is nothing more disordred, either in rage, or covetousness, then
the common people, more impacient in heaviness, nor more dissolved in pleasures.

Why ought unlawful gain to be eschewed?

Because the end thereof is not good, neither does such gain long continue.

Why do they compare a couetouse man to him that has the dropsi^?

Because he is seldom satisfied, and can not quench the couetouse thirst
wherewith he is always infected.

What was the cause of the commandment that we have to honor Princes?

Because they are on earche a representation and lively Image of God, who
gouer^eth all things.

Why did the Persians make their children to behold the orders and fashions of
Dronckardes?

To teach them to abhor dronkennes, by seeing the disordinate fashions of
those that were droncke.

Why did the Auncientes say, that it were much better to fall into the hands
of Ravens, then of Flatterers?

Because Ravens and Crows do eat us when we be dead, but Flatterers do
devour us alive.

Why is it not semely for a man to praise or dispraise himself

Because the one is a sign of folly, the other of inconstancy.

Wherein rests true Amity?

In the unity and equality of minds, by following and refusing, loving and
hating one thing. Amity is like to the Sun of the world: without which all
things are dark and out of order.

How may a true friend be known?

By things uncertain.

Who be they that do least fear death?

They that least trouble them selves with worldely things.

What thing gets friends?

Good Fortune gets them, and ill fortune loses them.

What difference is there between friendship and hatred?

The one ought to be immortal, and the other is mortal.

Which is the best patrimony that man can have in this world

To be spare and continent in living: and if our goods be not sufficient for
us, let us be sufficient for our goods.

What kind of auerice or covetousness is counted most honest?

The covetousness of time, when it is employed as it ought to be.

What is the state of the rich couetouse man?

A continual torment, and an extreme desire to get goods together, with fear
of loss of the same.

How may a man truly term temporal richesse?

Heaviness of mind, snares, and nets to catch us: and thorns that pearce us
through the heart.

What chances to sluggardes, and to the slothefull?

To live barely, and to rest without profit.

What is the property of Fortune?

To fear the mighty, and to tread under fete the simple.

Why have the Auncientes praised temperaunce above all things?

Because temperaunce increases the pleasure that may be had in delectable
things.

Why is the Idle and delicate life to be blamed?

Because with pleasure it brings a thousand sorrows.

Why did the Auncientes so much commend the rural life?

Because it is the mystres of frugalitie, diligence and Justice.

Why is a Iester or Parasite so displeasaunt?

Because they have but one song, oftentimes reciting their lies and gestes.

Whereof comes it that the Egiptians did cut of the skymce before their
members?

To keep them more clean.

What was the best thing which they of old time thought they had receued of
their gods?

Virtue, which is of it self a sufficient reward, in such wise as h^ that
possesses it, may esteem himself rich, as inioying the most special part
of all goodness. Fortune gives place to virtue, and obeys her in all points
whersoeuer she becomes: she can not be robbed nor lost, by fire nor by
water: she is clear and everlasting: and whosoever dies for her, can never
die, but goes to eternal glory.

Who be they that (in deed) are esteemed happy in this world?

They that can live and dispatche their affairs without danger: and in rest
to live in honor.

Which is the first point to atteyne wisdom?

For a man to know him self: and the more difficulte it is, the more
profitable.

In what sort should a man behave him self in other men's affairs?

In such sort as he forget not his own.

Whilst we be young, what thing ought we most to remember?

That one day we shall be old.

What is he that lives well?

He that bosteth not him self thereof.

After what sort ought the Ignorance of youth to be corrected?

By the wisdom of the old.

What is he that is brave (in deed?)

He that can exalte him self.

What is the property of a gloriouse man?

Rather to abhor death, then to desire life.

How does virtue increase?

Through perilles and adversity.

How may one avoid adversity?

By patience.

How should we preserve our goods, and become subject to the inconstancy of
Fortune?

In giving them to our friends, and in making participation thereof among
those that would us good.

To whom is Poverty noisome?

To him that suffers not the same patiently.

What is the sause that apperteyneth to travel?

That is Rest.

Why is Fortune painted blind?

Because she blinds her pursuers.

What thing is very easy to be gotten, and very hard to be kept?

Good fortune.

What is he that is free (in deed?)

He that does not heastely yield himself to his affections.

What is it that makes an evil man?

To much Liberty.

What ought he to learn above all things that desires to reign and govern?

To sustain Envy, with great courage.

What is that which most of all does overthrow Princes?

The poison of Flattery.

How be true Friends gotten?

With Fidelity and like duty.

What is that which so seldom is found together, to rest in one person?

Beauty with chastity, wisdom and richesse, youth and continency, age
without Ialousie.

What is that which men call wine?

It is the death of the memory, poison for man, corruption of beawtie and
virtue, and the flower of age.

What is he that can not speak?

He that knows not how to hold his peace.

Where is it most specially requisite for a man to hold his peace?

At the Table.

What is the true Image of man?

The speech.

What kind of men is most to be hated?

Those which use reproach.

To whom ought not a man to do good?

Neither to old men, nor to young children: because young children do forget
good tornes done unto them, before they come to the age of knowledge: and old
men do forget them by and by.

What manner of life lives man without learning?

The life of a dead man, or of such a one that lives in darkness.

What things be those that stir us most to virtue?

The love of glory, and fear of blame.

How may true glory be nourished?

By doing much, and speaking little.

How do common welthes begin to increase and florishe?

They increase by unity, and overthrow by discention.

What is the most expedient remedy in things that we can not recover?

Utterly to forget them.

What moved Thales Miletius to say that the gods hard all things. And that
all things was replenished with their divinity?

To make men more continent and better contented with their estate.

Wherefore did Hieron demand of Simonides what thing God was, and at every
time he took a great pause to make him answer?

To declare that God was infinite and incomprehensible.

What moved Themistocles to say that he was contented to ^orget all that he
knew, and to remember nothing?

Because the troubles which a man has in his memory be greater, then the
mirthes and joys.

Wherefore is it better, according to the opinion of Themistocles, to give the
daughter in marriage to a poor man being honest, then to a rich man of ill
conditions?

Because it is better to mary a man without money, then money without a man.

Wherefore did Socrates refuse the defense that Licias the Orator had done for
him?

Because it seemed to be to delicate and wanton. And to Philosophers all manlye
things do apperteine.

Wherefore did Socrates, being demanded (whether Archelaus the son of
Perdicas was happy or not) answer that he had never spoken unto him?

Because by conference and communication with him, he might have known whether
he had been a man learned and of good judgment, de^ing only such men to be
happy.

Which is the shortest way for a man to atteyne unto glory?

To be such a one as a man would have him self to be esteemed*

What kind of sause is best?

Hongre.

What makes drink to relishe best?

Thirste, caused by moderate exercise.

What caused Solon to say, when he was demanded of Pi^istratus the tyrant,
why he spoke so boldly and malepartly unto him, that he reposed his trust in
his age?

Because he cared no longer to live, being so nere death.

Wherefore did not Solon in his Book of laws ordeine a punishment for them
that did kill their fathers?

Because he thought no such wickedness could be committed. And so by those
laws he would not commit in memory any such thing to his people.

What is it that mainteineth common welthes?

Penalty and reward.

Wherefore would not Anaxagoras, when he was a dying, be borne and carried into
his country?

Because he knew that in all places the way was all one, to pass into a
another life.

What mente the same man Anaxagoras to say, when news was brought him of the
death of his son. Good news friend quod he, for now I know that my son
was a mortal man?

To declare that adversities do grieve us least, when we foresee that of
necessity they must come to pass.

How chanced it that Gorgias Leontinus never complained that he lived so
long?

Because he had no occasion to complain of age.

Why did Darius (being constrained to drink of water troubled and infected
with dead bodies) say that he never drank of drink that lyked him so well?

Because he never drancke when he was a thirst, before that time.

What sawces did the Lacedaemonians use in their meat?

Sweat, duste, running, and thirste.

What is the most pestilent thing that can be in man?

Love of our selves, and delight in our selves.

Wherefore was king Cyrus reputed and judged of Lysaender most happy?

Because he joined and coupled virtue with Fortune.

Why ought anger to be avoided and eschewed?

Because it is the enemy of good counsel.

And why Riot?

Because it is vile and unseemly in all ages and degrees.

Why ought human things to be despised?

Because there is no constancy and stedfastnes in them.

Wherefore is courage of heart so much esteemed: that is to say, constantly to
sustain and bear all sorrows and calamities that may chance?

Because it is not inferior to warrelyke bravery and courage. Whereof many
times the very soldier him self has need.

Wherefore is equity and justice conuenable and mete in a Prince above all
things?

Because it establishes kingdoms, and makes Kings to reign.

What causes Philosophy above all other disciplines to be so much embrased?

Because that science teaches man voluntary, and franckely to do the thing,
which other makes him to do for fear of laws.

Why ought pleasure to be contempned?

Because continually she is accompanied with sorrows.

What means the Swanne, when he is near unto his death, to singe better then
at any other time?

By natures teaching, to declare what benefit we receive by death, which
opens unto us the gate to eternal life.

Why have the wise men of old time compared our life to a stage play or
tragedy?

For that many times the worst sort of men do occupy the places of the best,
as oftentimes we see in such cases

Why do we hate poverty?

Because poverty causes many to wander out of the right way, who rather then
they would be constrained to beg and sterue for hongre, apply them selves to
rob and murdre.

How chanced it in Rome, that women when they were met by their nerest
Parents and kinsmen, were kissed on the mouth?

To know whether they had droncke any wine: For wine was utterly forbidden
among women as appears by Egnacius Metuetinus who killed his wife because
she had drunk wine.

Wherefore is it not good to build Cities nere to a river side?

Because Rivers raise up vapors noisome unto men.

Whereof comes it that Saffron and the herb called Foenum Graecum or greek
Hay, the more they be trodden into the ground, the better they grow?

Nature would the same, to signify that rest is necessary, and continual
travel not to be mete.

What moved the Auncientes to think, that he which did eat* Lentilles had
his mind better inclined to rest?

Because they engendre cold humores.

But why would nature that the Lupine should be turned to wards the son, to
do the office of a Dyall, by telling the time of the day unto the Country
people?

To serve for a Dyall to the laboring man, that he should not trouble him
self to look up to the heavens, at such time as he ought to work.

Why did the Persians use no other pittaunce with their bread, but the herb
called Nasturtium, or water Cresses?

To declare their frugalitie and sparenes of living.

Why did the Auncientes esteem nothing in their sacrifices to be holy, but
that which was roasted?

To do us to understand that there is nothing worthy to enter into heaven,
which before had not passed by the fire of tribulation and grief.

Why had the Auncientes so great care, that neither corn nor new wine should
be tasted, before the priest had made an assay of the first fructes?

To signify unto us that we should acknowledge all things that we have to
come of God, as the aucthor of all goodness.

Wherefore was Gold first found out?

For the destruction of man. Whereof they be so couetouse, that they care not to
adventure each danger for having of the same, according to the true verse of
Uirgil the father of Poets.

Quid non mortalia Pettora cogit Auri Sacra fames.

Wherefore is Gold so pale?

For fear of so many dangers and ambushmentes planted by man to recover the
same.

Wherefore did Queen Dido in Virgil, term her second marriage to be a fault?

Because peradventure the second marriage then was not sufferable: and she was
counted a wanton and inconstant woman that could not con^ent her self with
the first marriage. Yea and the custom was then to commend with crowns and
garlands those women that lived widows to their death, with no less praise,
then they did maidens and virgins.

Why did the Auncientes despise a man that desired to be to much happy?

For that to much felicity engenders forgetfulness, and contempt of God, of
honor and fame.

Why were women forbidden wine in old time?

Because wine provoke lechery, and is noisome unto the sense and
understanding.

Why were the magestrates also forbidden the same?

To the intent their brain should be good and strong, righteouslie to determine
and Judge.

But why were the Soldiers and men of war defended from the same?

That by to much drinking they should not sleep, and by that means all
occasion of advantage might be taken from the Enemy.

What means that sa^ng, that fortune does captiuate and blind the
understanding?

That is when one makes no resistaunce unto her, but suffers her to rule at
her pleasure.

Why was Bachus termed to be a foolish God?

Because he makes them fools that taste to much of his licour.

How chances it that the Thebans represented Bachus in fine and effeminate
apparel, and the Indians did clothe him with manely garments?

That was according to the manner of the places. For as the country is, so is
their custom.

Wherefore by being conuersaunt with the beautiful and healthie, we be neither
more beautiful nor healthie: but by keeping company with just men, continent
and modest, many times we resemble their manner and behauior?

Because the gifts of the mind we may imitate and follow, but not those of
the body.

Why be rich men most commonly wicked, and those that be good men not rich?

Goodness seeks them that be good, in them to fix his sure and long
habitation.

What caused Siluius the Italian poet, borne in Naples, to kill him self?

Nothing but a leke that he had about him, whereof he could not abide the
smell. The like happened to Cornelius Rufus, who was not able to abide a
certain corporal infirmity wherewith he was diseased.

What difference is there between beauty and ill fauourednesse?

The one gives and increases, the other takes away and diminishes the
majesty of the person, which caused Pericles and Hiponax, although they were
two worthy personages to be despised, because they were deformed and ill
favored.

Wherefore did Bupalus and Anterinus most excellent ingrauers, hang them
selves by the throat?

Through an extreme disdain conceued for certain Sonettes and Iambicall
verses written against them by the Poet Hiponax, not without desert, wherefore
Plato admonishes that in any wise we should not provoke the displeasure of
Poets, and the merye Poet Horace merelye writing of Poets has this verse.
Vatum irritabile genus.

What moved Socrates at the age of.lxx. years to give him self to Music.

Music moves the virtues of the mind, chaseth away evil thoughts and
sweteneth the travel of men.

What endured Lycurgus the law maker of Lacedemon to establish Music
specially in the field?

His experience, that Music made man cherfull and ready to fight, lusty to
supporte all disaduenture and danger of the war.

What made Achilles to be so valiant?

The observation of the discipline, and instruction of Phoenix and Chiron. For
Philip of Macedon was instructed by Epaminondas, Alexander through his master
Aristotle, Alcibiades by the diligence of Pericles and Arifron tutors, left
unto him by his father Clinia, although he had greatest aid and help by
Socrates.

Why were the Scithians and Thratians the most sober people of all Gretia?

The ignorance of vice provoked virtue more then all the knowledge of the
Greeks.

Shamefastnes either in man or woman, what is it properly?

The bridle and bitte that restrains their appetites.

Poesy, what manner of thing is it?

It is the day watch of virtue, the morning food of a ready wit, the
evening banquet of a well disposed mind, and the midnight bell of the studious:
which was well experienced in the noble captain Leonidas the Spartan, who
being Lieutenant general in the wars against the Messenians, never ceased to
peruse and read the works and poesies of Tirteus the Poet.

What vices blotted the great liberality and patience in adversity of Marcus
Antonius.

Play, Dronkennes, Surfecting, and to much familiarity with his householde
servants.

What made Julius Caesar the first Emperor of Rome so beloved of his soldiers?

The not telling and counting of his Soldiers pray, causing every of them to
take what he list.

What moved the Athenians to cause the deeds and acts of Thesius the first
founder of their noble City to be recited, which were written by Caunidias his
Scholemaster, having daily before their ^ies the portratures and images of
Silamon and Parasius?

The writings of wise men do represent unto us the true images of them of whom
they be written, better without all comparison, then colors or painting which
have no felinge. The form and factes of whom cannot be so well expressed.

What moved Polign^tus to cause at his own costs and charges the whole wars
of Troy to be painted?

The ardent desire he had to immortalizate his name.

Wherefore was Aurelius that excellent Painter in Rome counted to be infamous?

Because he mingled Hores and drabbes among the heavenly Goddesses, so far
was he enamored with their Mere trix.

Why would not Agesillaus in any wise suffer him self to be counterfaited?

Because he would leave behind him after his death his deeds and factes to serve
for his image and co^nterfaite, which in very deed do more divinely represent
ye affections of the mind the^ portratures of corporal Phisnogmies

wherefore was Philip of Macedon esteemed a man of so little brain

Because he spoke much and many times to small purpose.

Which is the most honest exercise for a Prince?

Reading, after he has ended his other exercises which made the Poet Homer to
bring in the God Jupiter, who making a feast, caused the victory that followed
in Ethiopia, had against the Giantes, to be song in verses to Apollo. Alcinous
also king of the Pheacians used the like. Queen Dido in the feast that she made
to Aeneas, caused Iopas upon his Citron, to singe the course of the Stars,
and the beginning of the world.

What was the cause of the great estimation of Pirrhus King of Epirus?

The eloquence that he had learned of Cicneas: together with the great
liberality and magnificence that he used toward them that assisted him in
his enterprises.

Why is it so much requisite to chose a good nurse for ye child

Because the body does not only receive the substance of the milk, but the
spirits also do feel it.

Whereof comes it that the Romans did not see their children, until they
were of the age of.vii. years?

Because they would not that they should come home to them, before they had
learned to honor them. The French men were more diverse, for they would not see
their children until they were estrong to handle wepons.

Why did they forbid their children the company of Ruffians, gesters, bablers
and all such Ribaldes?

To the intent they should not learn to give them selves to dishonest
pleasures, and to forgette the good nature wherewith they were endued, which in
the end would be the destruction both of their body and soul.

What ought the tales and communications be that are had with children?

They ought to have some semblance of truth: and above all things they must
not be fearful unto them, nor supersticious.

Why were the pensions receued of princes, abolished in many Cities?

Because there is nothing ye does sooner corrupt the person then gifts: for they
engender great suspitio in the^, that do receive them. Demosthenes for receuing
of bribes of Arpalus king of Persia, was chased out of Athenes.

Why were Coriolanus and Themistocles so much against their own country?

For the ingratitude of their citizens, who denied the^ both their due honors.
Caesar also because his country men denied him his well deserved triumph,
became enemy to his country.

Why was Cato of many men compted a fool.

Because he rather chose voluntary death, then to yield himself into the hands
of Caesar, who sought no other thing of him but friendship, and was meant to
pardon him al his iniuryes past.

Why did Scipio take such head of going rashlye to the skirmishe and cumbat?

He knew well that by his nativity, he was appointed to be general of
armies, and not a simple souldior: wherefore he behaved him self according to
the Majesty of that office, and not like a private souldior.

Why was Demetrius reprehe^ded, when he desired to have the surname of him that
had broken the first rank of his enemies?

The true title of a prince is rather to be just then mighty: and ought
rather to resemble God by virtue, then the Lion by force.

Why did Plato refuse to reduce the commonwealth of the Cirenians into good
order and discipline?

Because the abundaunce of riches had made it to licenceous.

Whereof came it ye Marius, Viriatus, and Ventidius Bassus were so excellent in
arms, and did suffer so patiently ye labors of ye wars?

The one was a laborer, the other a sheperd, and the third was a horskeper,
whereby all three were used to great travel, to pain, to heat and cold, and to,
sparenes of life.

Why would the Capadocians never be without a prince*

Experience did teach them how profitable it was to be under the governance
of an other.

For what cause was Solon esteemed a fool?

Because, being pursued of Pifistratus the tyrant, he loved rather to beg
throughout the world, then to tarry with Cresus king of Lidia, who would
have given him part of his Realm, to the intent he might justly and
vertuousely govern, which by his advise he thought that he might atteine.

Why would the Aetheniens never become subject to any Prince?

Because from their childehode they were accustomed to live at liberty.

With what goodness ought he to be endued that does reign and govern?

He ought to excede his subjects in bountifulnes, so much the more as he
does surpass them in degree and honor.

What is the true duty of a Prince?

To make his subjects to live quietly and godly, which thing he can not do,
if he him self be not good, just, and virtuous.

What difference is there between the equal and just Prince, and the Tyrant?

The one uses thoffice of a man, the other of a beast. The Prince serves as
a father to his subjects: the Tyrant deuoureth them.

How may a Tyrant assure him self in his Tyranny?

By putting to death those that are the chiefest and most noble. Such was the
council of Thrasibulus to Periander, and Tarquinius superbus to his son.

Why be men naturally afraid to rebel or encounter with a Prince?

Because that (after the mind of Hesiodus) the Prince is established by God.

Think you that God has any regard of things to come?

There is nothing more certain. Romulus testifies the same, being rescued
from the water, and nourished with the milk of a wolf: Abidus nourished with
the milk of a Hynde: and Cyrus of a Goat,

Is it any meruell then although the Persians did worship them as gods?

No truly. Moreover Homer and Hesiodus do affirm, that principality and
government is a gift proceeding from above, given unto men, thereby to know
the power of God.

What is the nature of a liberal man?

It is not only to give for the relief of the necessities of others: but also
to give liberally, and with a free heart.

How did the auncientes by figure and painting represent the good success and
end of all things?

They made an Image, holding in the right hand a cup, and in the left hand
an ear of wheat with a poppi^^ signifying thereby that he is well satisfied,
that contenteth him self with the fructes of the earth.

Wherefore was the gratitude and good remembrance, that Eschines had toward his
scolemaster Socrates, so well commended?

Because he gave him self to serve him, and a greater pleasure he could not do
him.

Whereof comes it that Crassus, being in the beginning very couetouse, became
in the end so liberal?

Through the great importunity of beggars, that never suffered him in quiet

Why was it said that Alexandre had conqu^red kingdoms, and that Anaxarcus
kept them?

Because that Alexander desperately (for the sorrow that he had slain Clitus
his great friend) would have killed him self, and so have lost at one instant,
the glory of so many victories, had it not been for the great admonishions
that Anaxarcus the Philosopher gave him, which preserved him from killing him
self.

Why did Alexandre use always to carry the Iliades of Homere about him?

Because by reding the factes of arms of the Auncientes, he learned the
policies of the wars, which encoraged him the more to ye desire of wars.

Of what disposition ought a sufficient Ambassador to be?

Brave, eloquente, and wise. For it is commonly said, that the prince is
known by the Ambassador.

Why did the Romans call their Ambassadors which went to treat of peace with
the navy, Caduceatores.

Of the Caduceum of Mercury, which was a rod that he held in his hand:
signifying thereby, that the same rod was a mean between them that fought,
and the aucthor both of peace and war.

What was the cause that Nicomedes king of Bithynia, instituted the Romans to
be his heyers?

In token of remembrance of gratefulnes to be toward them, being by their
aid, after he was chased from his estate by Mithridates king of Pontas,
restablished in the same again.

What is that which makes a Prince wicked?

To think that it is laweful for him to do all things, and that all wickedness
is sufferable, having power to do what he list. His great wealth and
abundance may be also the occasion, and flatterers, evil ministers, and
cruel men of war, such as attend about his person.

Which is the hardest thing for him to do?

Dioclesian the Emperor said: to know perfectly how to use himself in his
kingdom.

Why are Civil wars so greatly to be contempned?

Because he that has the upper hand does not only what he liste^ but also
they which take his part do the same.

Why be Princes esteemed like unto God?

As God considers the affection of man: even so the liberal and magnanimouse
Prince ought to consider the heart and power of him that does him service.

Why was the liberality of Zeuxis reprehended of the Auncientes?

Because he gave, to receive twice the valor.

Why did the Auncientes say, that it was no need to offer either gold or
silver to Saints?

Because Saints are not couetouse and a^ericiouse, as men be.

Why would not certain of the Auncientes, have the yma^es of their gods to
be in Marble, or other stone?

Because they are tractable and plyant to our prayers and requests: wherefore
they demed it blasphemy to judge them to be hard hearted.

Whereof proceeded the custom that the kings of Persia had, to give gold and
silver to all women that they met: and to men darts and arrows?

Gold and silver is conuenable to women: and weapons to men.

Why did Plato in his laws forbid that any god should be made, either of gold
or silver?

Because he demed those mettalles to be the very poison of the world.

Why did the kings of Persia use to reward women that brought forth many
male children?

Because they filled the cuntrie with soldiers, which served for the
preservation of the same.

How was Caes^r healed of the falling evil?

By sobriety and abstinence from wine.

Why have many wise men studied to be obscure in these writings?

To astoyne dull wits at the first sight, thereby to encorage the studiouse to
search the mysteries and secrets of the same.

Whereof comes it that the most notable learned men, if they chance to err,
do wander in more heynouse errors, then those that be but meanly learned?

Because they trust so much to the excellency of their wit: and so
following their own fantasies, most commonly be deceived.

Whereof comes it, that if a wise and well experienced man do give him self
to unrighteousness, in that vice he surpasses them that are of less experience?

That Justice is most cruel which needs defense by force of arms.

Which be those that be wise men?

They that are not inclined to sin.

How long is it lawefull for a man to desire to live?

So long as a man is out of hatred and necessity.

Where ought true pleasure to be sought?

In our selves, and not in other.

Why is moderation so much commended?

Because it increases pleasure.

Why did Epaminondas make so little preparation in a feast that he made for
certain Ambassadors?

To declare that they that can both be rich and suffer poverty, may hardlye be
corrupted with money if it be offered.

What made Alcibiades to be banished out of Athenes?

The envy of the Citizens.

What was the cause that Abatonius being so poor, was made a king?

His singular goodness which wise Alexander knew right well.

Why was Hipparchus esteemed Secretarye to the Gods*

For the great knowledge that he had in the course of the stars.

What is most to be feared in a City?

Honger.

How may a man enriche him self?

By forsaking his appetites.

How may we live ioyfullye?

By putting our trust in things that never shall have end.

How should a man be master over him self?

By amending that fault in him self, which he espieth in an other.

What ought they to eschew that are in prosperity?

Hatred.

What is the property of a wise man?

To apply well his time.

Where lies the felicity of man?

In the quiet state of the mind.

What manner of thing is humanity?

It is a virtue joined with good affection: or rather, a benevolence mixed and
tempered with dexterity.

Why were the Romans accustomed in their base court to place the cabinet of
the graces?

To declare that the office of man is, to aid and pleasure one another.

What manner of thing is mercy?

It is an affection of the spirit, joined with humanity.

How did Licurgus bring his Citizens to humanity?

By provoking each man not self, but to do all things for common profit as
Bees do.

Who be they that have been excellent in humanity?

Alexander the great, and after him Scipio and Caesar.

Why was Cato reprehended of Inhumanitie?

Because he loved disagrement and discension within his house: thinking by that
means, to profit the better.

What thing is facility?

It is a virtue, which easily makes a man to enter friendship with others, and
does long maintain the same.

What did Antonius pius the Emperor, to make him self every day better then
other?

He took aside the wisest of his familier friends, and asked of them what evil
was spoken of him: and if he perceived that any evil was spoken of him justly,
he amended.

What be they that were excellent in facillitie?

Philip, and Alexander his son: well showing the same to Dimocrates the
Architect.

What is faith?

It is such a godly virtue, that all other virtues without the same, is
nothing. Without faith wisdom is folly, Temperaunce is displeased, Force is
impacient, and Justice is turned into cruelty.

Of al ye Ancients who was most excellent in that virtue?

Sextus Pompeius, son of Pompeius the great, Alexander and Scipio.

What thing did obliterat and blot the virtues of Brutus?

The treason that he used against Caesar.

What is friendship?

It is a mutual benevolence of two or more, proceeding of a certain semblaunce
in manners.

Can it not be otherwise described?

After the mind of Pithagoras, it is a certain agremente of Nature equal
between two.

Among the Auncientes, who was most excellent to get friends?

Alcibiades: but he could not keep them.

What is to be required in friendship?

Asemblable will, grounded upon virtue.

How many kinds of amities be there?

Plato makes three: that is to say, Natural, Civil, and Hospital*

What is Piety?

It is the honor that first we ^we unto God, then to our Country, and
afterward to our parents and Maiestrates.

What is the office of Piety?

To make the person amiable toward his parents and kinsefolkes, and toward
his country.

Who were excellent in that virtue?

Many: but above the rest, Metellus, surnamed Pius, after him were these three,
Decius, Ptolome Ariobarsanus and Seleucus.

And who were they that were contrary to that virtue?

Nicomedes, which killed his father, Darius, Ptolome Philopater, and Ptolome
called Phiton.

Which is the true friendship?

After the mind of Epicurus, that which is civil, for it is always joined
with pleasure.

Civil amity, can it be perfect among more then two.

That is very difficult: for the conditions correspondent to such frendeship
are seldom to be found: for as Plato says al things ought to be common.

Why did Nature make man naked and unarmed?

Nature having made man wise, has given him means enough, whereby to arm
himself at ^is pleasure, and to use at one time sundry kinds of wepo^s.

Whereof comes it that tall men commonly are not wise?

The length of the body comes of great moistnes and heat: but drynes
engen^r^th wisdom in man.

Whereof proceeds it that Judges and advocates are more reverenced of their
Clientes, the Phisitia^s be of their pacients?

The gain and hope of Clientes depends upon the Judges and Advocates: but
the hope of the sick depends not only of the Physician, but rather of God.

Why did the Auncientes call the falling evil, the disease (...) Hercules?

Because Hercules was subject thereunto.

What is the office of a thristie man?

To remember that which is past, and to think upon that to come.

Why ought a man rather to chose loss, the^ dishonest gain?

Because the evil chance of loss is but for a time, but the other indureth
for ever.

How may a man live godly?

To think every day to be the last day of his life.

Why should a man take more care for his soul, then for his body?

Because the perfection of the soul makes the imperfection of the body: and
the beauty or force of the body makes the soul never the better.

Where lies the seat of our life?

In wisdom, Strength, and magnanimity: for there is neither wind nor tempest
that can shake them.

What difference is there between diligent and curiouse?

Such as is between Religiouse and Supersticiouse.

What difference is between affection, and good will?

Affection is a general inclination of the spirit, which induces a man to
love: and makes him sorry, if there chance any thing evil unto him whom he
loves. But good will is showed when, being moved with affection, we endeavor
our selfs to show pleasure unto them whom we love: in such sort that good
will is the effect of the affection.

How shall a man know them that are wicked?

By the example of the good.

How shall the virtue of man be known?

By adversity: as gold by the fire.

What was the cause of the renown of Sim^n of Athens?

His being so curtuouse and gentile, that he caused those beasts to be buried
that made him to win the prise of the games of Olimpus.

What made Pericles infamouse?

His great ingratitude and inhumanitie, to suffer Anaxagoras his schole-master
to dye for hongre.

What moved Phocion to help them that were wicked?

Because he knew the good had no need of help.

Why did the Romans eat and drink openly before the gates of their City?

To take better occasion to give meat to them that did want.

Whereof comes the custom, that kings and Princes cause their Trompettes to
be sounded when they go to dynner?

To give warning to the pore to come and take part of their magnificence and
liberality: and in many common welthes the same custom is yet observed.

Why did Alexandre lay his Treasure in the Temple of the Sun?

To keep it saufe: for at that time holy things were had in such reverence,
that all things were saufe that were committed and laid in the same. For that
cause Callisthenes laid in the Temple of Inno his daughters do wries to be
kept.

What caused the victories and the great sloughter that Leonidas of Sparta and
Themistocles made against Xerxes and his people: and what was the cause that in
the end Xerxes was slain by the means of Artabanus?

Because he had violated and polluted the holy things, and spoiled the
Temples, The like happened to Brennus in the Temple of Apollo: and Antiochus,
because he would have sacked the Temple of Jupiter.

What is Religion after the minds of the Philosophers?

It is a virtue so coupled with godliness, that it can not be losed or separated

Who were they that the Philosophers called Religiouse, and which
Supersticiouse?

The Religiouse were they which applied their study in the service of God: the
Supersticiouse were they that prayed incessantly for the health and long life
of their children.

Whereof comes it that a man understands one thing, and does another?

Because of contrary things we be wont to atteine like knowledge: ^^ because
the mind attends to many things, and the sensual appetite but to one. But
man most commonly lives by reason, and beasts after their appetite.

Whereof comes it that man above al creatures is proud?

Because he does somewhat resemble god: and being tamed above all other
beasts, by the knowledge that he has of many things, comprehends by his
wit al sensible things, and by the spirit al things intelligible.

Wherefore is a plurality of Princes evil, and not to be suffered?

All that which may be done by one, is better done, then when it is done by
many. Moreover if a kingdom be turned into Tirannie, the tirannie of one is
more sufferable, then of many: and to be short, the reign of one is the best.

Whereof comes it that we love better to be counted an honest man, then to be
so in deed and have an evil report?

Man alone is capable of honor, and therefore each man desires to seem to be
good, and every man would avoid the travel that brings man to goodness,
albeit without the same virtue can not be in man.

From whence came the, custom not to name the new borne before the seventh
day?

Because they esteemed the child at.vii. days of age to have escaped the
danger.

How chances it that in the beginning of sitting at the table to eat, a man
cares not how nere together he sits, and at the end of the meal he loves
to sit at ease and at liberty?

When a man is hungry he cares not for order, for in eating we represent a
Pyramid, which combreth little rowme.

Why did the Aegiptians, desirouse to live chaste, eat no salt?

Because through the heat thereof it provoke Lechery.

Why does Homere call salt a divine thing?

Because it gives taste to all meat, and preserves the same from stinking,
and has a force and virtue generatiue.

Wherefore be we afaird to pass through a churchyard?

Because it represents our end.

Wherefore did the Greeks feign that there was a god that blamed all things?

To declare that there is nothing perfect.

Wherefore was Hanibal so hated of the Romans?

Because he kept no fidelity, and despised al things touching god and man.

What moved Ptolome king of Aegipte to ordeine the Roman people to be the
tutors of his son?

Because he knew the Romans to be faithful.

How was the common welthe of Sparta so long time maintained?

Some imputed the cause to the magestrates, which knew well how to command,
some to the people because they knew how to obey.

Who was the cause of the great victory that the Lacedaemonians obtained
against the Iliryans?

The presence of their king, which was but a child, persuaded thereunto by the
counsel of their priests.

Why were the Athenians so unfortunate in wars?

Because they gave charge and authority unto many.

Wherefore did the Mossones a people of Asia, keep their servants tied and as
it were daily locked up?

To cause them to die for hongre, if they did any thing that was not honest.
For which cause Alexandre chastised them very rigorousely.

Wherefore did the Athenians establishe this law, that if a bond man were set
at liberty, and showed him self unkind to his master, he should return
again into bondage?

To declare how unnatural ingratitude is.

What caused the kingdom of Persia so much to florishe?

Xenophon says that it was the great love that they bare to their king.

What thing is hardest for a man to do?

To be secret. Which Philippides affirmed, when he besought Lycimatus his
great friend not to reveal his secrets.

Why did Plato so much refuse the liberality of Dionisius?

If Dionisius had been always nigh^ unto Plato to give him somewhat, Plato
would ever have refused it.

How ought a man to use Hospitality?

Indifferently, neither to much nor to little. Which Homere affirmed, when he
ordained that a traveler by the way, if he would not tarry, he should not be
pressed to tarry, but if he would, that he should have good chere made unto
him.

What order is to be observed in helping of men?

Massurius Sabinus the Lawier resolving this doubt, says: that first we be
bound to defend the pupilles that be committed to us in government and
charge, until they be come to age. Secondly to defend and help our gestes
and such as be lodged in our houses. Thirdly, those whose ^utes and causes we
take in hand to maintain.

Who among the Auncientes were the most excellent in Hospitality, and
contrariewise the most nigardes in the same?

King Massimissa, Scipio the great, Nicomedes, Cecer, Anaximenes and
Theophrastus used great hospitality. And contrariewise, Timon of Athens,
Flauius of Luques, and many other had the same in contempt.

What is that which is called Concord, and wherefore was it so called?

Concord is kinn to amity. And like as amity ingendreth love between two or
many persons, even so concord keeps the people tied and united in good peace.
And concord was so called, by reason of the concordance and union, wherein she
knitteth and binds the hearts of the people, as the Queen and Mystres of all
good works.

Wherefore was Domitian the Emperor so hated of the Roman people?

Because for the least fault committed, he condemned the doers to cruel
death.

What was the cause of the great victory that the Greeks had against Xerxes
Mardonius and the Persians?

The union of the Greeks, like as their disagrement was the cause of their
overthrow: even as discord ouerthrewe Carthage, and all the Princes of
Heliesponte.

Wherefore was it written before the gates of the temple of Apollo at Delphos:
Know thy self.

To induce us to know that spark of divinity which God has placed in us,
whereby we know that God has done all things.

Wherefore is it said that there is nothing that may better resemble ye
kingdom of heaven, then the state of a Monarchy?

Because there is but one god, which alone does reign and govern al things.

Of what sort of men ought a Prince to be chosen in a common welthe?

He ought to be noble of blood, he ought to be virtuous, rich, and puissaunt
in arms.

Do you think it to be requisite that a lieuetenaunt general of an Army
ought to be, not only valiant and wise, but also happy and fortunate?

I think doubtless that he ought to be fortunate. The ill fortune of Pompeius
may very well auooche the same.

What is the principal duty of a good Prince?

To seek means that his people be well instructed.

What was the cause of the evil ends of Sardamapalus and Nero.

The number of Flatterers in their Courts, ^esters, Parasites, Bawdes, Whores,
Ruffians, and all sorts of people disposed to vice, where the wise and grave
were expuised and driven away.

What was the cause of the magnanimity of Pirrhus king of Epirus?

The good council and eloquence of Cyneas his Scholemaster, who by reason of
his eloquente orations, forced very many cities rather to render them selves
freely, then by any force.

Why would king Cyrus that Xenephon should be always in his company?

To give him council in thaffaires of his Realm. For Xenephon was not only
wise, but also valiant and well instructed in the deeds of war.

Wherefore would Alexander the great that Onoficrates should always accompany
him in the wars?

To inroll and register his acts and deeds.

Whereof ought a prince principallye to take heed?

Not to change his bounty and goodness for any occasion that can happen, ne
yet to incline his cares to flatterers.

Wherefore did Tigranes the king of Helesponte ordeine that they which did
talk unto him, should knele upon their knees with their arms stretched up?

To declare that he had al power and authority over their bodies and lives.

What is the chiefest cause of a princes overthrow?

Flattery, more then force of arms.

What is he in deed that may truly be called happy in this world.

The virtuous man of mean wealth.

Whereunto serve richesse?

To make the mind quiet and content without which contentation there is no
happiness or felicity in this world. But how can he be in rest and quiet that
has not wherewith to bye his bread?

What caused Alcibiades to be so hardy contrary to the nature of the Athenians?

His Nourse Amilca, which was a Spartan woman.

What moved Diogines coming from Sparta and going to Athenes, to say: that he
came from men and was going toward women?

Thereby he reprehended the delights of Athenes, which made them effeminate
and womanishe.

Which is most requisite either that the Soldiers should defend the wall, or
the wall the soldiers.

It is better that the Soldiers should defend the wall.

What is the poison of friendship?

Flattery.

What manner of nourses ought they to be which are to be chosen for princes
children?

Fair, well conditioned, sage, discrete, pleasant, courtuouse, amiable,
chaste, healthie, and of good complexion, eloquent, their speech fine and net,
that the child may learn to pronounce well.

What is the surest guarde of a prince?

The good will of his Subjects: For that Prince is unhappy which for the
suertie of his person had need of sorts and diversities of guarde and watch.

What is Justice?

The honor and glory of them that do the same, and a great benefit unto them,
upon whom the same is executed.

Whereby shall a man know when a Prince begins to be a Tiraunt?

When forciblye he draws unto him the service of his people.

What cau^ed Theseus to be so valiant?

The great fame and renoume of Hercules inflamed him, to make his name
immortal.

How may a man be like unto God?

In doing good to many indifferently, and not to one alone.

Why do the Aethiopians which be on this side the river Nylus adore and worship
two gods, that is to say, one immortal and the other mortal?

They think that the immortal God does work al things, and the benefits
which we receive ordinarily, they believe to come and proceed of the mortal
God: As the notable Cosmographer Strabo does declare.

What is the greatest shame that we can receive?

To be surpassed in honesty, courtesy, and humanity, by those which be (...)
inferiors.

How did Philip king of Macedone gain and win all Gretia?

By gold and silver more then by force of arms, for he was wont to say,
that there was no forte or castle, were it never so inexpugnable, but he would
take upon him to subdue it, if so be an Ass laden with gold were able to enter
the gates.

What kind of Tragedies ought we not to read?

Those which contain nothing else but things that be proud, cruel, and full
of inhumanitie. But those we ought specially to read which be honest and full
of grave sentences, interlaced with pleasant talk, as the Tragedies of
Euripides and Sophocles be.

Why ought we indifferently to read all kind of Poets?

Because with a meruailouse swetenes of language, they entermedle the Graces
with the Muses: whereof it came that Aelius Comodus, the Emperor was so far
in love with Martial that he termed him to be his Uirgil.

Are men to be commended for their corporal beauty sake?

No: But for their virtue, wisdom, counsel, and force, which declare what
manner of minds they have within.

What difference was there between the Greeks and tho Romans in making of
their Images?

The Greeks made theirs naked, the Romans clothed or armed according to their
estate. The wise man in a long gown, and the souldior armed. as Horatius
Cocles in a goodly armure, and Accius Nauius that excellent Southsayer in a
long gown.

Of whence sprange the infamy of Perillus he being such an excellent maker of
images and pictures?

Because he applied al his cunning in making of a Bull of brass, therewith to
please the cruel mind of Phalaris the Tiraunt, wherein were roasted and
executed those whom it pleased the Tiraunt, that the cry of the executed
person within was like to the lowinge of a Bull. But he was well paid for his
labor, for the Tirant marking that execrable devise, caused the said Perillus
to taste the first fruits of his workmanship.

Whereunto serves Music?

To exercise the mind, as the fence play, and dauncinge are proper exercises

What was the cause that Pericles did obtain victory against Nicias?

The knowledge in Astrology. For Pericles foreseing an eclips of the Son
advertised his people thereof. But Nicias having no knowledge in the said
science, was with his Army very sore troubled and appalled.

What caused Driopas the Athenian to establishe this law: That whosoever had
conceived any evil opinion of God, should have his hedde cut of?

Because there is no worse thing then to have an evil opinion of him, which
has made and mainteineth all things.

What manner of thing is Religion?

It is the true knowledge of gods own service.

Wherefore did Alcibiades reject all kind of Music, saving when he was at the
Table at his meals?

Because Music provoked him to conceive delight, familiarly to talk at the
Table.

A strange Question, whereof I would feign be resolved. One Stesichorus lying
in his cradle, a Nightingale lighted on his mouth, and song upon the same?

It was a presage that Stesichorus should prove an excellent singer.

What profit brings Music to him that has delight in the same?

It sharpeneth the sprite, not only to know the harmony of the voice, but
also it makes the person to have a better judgment to indite either in rhyme
or prose.

What is true Philosophy?

The knowledge of goodness, and how to live well.

How many parts has Philosophy?

Three, whereof one consists in the knowledge of the universal nature of
things, the other in the knowledge of man, and the third in mutual talk.
Which parts be well allowed by the Philosopher Plato.

How happened it that Numa Pompeius being a man of mean state and conditions,
arrived to the degree of one of the Roman kings?

Religion was the cause, in such wise as all that he spoke and said, by reason
of his holiness, was thought to proceed from the goddess Egeria, with whom he
lay, as the Romans held opinion.

Wherefore was Tullus Hostilius another of the Roman kings, soudenlie stricken
with a flashe of lightning?

For that he made not his sacrifices to Jupiter, in such devotion and
ceremonies as did apperteine.

For what occasion were Uirgines in old time more esteemed, then they be at
this present?

Because they were supposed to be endued with the spirit of prophecy, which
manifestly did appear by those maidens called Sibillae.

How chances it that Virgil has praised Aeneas* with this Epitheton. In
signem pietate virum. Commending him only for his piety toward the Gods?

Because Religion and piety contain in them all kind of virtues.

What caused the Poets to use so many fictions and inventions?

To allure men to abandon their barbarouse conditions and brute behauiors, and
to turn them selves to virtue and her exercises.

What was the cause of the death of Ci^na?

Because he was cruel toward his soldiers, and constreined them to fight
perforce and by compulcion.

What is Patience?

A voluntary suffraunce in things difficult, for love of honor and profi^

What is constancy?

It is a virtue which conserueth good counsel, and makes a man persevere in
honorable deeds.

What is Opinion?

It is a stay fixed either in deed or word, which makes us obstinatelye to
follow our fancy, although it be without reason: only to be superior in all
controversies.

What is Justice?

After the mind of the Aunciente Poets, it is a celestial virtue powered
down from God into our sprites, that we might the better honor, love and
sanctify him as aucthor of all things: and therefore Princes were, for good
respect, called of Homere Jupiters scholars.

What is the property of Justice?

To love and honor God above all things: and our neighbor as our self.

How many kinds of Justice be there?

Four, that is to say: Divine, Natural, Civil, and Judicial.

Of what things is the world governed?

By reward and punishment.

What is divine Justice?

It is that which makes us to acknowledge god to be our creator, the
beginning and end of all things, and him of whom all creatures receive life,
without participation of mortal things.

What is natural Justice?

It is all ways one in all men, and varieth nothing through the diversity of
Regions and Nations: being always conuenable to Nature. And as divine Justice
shows the dewtie toward God; even so natural Justice is subject to the
satisfaction of nature. The disciples of Socrates affirmed that natural
Justice is a knowledging of good and just things, and agreeable to natural
reason: which thing whosoever does use, shall become good of him self.

What is Civil Justice?

It is apperteining to a Prince or Magestrate: whose office is to provide that
the people be well ruled and governed, and that no harm be done unto the place
whereof he has the rule.

What is Judicial Justice?

That consists in being reasonable to all men, and to discern the iu^^e
(...) the unjust.

What is properly the nature of a wicked man?

To be hard, cruel, and unwilling to receive good counsel, to rejoice at
other men's evil, to suffer no man patiently, to be angry to here them to be
praised, such as not only have done them pleasure, but also those which be
utterly unknown unto them. Such were Pirron, and Eraclitus Philosophers,
Tymon of Athens, Marius, Coriolanus, Phocion, Lucius Crassus, which was slain
by the Persians, Cato, Scipio the great, and Caligula.

Why were A^hilles and Sylla reprehended for their victories

Because they were cruel and insolent toward their Enemies, when they had
overcome them. The contrary did Caesar, Alexandre, Hanniball, An^onius, and
Aegesilaus: all which were greatly praised for their victories.

Before whom is it lawefull for a man to vaunt him self of well doing?

Before the valiant, or before them that know him not, or have small
knowledge what virtue is.

Why was Mete^lus despised?

For being to much desirouse to have surpassed Sertorius: to whom
notwithstanding he was no^ comparable in valiaunce.

How ought a man to use the goods of Fortune?

That they may become subject to man, and not man to them: following the verse
of Horace.

Et mihi res non me rebus, submittere conor.
Whereof proceeded the fayning of Poets, that Mars was armed with Diamondes?

To declare that a prince ought to be strong, not in body, but in heart and
courage.

What is the property of a good Captain?

To be gentle, politic, wise, and witty: not to be discoraged in hard
fortune, nor inflamed in prosperity. Such was Hanniball. See a further
description hereof in the.xxiiii. Novel of the Palace of pleasure.

From whence came the great renoume that in old time the Cimbrians, and
Celtiberians achieved in the wars?

Because they esteemed the bed of honor to be in the wars: and had rather
slay their own children, then they should be thrale and taken of their enemies.

What was the cause that Scipio being but young, obtained such great
reputation that in his youth before ripe age he was made one of the Tribunes or
governors over the people: and receued the state of a Councelour, and was sent
into Spaigne in the place of a Consul?

Because he was esteemed very holy and religiouse, in such wise as the dogs
which were set to keep the gate of the Capitole, would never ^aie at him for
all their fiercenes.

Why do some praise Anger?

Because it does commonly accompany courage.

How many kinds of Amity be there?

Three, that is to say: profitable, honest, and delectable.

Why was Dionisius expelled by the Locr^nces?

Because he being courteously received of them, in the time of his v^nishment,
vse^ dishonest orders toward their wives.

Why did Amphitryon give his son Hercules to Euristeus

To teach him to fly the voluptuousnes of the Thebanes, and to accustom him
with honest labor, by following the virtues of Euristeus.

Whereof proceeds the diffrence between one man and another

By digressing from Philosophy. I say, that it rises through the travel of
the soul, when it passes into our bodies, descending from God through the
Lodiaque, and the white Circle. In which passage all souls take their
affections, and do participate with all the natures and mocions of each Sphere
and star, according to their aspectes.

What is Choler?

It is an anger, sone come, and so^e gone, proceeding of a feoble heat,

What is taken of the Planet Saturn?

Reason, eloquence, and understanding, as of Jupiter force of doing, of Mars
boldenes, and of the heat of the Soune feeling and opinion, and so forth*

What is hatred?

It is an anger that has taken root.

What is discord?

It is a frowardnes and anger coming of hatred, which makes men rebellious to
the common wealth: which in deed, is the destruction of all human things.

What is Concord?

It is a virtue, which in short time, makes small and weak things to grow,
as Salu^t says. Concordia paruae res crescunt.

Why be Flatterers esteemed worse then those that are false?

Because the false man does but deceive only, but the Flatterer corrupts
men: and therefore the Athenians punished Flatterers by death, as Timagoras was.

What was the cause that Antigonus lost the most part of his kingedome, and
was constrained to make peace with the Romans?

Because he gave more ear to Flatterers then to Haniball, that gave him
profitable counsel.

Why did Scipio the great refuse the title of most mighty, which the
Spaniardes had given him?

Because change of Title, is a token of inconstancy, more convenient for
women then men, which made Caesar retourning from Alba to Rome, to refuse the
name king, and conceived hatred against Uitellius the father of Uitellius the
Emperor, because at his return home out of Siria, he kneled down to do him
honor.

Why would Caesar never have respect to the saftye of his person, although
that his friends daily did counsel him thereunto?

Because he did less esteem the danger of death, then life in continual
fear: agreing therein to the saying of the Poet. That it were better to be
destroyed at one blow, then doubtfully to attend the hazard of Fortune.

What moved Titus the son of Vespasian, to pardon two gentlemen, who, not
being content to speak evil of him, had also conspired to depose him from
his Empire?

His good nature: knowing besides that Empires and Kingedomes come from God,
and be bestowed upon them whom his goodness pleases to appointe.

What is the office of a good Prince?

To do well, and not to care who speak evil of him.

Why had Epaminondas no regard to be revenged upon them that spoke evil of
him?

Because he knew that such patience proceeded of the great courage of the
heart.

What was the cause of the death of Sardanapalus?

His evil life, his lasciuiousnes with women, and the little justice that he
used.

Why was Marcellus created Consul of Rome, with Cato that dyed at Vtica?

To the intent that by the gentle and good nature of Marcellus, the severity
and rigor of Cato might be moderated.

What caused Nero, to cause the malefactor incontinently to be dispatched of
life.

His natural crueltye. The contrary rested in Caesar, for reward whereof, in
the end he received hurt.

Why is dominion or rule so weighty a matter?

Because it is impossible to please all men.

Why would not Caligula the Emperor, hear the accusation of any person.

Because he would that no man should hate him.

What induced Dionisius to give over his good nature, wherewith he was endued
at the first, and to become cruel at the end?

The mockes and cauillations of his subjects, who mocked him for his lokinge a
squinte, and for the grossenes of his body, which is a notable example to
beware of jesting and backbiting of princes.

Why did Phocion of Athenes blame Demosthenes, because he spoke evil of
Alexander, although he was enemy to their country?

Because that Phocion, like a wise man, knew that it served for no other
purpose but to prick Alexander forward to make war against them. Mennon
for the same occasion wounded one of his soldiers saying: I give thee wages to
fight with Alexander and not to speak euel of him.

How chanced it that Neuius that excellent Poet, was imprisoned by the
Triumuiri at Rome?

Because he was a great Slaunderer, specially of princes: wherefore he was
constrained, when he was delivered out of prison, to make twoe comedies, as it
were for an honorable recompense: whereof the one was called Areolus, and the
other Liontes, wherein he vnsayde again all that ever he spoke before.

Why was Sisithcus the Poet driven out of the Theater by the Athenians?

For writing against them that gave themselves to Philosophy under the
discipline of Cleanthes.

Why did the Magnesians crucify Daffitas the Grammarian upon the mount Thorax?

Because he did speak ill of many, specially of Lisimachus their prince and
dear sovereign Lord.

What is virtue?

It is a perfect and entire reason, which follows the minds of the wise, and
procures them to shun and avoid vice.

What is Avarice?

A disordinate appetite, a cupiditie insatiable, a disease which infecteth the
person, making man vile and effeminate. But after the opinion of the Stoiks,
Plato declares that he which desires to be rich, must give over his
appetites and heap no treasure together. Other Philosophers affirm, that
covetousness is a disease that poisoneth the body, and makes the mind
effeminate, and can never be recovered.

Why was Acchius the king of Lydia slain?

For his extreme covetousness, which caused him to make taxes and new impostes
upon his people, to gather together much treasout. Wherefore inthende his
people did cast him into the river Pactolus, which is full of fine gold, to
the intent he might glut him self with gold, after which he so much thirsted.
The self same vice of covetousness was thoccasion of the death of Crassus, who
was slain by the Persians.

What is liberality?

To use richesse indifferently, that is to say, to spend nether to much nor
to little: so that it is as it were a mean between Covetousness and prodigality.

Why was Scopas of Thessalia so much contempned of the wise men in his time?

Because he counted him self happy, for that his counting house was full of
those things that neither profited himself, nor yet any other.

What is it that makes a man happy?

The brideling of disordinate appetites.

Why did Piso reprehend the liberality of the Emperor Otho?

Because he gave not his riches, but threw them away. Virtue casts nothing
away, Virtue usurps nothing of any other man's, Virtue has need of nothing.

Who were they that were counted infamouse in Rome?

They that spent their goods upon dishonest things: and they which did take
fines to enriche them selves by unlawful means.

What was the cause of the evil name of Sylla?

Because he grew very rich in short time, which made him to be suspected of
briberie.

Why did Plato say, that to live quietlye in a City, both richesse and
poverty ought to be expelled?

Riches makes a man proud, and poverty induces him to evil.

Whereof comes it that Caesar was once blamed for his liberality?

Because being but a private man he used disor^inate expenses, unmeet for his
degree. And it is to be noted, that that which is Prodigality in a private
person is magnanimity in a Prince.

How did Nicias obtain the favor of the people?

By spending and giving his goods liberally: although he was not very much
commended of the wise. Alexandre was greatly praised for despising of worldly
goods, esteming his true richesse to consist in his trendes.

Which are lawefull richesse?

Those which are well gotten: and such as d^ serve us, and not we them.

What is anger?

It is a certain boiling blodde, burning in desire to be revenged upon him
with who^ a man is offended, and is always accompanied with wrath.

What difference is there between anger and wrath?

The one consists in the will, the other in the deed: and the one may be
without the other, even as a man may be drunk, and yet notwithstanding is no
dronkarde: that is to say, accustomed to be overcome with wine.

Why did the Romans ordeine, that when their Armies did prepare to encountre,
certain bands should make have to give the onset, and therwithall should
utter certain vehement cries?

To astoine the enemy, and to encorage their own soldiers to fight more
fiercely.

Of what age ought he to be that is first trained in the wars to make him
perfect in the art of warfare?

The younger he is, the more perfect he shall be in warfare: as witnesses
Hanibal, who at the age of ten years followed his father Amilcar in the
wars. Scipio took upon him to be a souldior at.xvii. years of age.

Among the Auncientes, who has best deserved the name of a good and valiant
Captain?

I am of the opinion of Antigonus, who judged Pirrhus to be the hardiest
captain that ever served in the wars, and most happiest, if fortune had
suffered him to live out his time.

Why was the camp of Mars at Rome, appointed hard by the River of Tybre?

To the intent after swea^ing and exercise of arms, the youth to wash away
their sweat and dust, should enter into the River, not only to bathe them
selves, but also to learn to swim, a thing so necessary in a souldior, as
Alexandre repented him self of nothing so much, as for that he never learned
to swim.

What causes Idleness?

Cato said that by doing nothing, men did learn to do evil.

From whence came the great hardines wherewith Horacius Cocles was endued, when
he sustained such a fierce assault given by the enemies upon the wodden bridge
of Tybre at Rome?

Because he could swymme. And by the same means Ceser escaped from his
enemies in the wars at Alexandria. Sertorius also used the same, passing the
river of Rodanus.

Why did the Romans erect an Image of Claelia on horseback, and not otherwise?

Because they flying from king Porsenna, she feared not to pass through the
River of Tyber on horseback. Or else as some say, because she being sent
back again by the Senate of Rome to Porsenna, she presented him a fayer Horse
richely garnished.

Why did Lycurgus make the maidens of Sparta accustomablie to run and wrestle
naked?

To make them the stronger to abide the travel of child.

What ought a man chiefly to ask of God, according to the mind of
Philosophers?

Good Fortune, after a man is endued with understanding, how to use the same.

What manner of thing is it to be very just?

To have the knowledge of divine and humane things.

What is the most grieuouse disease that may happen unto a Prince?

To love Flatterers.

Why did Agammenon the king, desire rather to have in his company, ten
Nestors, then ten Aiaces?

Because the man that is wise, is rather to be desired then he that is hardye.
For that occasion Antigonus desired always to have Zeno with him, to give him
council concerning the affairs of his Realm.

What books ought princes to read, that they might learn to be good?

Those that give them admonishment of their duty: for no man dares speak
unto them that thing without great fear, which they may find in writing.

What was the cause of the great friendship of Lisimac^us toward Philippides
the Comical Poet?

Because he did not flatter, which is many times the property both of a Poet
and of a courtier.

What is pleasure?

A recreation of the spirit, provoking man's mind to think to inioye any
thing, although not grounded upon reason: and therefore it is always an enemy
to virtue.

What is Joy or gladness?

It is a motion of the spirit, proceeding of a certain opinion of a thing
which we hope to enjoy, and therefore is vn^emely for a man of great
estate, because it troubles the mind, and causes it to pass the limittes of
reason.

Is it requisite then to reioise with measure?

Yea: chiefly to have respect to the inconueniencie that might happen by to
much mirthe: as it chanced to those two Roman women that thought their
children to have been dead in the journey of Cannas, which afterward
sou^denly returned safe contrary to their mothers expectations, and as it
happened to Chilo, who died through to much joy.

To what thing ought a man to have most regard?

To virtue, then to his health, after that to honest pleasures, and finallye to
richesse.

What is prodigallitie?

It is a perturbation of the mind, diminishing virtue: which consists in
spending extraordinarily and without order of reason.

What was the cause of the death of Apisius, that wrote so diligently of
cokerie?

He killed him self with nothing else but gluttony.

What is Ambition?

It is a troubling of the mind, so vehement, that it consumes the heart and
spirit, with great desire to atteine to glory, dignity, and honor.

What is it that a man ought to covet in this world?

All things that are honest.

What is assurance?

It is a virtue proper to high and lof^ie minds, which approaches night unto
confidence: And the property of that virtue is, to make a man always ^oke
with a bold and merye countenance, not studyinge or taking any care for
ought that may chance: and properlye it is a tranquillity of the mind,
whereunto Phocion greatly exhorted Alexander the great, but in vain.

What is Magnificence?

It is a virtue proper only to princes: because it consists in great and
hard things, and great expenses,

Who is he that worthelye may be called liberal?

Aristotle says, that it is he which spends his revenue in good order, and
upon things desent.

Is there any difference between liberality and magnanimity?

Great difference: although they seem to be but one. He that is liberal,
ought to have respect how much he does spend, what that thing is worth
that he buyeth, and above all things that he do not excede in expense of his
Revenue. The magnanimouse and honorable without any care for public
expense, has respect only how he may do some great and valiant enterprise.

Among the Auncientes who has been most excellent in valiaunce?

Caesar: And for that cause, Marcus Bibulus, who was companion with Caesar, in
the office of Edilis, was wont to say that it chanced unto him as it did unto
Pollux: because, like as the temple dedicated to Ca^^or and Pollux, was called
only the temple of Castor: even so all the valiance that Caesar and Bibulus
used together in the time they were collegnes in that office, redounded only to
the honor of Caesar and not of Bibulus.

Who was the most excellent among the auncientes to acknowledge and
recompense a good turn done unto him?

Pirrhus: of whom it is said, that he was thought to have dyed for anger, that
he had not time enough to succor one of his friends.

What is the nature of an unthankful man?

To forget the taste of good turns past, if a man do not persevere still in
doing him good.

Who loves more, either he that does the good turn, or he that receaueth
the same?

He that receaueth a good turn, is debtor to him that does it. The nature of
the debtor is to shun the company of his creditour, and to disdain him when
he has not wherewithal to pay him: But the creditour desires none other
thing but the health of his debtor, whereby he may find means sometime to be
paid.

What is Constancy?

It is a virtue which properlye resists sorrow, and is contrary to
Inconstancye.

What is the property of Continency?

To vanquishe and subdue the Fleshly lusts. And although it be a harder matter
to vanquishe, then to fight and resist: yet the Auncientes have better esteemed
the continent man then the constant.

Among the constant who have been the most excellent?

Marius, Cassius, Sceuola, Attilius. Anaxarchus, Zeno, Citus Pomponius, Leena
the harlot, Pirrhus, and many others, which have been happy through
constancy.

What is trust?

It is a sure hope, and presage of a good turn that we hope for, as though it
should without all doubt happen unto us.

Why was Chysippus disdained of all other Philosophers?

For his arrogancy: for he boasted that he knew all things.

Why was Hipocrates blamed of Arrogancy?

Because he wrote to Xerxes king of Persia, that he would not utter his
knowledge unto barbarous people.

And why was Zeuxes the painter also blamed of Arroga^cy?

Because when he had painted Helena, he said that Leda her mother for all that
she was gotten with child by Jupiter, had not made Helena so fair as he had
painted her.

How ought a man to behave himself toward his friends?

In such sort as a man must think that in time to come they should be
enemies: although that Cicero makes a mock at that opinion, and says, that
it is the poison of friendship.

How did Mil^iades the son of Cimon of Athenes obtain so great renoume?

Because there was no man how poor so ever he was, but he would give ear to
his request.

Why was Viriatus so much esteemed of the Portugalles, who were wont to
despise all other Captens?

Because he was ready in fight, and knew how to defend himself.

Why was Philip king of Macedonia so negligent and slow in the wars?

Because he thought it better to overcome his enemy by policy, then with
effusion of blood.

How chanced it that the Lacedaemonians, when they had obtained victory by
force of arms, did sacrifice a Cock: and when they came upon the enemy by
policy, subtlety, or knowledge, they sacrificed an Ox?

Because they esteemed policy better then strength.

What virtues apperteine unto strength?

Magnanimity, confidence, assurance, valiaunce, constancy, stedfastnes, and
patience.

Why was Fabius Maxi nus crowned universally throughout all Italy with Grass?

Because that Crown was ordained for Captains and Generalles, that could
conducte their soldiers to the wars, and return with them again, without
loss and effusion of blood. After that sort did Antigonus escape from the
fury of Pirrhus.

What ought a man principally to espect in the wars?

Opportunity. which Pelopidas, Pirrhus, and Marcel^us knowing not how to use,
arrived very sone to the end of their lives.

Why did the Lacedaemonians beat their children upon the altar of Jupiter?

To use them to be constant, and to endure stripes without making complaint.

What was the reason of a Law placed in the.xii. Tables: which was that the
dead should not be wept for?

Because weping and tears do witness a faint and effeminate heart.

What mean the Poets to bring in Princes and knights lamenting their
misfortune?

To mock them secretly, for without danger they durst not do it openly.

Whereof comes it, that Alcibiades was in his time compared to the fish
called in Italian Polpo?

Because he was of a nature so tractable that he could manne himself to all
uses and fashions, like to the fish called Polpo, which takes his color of
the Sand, where he grauelleth or groundeth him self.

Upon what reason did Homere call certain people of Thracia half men, and why
did he say, that the house of Protesilaus was imperfecte?

Because the people of Thracia lived without women, and in the house of
Protesilaus there were none but men. The like affirms Menander of the Geti or
Gothos. But what good can an householder do without a woman: surely in mine
opinion (I speak i^ not to please women) no more then a man can live without
meat, or continue without clothing.

Who was the first that taught a man to live an Active live

Socrates: and as Cicero says, such life is very agreeable to God.

What is virtue?

It is an Armonie, or pleasant accord of Nature, with other good things
agreyng thereunto.

What is the chiefest goodness, according to the Philosophers opinion?

To feel no kind of sorrow as Hierom Rhodiotto says: albeit that the
Stoiques and Epicurians affirm the contrary.

Why is Lycurgus amongs al ye law makers esteemed the best?

Because he did observe and keep that which he him self commanded.

Why did the Poets faigne, that Prudence was borne or conceived of the brain
of Jupiter?

To declare that wit and understanding (whereof Prudence does spring, which
causes us to foresee all things is divine.

Wherefore do the Poets faigne Philoctetes to be banished from his cuntrie, and
to wandre by hills and dales, dailye weping and sighing?

To declare that there is no sorrow nor accident, how weighty soever it be,
which ought to induce man to violate nature, or to kill himself.

Wherein consists true force?

To abide and supporte all hard things, and not to imbase his heart in
adversity.

Wherefore did the Auncientes wash before they did sacrifice?

To declare that all disordinate thoughts, proceeding of beastly affections be
displeasaunt to Godde.

For what reason did the ancient Romans term God to be Optimum Maximum, so
much to say right good and very great? And wherefore did they place Optimum
before Maximum?

The one Epitheton signifies virtue, and the other puissaunce or might: yet
virtue was always preferred as the chiefest.

What moved Anaxagoras to give all his goods to his friends?

The more frackely to play the part of a Philosopher, to yield unto heaven
our true cuntrie (Whereof we do take our beginning and issue) the first fructes
of our minds and sprites.

What was the cause that Ac^ius the Poet did make a Comedy entitled Il
Cauallo Troiano: in English, the Trojan horse?

A desire he had to reprehend those that are slow of understanding, that were
ignorant to use time before necessity, and not afterward when (...) fortune
did succeed. Whereof rose the proverb. Sero sapiunt Phryges.

Wherefore did the Romans term Fabius Maximus to be the Target of the Roman
people, and Marcellus the Sword?

Because the one gave him self to maintain the common welthe, but the other
was eagre and sharp to revenge the enemies of the same. And yet both they
were se^te together by the Senates order, that the gravity of the one might
moderate the hardines of the other.

Wherefore did Caesar ordeine two Legions or bands of soldiers to be
enterteined at Rome, well armed and furnished?

That the Citizens should not be surprised vnwar and noted of negligence. Every
Legion was divided into ten Cohortes or companies: in every Cohors was L.
bands or squares: every Square had.xxv. soldiors. the Legio commonly
contains.vi. thousand footmen, and.vii. C. xxxii. horsemen: but Liuie in
many places of his Decades, declares the same to be sometimes more, and
sometimes less: yet our common account of the Legio comprehends the number
and division aforesaid.

Wherefore is Pompeius reproved by certain Historiographers, not to be skillful
and wise enough?

Because at the journey of Pharsalis which he lost, he left in an Islande
called Corfu a puisaunt army, wherewith he might have stopped the passage of
Caesar.

What was the cause of the death of the Emperor Otho?

The hazardinge of the battle, his enemies being as it were in despair.

What difference is there between Prudence and viuacitie of wit, otherwise
called pregnancie of mind or Sagacitie?

Prudence gives good Council, and the pregnaunt wit comprehends and
judges the council which is most requisi^e, the one being very necessary
for the other.

Wherefore was Paulus Minutius the companion of Fabius, esteemed so prudent and
wise?

Because he took Council of himself in that which he knew, and followed the
council of others in that which he did not understand: esteming him to be a
sotte and beast, which had not good advise in him self, and would not obey
them that had experience.

What is the duty and property of them which be accounted to be fine witted?

To use their wits to each divise and quality, like unto the fish Balena,
which is a great fish in the Sea, having a hole in his hedde, whereby he
takes air, thrusting forth thereat great abundance of water, some times
here, and sometimes there.

Why was Lysandre so ^louted and mocked of his own people?

Because he vaunted and bosted him self to be the kinseman of Hercules, not
doing any sign or token of virtue: but all that he did was by tromperie and
deceit.

Wherefore was Helanicus of Epirus so greatly esteemed for his subteltie?

Because all that he did was for the public wealth, and not for his own
particular profit.

What is Equanimitie, a virtue so much praised?

It is a certain pureness and constancy of mind, wherewith we continue alyke
in prosperity and adversity, not being puffed up with pride, or abbasing our
mind. Socrates the Philosopher, and Antoninus Pius the Emperor were excellent
in that virtue.

Where is the seat of the affections in our body?

Joy rests in the splen, A^gre in the gall, Fear in the heart, Lechery in
the liver.

What manner of thing is modesty?

It is a moderation of our appeties which obeys reason.

For what respect did Antiochus give so great thanks unto the Romans, that
leaving him so little a Country, which before was a King so mighty, and
prince puisaunt?

His modesty did him to understand that he was discharged of a great
burden, which hindered him before often times from sleep, from e^ting and
drinking,

Wherein did Tiberius most of all declare his modesty?

In that being desired to tax his people, he said that it was the office of
a good Sheperde to shere his sheep, and not to pull of their skins.

Dionisius of Siracusa, wherein did he show himself praise worthy?

For being so modest, that although he were come to the estate of a King:
Yet he would not alter the manner of apparel, which he ware when he was a
private man.

What manner of thing do ye call shamefastens?

It is a certain passion which makes the person blushe, specially in any
good and honest matter, and proceeds of a certain hon^stie of mind. Many
have termed it to be the misteris of comelines, and the mother of honesty.

What was the cause of the victory that the Persians had against Astiag^s?

The shame that their wives did unto them when they fled from the Battle,
who saying them run away like sheep, lifting up their garments, smockes,
and all, said unto them, whither will ye, ye cowardes and dasterdlye men,
you that dare not stand to the battle. Whither will ye flee? Is there no way
left for you, but to perse again the wombes of your mothers? Which manlike
words although proceeding from women's mouths, made that dasterdly nation to
return and gain the battle.

Wherein appeared the honesty of Socrates, so much com^mended of the
Auncientes?

Many and sundry ways: but specially in this point, for when he heard any
one talk dishonestlie, he hid his head with his cloak, until the other had
done his tale.

What is Abstinence?

It is a virtue of the mind, bridled by reason, drawing us from disordin ate
appetites, which we have after the goods of this world.

What is Continence?

It is a virtue of the mind, which makes our sensual appetites subject to
reason: so that by abstinence, covetousness is refrained: and through
Continence, Lechery is chastised.

Who amongs the Ancients was esteemed most abstine^t?

Paulus Aemilius, chiefelye in the victory that he achieved of the Persians:
and in the enterprises of Spain and Macedonia: Lucius Acummius at the
overthrow of Corinthe.

And in Co^tinencie, who has excelled among the Ancients?

Cipio the great, Alexander, and Caesar.

What is it that made the Corinthians infamouse?

Because they sold their daughters, to enriche them selves.

What was the cause of the defamation of Messalina the wife of Claudius?

Her dishonest Intemperaunce and filthy lust, who would not stick to
adventure cumbat with any aduenturouse knight.

How did Hieron of Siracusa get so great fame, being but the bastard son of
a poor laboring man?

By great temperaunce, honesty and valiaunce: which did so shine in him, that
he was made captain general of the Syracusanes against the Carthaginians:
and in the end he behaved himself so well, that he was made king.

What things are very honest?

Those, which without respect either of profit or commodity do deserve of
them selves to be commended. And honesty is no other thing, but a provocation
always to do virtuous deeds.

What was the cause of the glory of Theseus?

The affection that he had to follow the virtues of Hercules: which caused him
continually to be troubled both in body and mind.

In what virtue did Pomponius Atticus excel?

In modesty, the companion of honesty. Such also were Hanibal, Publius Surus,
Anaxilaus, Epictetus, and king Philip of Macedonia.

What is the property of Chastity?

To rule and govern the affections of the mind, to chase away all disordinate
appetites, to conterpeise riot with reason, and in all things to be constant.

What difference is there between Chastity and shamefastnes?

Chastity is a general chastisement of our affections, be it either lechery,
gluttony or covetousness. But shamefastnes is tried only in continuing from
lechery. Those women then that are chaste, are such as have not committed
offense, neither in body nor thought. But the shamefast are those which have
not had to do with any man but with their own husbands.

How did Euagoras king of Cyeras obtain so great renoume?

By not deceiving any man for keeping of his promise, gratefying his trends,
for his valiance, for being enemy to vice, and al euel thoughts.

What is moderate sparing properlye?

It is a virtue nere unto modesty, which is so necessary unto man, that
without it, he falls into many vices. It causes man to spend nothing
superfluously, and to spare nothing that is necessary to be spent.

How may we godlely increase our goods?

By moderate sparing, and by tilling the earth.

What is sobriety?

It is a virtue that rules drinking and eating: without which other virtues
are obscure.

How may that man become sober that is insatiable in drinking and eating?

By considering the follies which they do that are drunk.

Why did the Lacedaemonians use in their feasts always to cause one to be made
drunk, for example unto their children.

To make their children to abhor that beastlye vice.

How ought a man to drink?

With such moderation that he may abate his thirst: avoiding dronkennes, the
disease of the head and stomach, which continually do follow the same.

What did obscure the great virtues of king Philip and Alexander the great
his son?

Dronkennes: the like happened also to Cyrus the less, to Cato, Promachus, and
to the son of Cicero.

What signifies wine so disordinately taken?

The blood of the earth, converted into poison.

What made Massinissa of such great estimation?

Sobriety, and his being content with such victualles, as the meaner soldiers
used to eat. And by that sobriety he behaved him self so well, that at four
score and six years of age, he begat a child, and at four score and twelve,
he vanquished the Carthaginians.

Why did Solon ordeine that a man should lie with his wife but three times in a
month only?

To accustom his people by little and little to shamefastnes: a thing that
aduaunceth not only women, but also men.

How may a man avoid all horrible and fearful things?

By virtue: by which thing only most cruel Tirauntes have been reformed.

Wherefore did Dimocritus put out his eyes?

To the intent he might not see the prosperity and insolency of his country men,
which lived without Justice, and all kind of virtue.

What privilege have brave and valiant men?

To be none of fortunes subjects.

Is it possible to find perfect valiaunce in one manne alone?

Homere thinks not so, and holds opinion, that force and valiaunce in
respect of other virtues in the same, do many times receive certain furiouse
assaults. Likewise he supposes that there be many kinds of valiaunce: for he
praises Achilles for his anger, and Ulisses for his wisdom.

Why is it requisite for a souldior to be Cholerike?

Because Choler sturreth up the heart and enflameth the sprite. That is force
says Homere, which enters in at the nose, and chafeth the blodde.

Among moral virtues, which is the best?

I think it to be force, which by his virtue makes a man not to fear death
in an honorable enterprise, and subdueth his heart to Justice and wisdom.

Who was the first that rewarded valiaunce with preciouse gifts?

Bachus was the first that gave presents unto valiant soldiers, as Crowns,
Spears, Cheines, victories, pictures, and helmetes.

How did the wise define that virtue?

Diversely. The disciples of Socrates said, that it was a virtue, which willed
man not to fear adverse fortune: to whom agreed Chysippus. The Stoiques said
that it was an effection of the passionat mind, which made men obedient to the
laws without any fear. The Scholars of Plato said, that it is a sure and
steadfast means to chase away and receive (when time serves) all things
which seem horrible. Aristotle says, that it is a mean between hardines and
fear.

What makes a man to be lusty and valiant?

Desire of honor any glory.

Itamus the souldior of Atigonus, did he despise death for Glory sake?

No: but was content to dye, because being a very wicked person, he abhorred
life.

What means it that Timiotheus the Musician, always when he listed could
cause Alexandre the great to enter battle, and take upon him arms and weapon,
and yet could never move the brain of Sardanapalus?

That proceeded of the nature of either of them, which could not be altered
without great difficulty.

Is there nothing besides Choler that does make a man to be valiant?

Sorrow makes a man to lowre, although the true valiant man is constant both
in sorrow and harms, and shows always a good face.

They that chauf through Choler, or sorrow, may they be called valiant?

No: but rather hardy, cruel and furiouse.

Do you think it a good thing to be revenged upon the enemies?

Yea: if the reuengement be done by virtue and valiaunce of heart, and not by a
passion.

What is the property of a valiant man?

Not to fear that thing which seems fearful unto him: and that only for a
zeal that he has to honor, and not by constraint.

Think you that despair does not sometimes inflame the hearts of men to be
coragiouse and valiant?

Virgil thinks yea, by saying that Optima Spes victis nullam sperare salutem.
But I suppose that desperaunce inflameth our hearts against our selves, and
not against others.

Think you also that necessity makes a man valiant?

I would suppose so: for so much as necessity constrains a man to do what she
list. And so were the Ambronians constrained by their wives to fight.

Why did the Santians kill them selves?

Because they were in despair that they should never recover their liberty.

May a man place hope among the number of Moral virtues?

Many have esteemed it to be the queen of virtues.

Who is the master of all things?

Use. For which cause the Souldior that is not accustomed to battel^, dares
scarce show his face to the enemy.

Whereunto ought a good Captain principally to have respect?

To common profit, rather then to his own particular commodity. Such was the advice that Pelopidas the General of Thebes receued of his wife, as he was
going to the wars.

What is the chief end of magnificence?

To get Friends.

Why were Caeseres gifts best esteemed, although they were less then others?

Because he gave them with a good will, and with his own hand. Uoluntarie
gi^tes do engendre more favor toward him that gives them: and binds him
more that receives them.

In what thing is magnificence most apparaunt, either in building and repayring
of condues and mines, or in Sepulchers, Temples, Steples, Labyrinthes, or
Libraries?

I think the building and foundation of Cities: for it acquireth and wins
unto man great reputacion, and the memory thereof is more then for ever. As
appears by the fame of Tyton the father of M^nnon, S myramis queen of
Babylon, Smirra the queen of the Amazones, Philotidas Nelius, ^thamantes,
Teucer, Antiochus, Perseus, Alexandre, Augustus Caesar, Marcellus, Titus,
Labienus, Liuius, Mutuis, Pompelius, Cornelius, Sempronius, and other builders
of Cities.

Why did the Persians establishe a law against those that were ingrate?

Because they knew ingratitude to be the spring of all vice, the enemy of
nature, the poison of amity, and the ruin of gentleness, and benignity.

What was the cause of the death of Epaminondas?

Because he would have saved his Army besides Mantinea. The like did Paulus
Aemil^^s, although Uarro his companion did the contrary, through whose
temeritie and necligence the Romans received that great overthrow at Cannas.

Whereof came it that the ordinances which Lycurgus made for the state of the
wars were so greatly esteemed?

Because they still tended to honorable victory.

How like you the saying of Caesar, which is that a man ought not to violate
Justice, but at such time, when he desires to reign and govern?

Forsothe I like it so well, as a thing most unrighteous and wrongful.

What was the cause that the Lacedaemonians lost their Monarchy and Empire?

The insatiable desire that they had to surmount the whole world, which
caused them to have enemies on every side. The like incited the kings of
Grecia against Athenes: wherefore mediocritie is commendable in all things.

Whereof proceeded the ordinance that the Greeks made, to punish the Souldior
that had abandoned the weapons of defense, and not them that had cast away the
weapons of offense?

Because the Souldior should be better advised to defend himself then to
assail. And for that cause the Romans in the wars did put their braceletes
upon their left arm, and not upon their right.

What is Magnanimity?

It is a certain greatness of courage, wholly bent and disposed to honor, in
such wise as he can not be stout or magnanimouse, which is not honest and
virtuous.

Wherefore was the Temple of virtue placed by Marcellus, before the Temple of
honor?

To declare that honor is gotten by virtue.

What is the property of him yt is magnanimouse and valiant?

To enterprise and do things difficill and great, without hope of recompense,
and with modesty and subrie^ie to talk of the same.

What is the principal virtue that a Prince can desire?

To aspire to be the best in doing well.

What moved Caesar to s^nde home Ptolome king of Alexandria his prisoner,
considering the ill wills that the Alexandri^^^ hare unto him?

Because he thought to win more honer to fight with a king, then with a
multitude (...), out a (...).

What was the overthrow of Galba?

Because he committed his government to an other, and would not understand the
state of the same, but referred all to certain noughtie persons which were
about him.

Wherefore would not Alexander give ear to the counsel of Parmenio, who
advised him to assail his enemies in the night?

Because he esteemed that, rather to be the act of a thief then of a valiant
captain, which ought to fight by virtue and not by policies.

What manner of thing is Sloth?

Tullie does say, that it is a certain fear which the slothful manne
conceueth in him self of the labor and pain that he ought to do, and is
contrary to diligence. Demosthenes was not to be reprehended herein, for he was
angry that day that he saw an artificer or crafts man rise before him, for
which cause, Pithias the Orator was wont to say, that the works of
Demosthenes did smell of the oil and candell.

What was the cause that ^ib^rius the Emperor lost the whole country of
Armenia which was taken from him by the Persians, Missia by the Danes, and
Samothracians and France by the Almai^es?

Sloth and fear of travel, giving himself day and night to the delights
of Ladies in the Island of Cypres.

Why did the people of Saba the next neighbors of the Nabathei give
themselves so much to Idleness, considering the diligence and industry of the
said Nabath^i their next neighbors?

The fertility of Saba made them slothful, and the barrennes of the country
of the Nabathei made them vigilant and industriouse.

Why did Euripides introduce Theseus to consider and talk of all the evils
that can happen to man?

Because a stripe foresene, does hurt a man the less.

What is mercy properlye?

It is a certain heaviness arysing of an other man's grief: which, as some
say, ought not to move the minds of the good, but rather they ought to content
them selves with their innocencye, without taking pain or care what the
wicked do sustain and abide.

What is Felicity?

It is an abundance of Spiritual, corporal, and earthly goods.

Why was Archagathus ye Surgeon made a Citizen of Rome?

Because he was very merciful and cunning in his cures: that the like of whom,
the Romans never saw.

Why was Antonius the Emperor surnamed Pius?

Because he reigned without effusion of blood: and was so merciful as ever
Caesar, Alexander, or Uespatian was.

Why do Soldiers love hunting?

Because it is like unto the wars: which is the place where every man may
learn to live virtuously.

Which is the godliest exercise that a man can learn?

Husbandrye: in which there is not only profit but pleasure?

Where is the best walk that can be found?

That walking place which is furnished with wise men.

Whereof proceeded the great estimation of Homere?

Because his works are so full of learning, and very good to encorag^ men's
hearts to virtue.

Why were the Greek aucthors counted great liars?

Because they confounded histories with fables: such as Herodotus and
Hellanicus be.

What is the property of Justice?

To deceive no man: even as the property of wisdom is not to be deceived.

When is it lawefull to lie?

For safegarde of the goods or the life of an other: as Chil^ did, when he
forsware him self, to save the life of a certain man.

What is the property of a gloriouse man?

To believe rather that which is spoken of him, although it be false, then that
which he perceives in deed to be in him self. For that cause was the ^able of
Juno and Ixion feygned.

What is the property of a vile and noughtie man?

To hide the truth for fear: which never chances to the valiant and honest,
who cannot abide that any man should lie.

Why did the Poets say, that verity was the daughter of memory and tune?

Because she cannot be long hidden.

From whence came the wh^le that Ixion does turn continually, as the Poets
do faigne?

It is the true token of a common liar, who, the nerer he thinks he is to
virtue, the further he is from it.

Why did the Egiptians ordain that a vacabonde and common Iester should not be
taken for a witness?

Because such people are not worthy to be regarded: and for a little bribe,
they are ready to all mischief.

Wherefore did the Romans forbid playing for money, except it were in
warrelike exercises: as to throw the bar, to dance, to wrestle, to vaute,
to play at defense, and other such like pastimes?

Because in other pastimes, Fortune rules, and not virtue.

Why did ^pelles the Painter set his tables abroad, for every man to view?

That he might understand men's Judgment of his faults. As appeared by a
Cobbler, who found fault in a pantofle or slipper which Appelles had made.

What mischiefs do Flatterers bring?

They corrupt all good manners: they tell lies instead of truth: they do evil
instead of good: vice instead of virtue: and are ordained to destroy^ the
good, and those that do righteouslye.

Why would not Socrates suffer himself to be praised of a young man?

Because that praise in presence is a kind of Flattery.

Why did the Romans so much disdain Prusias king of Bitbinia?

Because he was the greatest flatterer that ever was borne. In so much that his
flatteries were the cause that it was ordained at Rome, that no king should
come thither, without license of the Senate obtained before.

What is Flattery properly?

It is a vice proper and particular to vile minds, to women and cowardes: for
it proceeds of nothing else but of fear.

What is shamefastnes?

It is a kind of fear to fall into any infamy, or to be blamed for any deed
doing, or to be worthelye reprehended for some fault. Therefore Cicero did
term it to be the Tamer of evil thoughts: for she withdraws man and
preserves him from committing any offense.

To whom ought a man to be shamefast?

To children only: for to a man of age it is unmeet to blush, and to say, I
had not thought to do it.

Who is he that worthily may be counted valiant?

He that loves life, and fears not death.

What is death?

It is an end: from which a man ought not to retire, but to go to it
ioyfullye: and as some say, it is a gest given of God to men, by a singular
grace.

Why did Mallius say in the oration that he made at Rome against Furius and
Aemilius, that envy was bleare eyed, and had a very evil sight?

Because that the enuiouse man considers those things which are next him,
and not them a far of, which should be more to be enuyed, if envy were a
virtue.

Why is Envy compared unto fire?

Because it always mounteth: for there is no man so mighty, that envy will
stick to assail, and surmounte him also, if it be possible.

What was the cause of the death of Socrates, being so innosent a man?

The envy of the Athenians: a usual thing in that city: which caused also
the death of Themistocles, and Aristides the just.

Why do the Poets faigne that Marcias was beaten of Apollo, and Thamiras had
his eyes put out by the Muses?

To declare that how mighty soever a man be, he has some body that goes
about to make him self equal with him: which is a passion almost like unto
Envy, but not so much different from virtue.

What was the cause of the soudeine death of Diodorus the S^phistre?

The thought that he took, because he could not resolve a question that Stilpho
the Philosopher put to him in pastime. And excessive thought ought not to fall
into the heart of a virtuous man.

What mean the Poets, by faigning an Eagle always to gnawe the heart of
Frometheus?

To declare the continual study of Prometheus, who was very learned, and wise
in Astrology.

Whereof comes it that in the time of Ptolome there were found so many
Mathematicians: in the time of Xerxes so many pleasures: and in the tune of
Nero so many Musicians?

Because subjects do always give their minds to that which pleases their
Prince.

Wherein did Vespasian most declare his wicked nature?

Because he surrendered the greatest offices into the hands of the greates
Bribers, that afterward he might have their goods confiscat.

Why did the Persians ordeine, that he which procured to establishe new laws
among them, should be put to death?

That they might always con^inue in their old customs.

How may the Just and unjust be known?

By law, and not by nature.

What is the foundation of Laws?

Virtue.

How did Chrysippus pain^e Justice?

In form of a virgin, having a severe, grave, and fearful countenance and
yet nevertheless honorable, Shamefast, humble, and full of majesty.

What is Nobility without virtue?

It is a thing stuffed with pride and violence.

Show me I pray you, what things are contrary unto virtue, and which are
like thereunto.

The contrary of wisdom is folishnes, and the like to it is subtlety. The
contrary of Constancy is inconstancy, and his like is obstinacy. Strength
has for his contrary feoblenes of heart, and hardines for his like. Injustice
is contrary to Justice: but cruelty is kin to Justice.

Why would not Plato return home to his city, although he was greatly
required thereunto by the people?

Because they would not understand just and reasonable causes: and because he
could not get them by any means to acknowledge the same.

What is Innocence?

It is a certain nature so well engraven in the heart of a man, that it
^^useth him that he can not, nor may not do hurt to any man.

What is he that worthelie deserves to be called happy?

He that goes about most of all to resemble God.

Which be the virtues that do conduct or bring us to heaven?

Charity, faith, hope, piety, Religion, and godliness.

What things are contrary to them?

Hatred, incredulity, despair, impiety, Hippocresie, and wickedness.

Which are the moral virtues?

Prudence, Justice, strength, temperaunce, magnanimity, magnificence,
liberality, stoutnes of courage, mekenes, innocence, continency, gravity,
fidelity, and Shamefastnes.

Which be the vices that are contrary to the said virtues?

Imprudencie, Injustice, fury, intemperaunce, pride, vain glory,
covetousness, fearefulnes, choler, noysomnes, incontinencie, rashenes,
infidelity, and boldenes.

Is virtue the sovereign goodness it self, or the way to atteyne thereunto?

It is the Laddre to clyme thereunto.

May vices be turned into virtues, and virtues into vices, by the variety of
the time, places and customs, or not?

Yea, considering the diversity that is among the people, in their manner of
liuinges.

May a young man be wise?

Wisdom comes not, but by a long space.

Nobility, does it proceed of virtue?

Yea: and of nothing else.

What is requisite in an History?

That it declare first the Counsels, and after the deed, and thirdely the
issue, called of the latin Aucthors, Euentum.

Why were laws established?

To bridle the wickedness of our minds.

Which is the most daungerouse Ignorance?

Not to know God: and afterward not to know himself.

May a Captain overcome Fortune with prudence?

Uerye hardly, c^nsidering that Fortune is by the Poets made a goddess, and
placed in heaven.

Why is virtue so much to be beloved or imbrased?

Because she is conformable to reason.

Why ought not wise men to fear death, but rather to desire the same?

Because that this our life is nothing else, but a prison.

What Poets are to be eschewed and chased?

Those that write only to please and delight the cares, and to corrupt youth.

Wherein consists the force of an army?

Some say that it rests in counsel, others in the fortune of the Captain:
some say that it consists wholly in the hearts of the Soldiers, others in
strong holds, and some that the Soldiers be well armed and appointed.

What wars be lawefull?

Those that be made, to obtain peace.

Why was Octauian the Emperor esteemed happy?

Because he reigned in peace.lvi. years.

Is it a fable or History that Gyges, by virtue of a ringe that he had, was
made king of Lydia?

If it be true that Polycrates the Tyrant, by reason of a stone called a
Sardone, did avoid all dangers: and if it be credible that Appollonius did
live a hundred and thirty years, always as it were at the flower of his age,
by virtue of.vii. ringes that Iarcas gave him: and if a man may believe the two
ringes forged by Moses, the one for love, the other for oblivion: and if the
ringe of Bactus be true, this history of Gyges may also be believed.

Why did they prepare Arkes and Pageantes of triumph at Rome?

To stir men to virtue.

What was the true meaning of the three Sirenes?

They were three harlotes, which with deceiptes, and with swetenes of their
voice used to deceive those that were given to banquets and pleasure,

Why was the Temple of Diana of Ephesus erected?

Some think that it was built by the will of God: some say that it was for
religion, or for the pride of men.

Why is it said that worldly pleasure is like to a Lab^rinth or mase?

Because the entrye thereof is easy, but the coming out very hard.

Why did Nature make Mercury?

To make Alchimistes fools, and couetouse men poor.

Whereof proceeds it that the Philosophers of our time, are for the most
couetouse, and of evil life and manners?

They turn virtue into vice, because they see princes to make now no
account of those that be virtuous.

Whereof proceeds the credit that Flatterers have of Princes?

Princes for the most part be great lovers of themselves: and therefore do love
those yt do praise the^: in which point they do resemble certain beasts which
can scarce see at none days, and in y^ dark their eyes be very ^iere.

Whereof comes it that dogs do always bark at those that be ill
apparelled, ragged and torn like beggars?

Those are the dogs of the Cities, accustomed only to see people richly and
well apparelled: and contrariwise the Country dogs do never bark at any
peasant or beggar.

Why is wine forbidden women in some countries?

Because it provoke lechery: a thing very uncomely in women*

What means this proverb. Take away the light, and every woman is of like
conditions?

Perhaps because they would be all naught, if shamefastnes did not let the^

Whereof comes it that for the most part the learned have very evil sight?

It comes of the paper which they do oftentimes handle: for there is nothing
more hurtful to the sight then whitenes. Or else we might rather say, that
much Study does cool the parts of the body, specially those, which are
cold by nature, as the brain, the stomach, and hinders digestion: in such
wise that by euel digestion, Fleame ingendreth in the body, and stops the
cundith: then the eyes as partakers of such passions, are debilitated.

Of what power is Nigromancie and Witchcrafte?

If a man may believe the dreams of many writers, it can stay the course of
the element and of the son, it can make the mo^e to be as red as blood,
appease the winds, make the earth to tremble, enchaunt bestes, and cause a man
or woman to be loved perforce.

But how can the Nigromancer do such strange things*

With parfumes, coniurations, ceremonies, charms, and carecthers.

What is he that is like unto the image of Sardanapalus?

A man well proportioned of body, but of brutish nature.

What does fortune represent, with her apple of gold?

That good spirits are accompanied with good Fortune.

What means a Plough, in the hands of a Laborer?

That travel is the true treasure of man.

What signifies a wolf carrying a lamb in his mouth?

A man that cares not what hurt he does to another, so he himself have the
profit.

What betokens a man with his purse open?

That a wise man spares nothing for his health.

What signifies a ship sonke in the bottom of the Sea?

That the peril of other ought to make us take better head.

What does the Antes carrying of corn represent unto us?

Those that live of the sweat of other men's brows. They teach us also in
youth to provide for age, as they in harvest do provide to live withal in
winter.

How may we represent gratitude and acknowledginge of good turns which we
have received?

By a Storke that nourishes the damme.

And great travel with little profit, how should we paint that?

By a child that swimmeth.

What is to be understood by a Serpente?

That an evil disposed person, cannot accustom him self to goodness.

What signifies a man that is painted with gold in the right hand, and fire
in the left?

That he is not worthy to be a partaker of the felicity which has done no
friendship in time of adversity.

What does he betoken that breketh his head against ye wall?

That he estemeth his life but a little, which contendeth with great men.

What represents a Quadrant unto us?

That nothing ought to be done without counsel.

What is envy?

An horrible monster.

Where is her habitation?

At the Court.

If she should happen to be banished from thence, whether would she go?

To Monasteries and Conuentes.

Whereof proceeds it that children do not love the father so well as the father
does the children?

Love is always advanced, and does never turn back again: specially for
the desire yt a man has to make his posterity perpetual. Or rather it
proceeds of this, yt the father has nothing of the son, but the son has
and holds all of the father.

Whereof comes it that although every man is desirouse of knowledge, yet very
few do apply themselves to sciences and arts?

Because to attain to sciences, great pain is to be taken: and man is
subject to his pleasure, a thing contrary to contemplation. Or else some do
want the right way and mean to study.

Why is Philosophy painted naked?

Because both in verity and Philosophy, there needs no couerture: but it is
necessary that all things be handled plainly and purely, and ought to be
void of all sophistical colors and carnal affections.

Why did Euripides say in his Tragedy entitled Medea, that women's wit is
unapt to goodness, but very well encline^ to unhappiness?

Because a woman is a creature imperfect: and where perfection is not, there
can rest nothing that is good.

Why is the counsel that a woman gives upon the soubden of much estimation,
and that which she does devise and study nothing worth?

Even as unreasonable creatures are induced and provoked to their actions,
without any resistaunce, by a certain superior occasion, which is Nature:
even so the woman although of her self she be evil, yet the understanding and
knowledge that Nature has given her (which will not be deceived, ne yet abuse
or deceue any person) does provoke her at the first motion to give good advise.
But if she have ^easure by study to follow her own inclination, all that she
will do shall be naught worth.

Why be women more couetouse then men?

Because they know that no man will set by them without riches.

Why be reasonable creatures o^ so short life?

The perfection of transitory things is not mesured by time: for the life of
reasonable creatures, although it be shorter, yet is more desired then the life
of brute beasts.

Why is death called the last of all terrible things?

Because she is terrible both to the^ that think to be immortal, and also t^
evil livers, and to those that die of a violent death: but not to others.

Why is nesing demed a good sign, and not yexing?

Because nesing comes from the head, which is as it were the lord and ruler
of the body.

Why is it a thing so shameful to kill a woman?

Because she is weak, and not able to resist.

Why did the painter Phidias painte Venus setting her feet upon a Tortoise?

To declare that a woman of honor is no runner out of the doors, but keeps her
self within her house.

Whereof comes it that many Ladies have so greatly esteemed the leaves and
seed of Agnus Castus?

Because it is enemy to Lechery.

Why did nature ordeine, that when Bees do engendre, no man can see them?

To teach us shamefastnes and modesty.

Whereof comes it, that in reding a certain Aucthor, some do gather that
which pleases their minds: and others do refuse and reprehend the same?

A wise Aucthor shall study to be brief, and not obscure, and shall have a
gift to teach, to be of good invention, digested by good order: accompanied
with grave sentences and good examples. Such an aucthor coming into the hands
of a studiouse man, makes him (for the singularities that he fyndeth) to
collect that which serves for his purpose, leaving the rest, to be of no
value and regard.

Why are clothes of Silk better esteemed, then those of woll?

Because silk is more fine and light, better colored, more bright and orient
then woollen.

What is it that bredeth envy most in man?

To be sad and melancholique.

What manner of motions has envy?

Slow and heavy.

Of what age is she?

Old, crooked, withered, having a pale and lean face, her tongue infected with
poison.

From whence comes the beauty that is in the necks of Pigeons, and in
Peacokes feathers?

Of the variety and diversity of colors.

What is the property of man's heart?

To faigne and dissemble.

Why is the Cameleon so meruelouse?

Because he transformeth him self into all colors.

Whereof comes the brightness that is in rotten wodde?

Nature shows us thereby, that there is nothing so abiecte, but it has some
virtue.

What is the property of the Sirenes?

To bring death by singing.

Wherein consist the effects of virtue?

In words and in deeds.

How may a man seem gentle in his behauior?

By his gate or going, by countinaunce, by his manner of living, and above all
things by his civility.

How are secret aduertisementes disclosed?

By letters, by weapons, in love, and by courses of arms.

How must a man do reverence?

By putting of his cappe, and bowing down his hedde.

How ought a man to obey his Superiors?

with fidelity, good will, devotion, fear, and hope.

How is a man modest in his behauiors?

When his hand is on his stomach, his eyes loking on the ground, and his
mouth shut.

In Chiromancie, what signifies it when the mount of the Sun is elevated, or
bowing downewarde?

It betokens much good, or much evil.

And that of Mercury?

Goodness or dulnes of spirit.

And that of the Moon?

Happy or unfortunate voiages.

And Mars?

Good or evil fortune in battle.

And the Triangles?

Strength: even as Angles do signifye richesse.

How is the life of man divided?

Into a life contemplative, Civil, solitary, and wild.

What thing is most hardest to be tamed?

Necessity: which the gods themselves can not resist.

What is requisite to be considered of our birthe?

The conception, the form, the birth, and nourishment,

From whence comes deceit?

Of Trust.

What be the properties of a wise man?

To rule the Stars, to know and govern himself, not to quayle through the
assaults of Fortune, with good discretion to spend the time, not to be afcarde
of death, and to live neither in fear nor hope.

What is the state of a couetouse man?

Never to have rest, and to be always gaping after Richesse,

What is the estate of Courtiers?

To be nourished with hope.

What is the estate of him that loves virtue?

To aspire always to honorable things.

Which are the goods of the soul?

Virtue and her train: honor, glory, quicknes of sprite, memory, counsel
and discipline.

Wherein consists true Philosophy?

To endeavor to live vertuousely.

What is a chaste woman?

A miracle of miracles, the pathe way to immortality, a heavenly thing, and
an i^estimable fortress.

Chroniclers, can they set forth or illustrate the fortunes of noble men?

Yea.

And Poets likewise?

They do no less delight, then instruct.

Which be the goods of the body?

Health, beauty, strength, aptnes, and a joyful old age.

Which be the goods of Fortune?

Nobility, Richesse, Friends, dignity, an honest wife, many children,

What is Felicity?

Fortunate virtue.

Which be the true goods, and which the counterfeate of the body, of the
soul, and of Fortune?

The counterfeite goods of the body are, deformity and sickness: Of the
soul, vice and ignorance: and of Fortune, base estate and poverty.

What is misery?

It is a viciouse and unfortunate life, full of sorrows and per^^^es.

Wherein consists the Music of the soul?

In temperaunce, but as some hold opinion in strength.

What is the office of an excellent Painter?

To know sundry kinds of beasts, the differences of their sex, their age,
their properties, and other things.

Why were the wise women called Sibillae esteemed divines?

Because they were the Secretaries and Trompets of divine mysteries.

Whether is it harder to vanquishe a monster, or to bridle the affections?

The affections are most hardest to be subdued.

What is the office of a conqueror?

To pardon the conquered.

What be the properties of harlots and Courtizans?

To be full of wily fetches, dampnable devises, tirannous, scornful,
subtle, licorous, evil conditioned, with alluring looks, and shameless
ge^^ures.

Why do men love to wear ringes?

Because the same by circle resembling the heaven, and the precious stone the
star, besides that for the most part they are endewed with meruaylous
virtue, they give also a certain gladness to the eye, and to ye hand an honor

How is the chastity of Lucretia known?

By her death: as the like of Penelope, by long abode Uirginia by the disdain
of her father: the Almaine ladies by the halter, wherewith they were hanged.
Cloelia by the sieve: Sulpitia by the Temple: Dido by her ashes: and Hippo by
her leaping into the sea.

Which be the instruments of Chastity?

The Target of Medusa, the neckelase of Jasper, and the chain of Diamantes and
Topazes.

Whereof comes it yt the palm tree represents constancy?

Because the more it is oppressed, and the greter weight it has, y^ better it
is.

What is the property of age?

To make a man to be of good experience, wise in his doings, of good council
when time requires, modest and temperate in word and deed, and grave in
considerations.

Why ought a man to avoid carnal love?

Because his pleasures do incontinently decrease, but his sorrows do still
remain: and he is stuffed with vanities, dreams, and vain hopes.

What is carnal love?

It is a furor full of care: a strong sorrow, and a weak strength.

What properties have the fountains of Chius?

To make a man foolish and hard of understanding,

And those of Paphlagonia?

To make them drunk that drink thereof.

And that of Suses?

To make the teeth fall.

And that of Tharsa?

To make the voice pleasant and armoniouse.

And that of the Son?

To burn in the night, and to be cold in the day.

And that of Garramanta?

To friese twice in the day, and burn twice in the night,

And that of Exampus?

Bitter, filthy, and naught.

And those fountains of Arabia?

To make cattle change their hear.

And that of Epirus?

It lights that which is put out, and puts out that which is lighted.

And that of Carthage?

To cast forth oil to heal beasts withal.

And that of Neptune?

To make them to die that do drink thereof.

And the water of the flood of Dalmatida?

To make him amorouse that drinks thereof.

The Rubie, wherefore is it good?

Against poison.

And the Granat?

To exhilarate and content the person.

And the Balais, what is his property?

Never to be hoate with any fire.

And the Sapphire?

To make humble and chaste.

The Iacint stone, the Ametist, Sardonie, and the Asbeste, wherefore be they
good?

Against the plage, dronkennes, evil fortune, and fire.

The Chrisolith, Gyrassol, the Jasper, the Turquis, and the Aga^ wherefore
serve they?

To restablish the brain, to make invisible, to staunch blood, to escape ^
danger, and to give good breath to him that runs.

The Beral, the Cassidonie, the Corneline, the Coral, the Christell, and the
Adamant?

To make the person amorouse, to preserve the understanding, to mittigate
hatred and anger, to resist lighning, to quench thirst, to draw flesh and
iron.

Which is the most worthy person, the man or the woman?

God has always given increase of excellency unto the last creatures that he
created. And because the woman was last created, and is as it were the chief
of the work of God: she is truly the worthiest of al, being made of the most
excellent creature that God created, that is to say of man.

Which is most subject to their appetites, either the man or the woman?

The woman was most purified in her creation: and so she subdueth her appetites
best.

Tell me the properties of the Phoenix, the Egle, the Swan, the Faucon, the
Popingay, the Crane, the Pelican, the Pecocke, the Nightingale, the Turtle
Dove, the Pie, and the Crow?

To be immortal, high minded, a good singer, to have good wings, to be
beautiful, vigilant, amiable, gloriouse, delectable, sad, chaste, royal,
and to prognosticate the time to come.

And the Lark, the Cock, the Quail, the Swallowe, and the Storke, what
properties have they?

To be pleasant, magnanimouse, delectable, sad, and mindful of a good turn.

And the Lion, the Tigre, the Elephaunt, the Unicorne, the Bear, the Hyena,
the Wolf, the Panther, the Rinoceron, and the Leobert?

To be vigilant, swifte, obedient, humble, furiouse, inhumaine, a deuourer, to
smell well, to be fayer, and of great courage.

The Beuer, the Heart, the Squerill, the fallowe dear, the Ape, the Fox, the
Graye or Brocke, the Marteine, and the Wolf engendered of the Heart?

To be providing, of long life, nimble, fearful, a Counterfecter, crafty,
slepie, honorable, and spotted.

What signifies the colors of white, grene, yealow, golden, pale yealow,
orange color, blew, pale, and carnation color?

Truth, hope, gladness, diminution of amity, inconstancy, heat, and
r^^engement, friendship, treason, and sorrow.

The chaungeable color, the violet, the sky coler, and the Tawney?

Inconstancy, government, high estate, and low.

A point in Palmistrie, and a part of manans hand.
The mount of Venus being elevated or declined, what signifies the same?

Love or hatred.

The mount of Saturn a another token of Palmistrie, what signifies the same?

Richesse or poverty.

How ought every age of man to be governed?

Sucking babes with milk, the Infant with rods, the child with shame, the
young man with good discipline, the man with arms, the old man with good
counsel, and the latter age is decrepit and twice childishe.

What be the tytles of the Sun?

The sun is called the father of the day, the governor of nature, the life
of the body, the eye of the world, the heart of nature, the king of the
Stars, and the visible son of God.

Which be the wings of Time?

The time paste, the time present, and the time to come.

What be the teeth whereby time does consume all things?

The day, the night, life and death.

What is the cause that in our time men be not so excellent as they have been
in times paste?

It is Nature which daily grows worse and worse, or else it is because virtue
is not so much commended or esteemed at this present, as in times paste it has
been. Or else it may be said, that it is the custom of each age to make
complaint of the present state.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Paul's Churchyard, by Nicholas In^lande.


