THE Consolation of the Soul, being an assurance of the forgiveness of
sins, with the most notable promises of God contained in holy Scripture, both
in the old and new Testament: briefly expounded and applied, as hereafter
follows.

With certain examples worth the bearing in mind, touching the great mercies
of God, toward poor, and miserable sinners.

When I am trodden under foot, thy mercies does lift me up again. Psalm. 94.
Made by John Chassanion, and englished by H.S. of Greyes Inn. Gent.

Imprinted at London for Simon Waterson.

To the faithful of the reformed Church of Metz grace, and peace through
Jesus Christ our Lord.
SEEING it has pleased GOD (dear brethren) to make me an Instrument, whereby
to declare his holy word unto you, I thought it very needful to present this
little Book, wherein I entend not to teach any new matter, but to put you in
mind of your salvation, which you have of long time known, and do daily
hear, to the end, it may be the better rooted in your hearts. And so much the
rather, seeing by this you have at all times such means to rejoice, and
comfort your selves in God, whereby we may gather very many good instructions
in Gods school, if we be certainly persuaded of his grace, and endeavor our
selves, both to obey him, and to amend that, we find to be amiss in us. Also
we shall continually lift up our hearts toward him, that we may be partakers of
his felicity, and bountifulness, the very ground of our salvation. After
which manner, do the children of God truly exercise them selves in meditation,
and look thoroughly into the unspeakable goodness of him, by whom they are
saved through Jesus Christ, even with an undefiled thought and hope. Also it is
requisite, that there be a true amendment of life, agreeable both to the
service, obedience, and honor, which we owe unto him, and to call upon him
unfeignedly. All which are the chiefest points, comprehended in holy Scriptures,
and here summarily spoken of, for the confirmation of our faith, and hope: the
full assurance whereof is as it were the foundation of all others, consisting in
the certain persuasion, which we ought to have of the forgiveness of our
sins, to which end also principally the preaching of the Gospel does
attend: by reason whereof S. Paul calls it, the ministry of
reconciliation. How happens it the^, that the Clergy men in our company by
an holy, and religious custom, every Sunday in morning prayers, declare the
grace of God, that is to say, the forgiveness of sins to all true penitent
Christians, being necessary for every one to know? Certainly, principally
for this cause, that all may be persuaded, that their offenses be forgiven
them before God: and that they be reconciled unto him, and received into his
grace, what iniquity soever they committed. And this certain persuasion ought
to be steadfast, and deeply rooted in our hearts, chiefly in the time of
Calamities, and great affliction, whereunto the children of God are continually
subject, having the obstinate, and perverse world their enemy, which will
never agree with them, being set forward, and inflamed by him, which from the
beginning is a murderer, and an adversary to all mankind: and never leaves
in rest those, that give themselves to the true service of their god, but does
procure unto them all hindrances and lets, that he can, and continually
assaults them with mortal wars, compassing them with euilles round about,
and strangely oppressing them, when they do protract time. It may seem then,
that for a time God does give them over, and that he is very angry with them,
and that he would undo them, and that they be lost: but they having this full
knowledge, that by his infinite bounty and clemency, he does receive them
into his mercy, and quiet orders: See how they are revived, and comforted, and
their consciences in rest. And to this end, is the word of salvation given
unto them, by the which God does promise to be merciful unto them: If then
such a simple promise be sufficient to make them certain of his love toward
them; how much more will it be, when al other promises do abou^d? It is
therefore for this cause, that I have gathered here a certain number of most
singular notes of the holy Scripture, which consequently are added, and which
are taken from one, and the self same spring, which shall be like towers, and
strong places most high to defend us against the terrible and perilous assaults
of the devil, and to put off from us, all incredulity and mistrust. That,
which I present unto you, well-beloved brethren, I dedicate it to witness the
good affection, that God has given me toward you, wishing that more and more
you may be steadfast, and conformable in the faith, and certainty of the
fatherly goodwill of our God. We cannot but always hope well of such a gentle
and gracious father, which have looked on us a long time, with his own eyes,
and has visited us, as his own, only by the true and happy light of his word,
and by excellent Shepeheards (of which some are already received into perpetual
rest with the Lord: others serve him yet happily in other places) he has
established the ministry of his Gospel among you, which you inioye at this
present, by his inestimable bounty: although the blustringes of the tempests
lately past, have brought into many and diverse places some strange troubles
and calamities. This good God nevertheless, has always care to preserve you
in such extremities, that you have continual occasion to give him thanks, the
very tokens, and witnesses of your faith, which may appear in that, that you
need not grievously to seek for the nourishment of your souls three long
miles, far from your houses, neither in painful and sorrowful ways.
Continue always therefore in this zeal, for the glory of God, and in the
confidence of his goodwill, and mercy toward you unto the end. I desire
those which be slothful to come into the pasture of the Lord, to consider
what he says in this place, when he says: that his sheep follow him and do
hear his voice. Ioh. 10.
And what he says in an other place: He which is of God hears Gods word.
Ioh. 8.
I do warn them therefore with my brothers and fellows, to be most affected
in it, and not to be given so much to the love of the world, and to their
vanities: to the end that they may not deprive themselves before they be
aware, from the celestial goods and riches which are everlasting. Dear
brethren, I pray to our God and father, that in houlding you always under the
shadow of his wings, he may cause you to profit more and more in his holy
knowledge, and continually to fortify you in his service, and to replenish you
withal the gifts of his holy Spirit, to his honor and glory, and to your
consolation.

Your humble and affected brother in the Lord. John Chassanion.

The Consolation of the Soul, being an assurance of the remission of sins,
with the most notable promises of GOD contained in the holy Scripture, as well
in the old, as new Testament, briefly expounded, and applied unto the same.
IF he to whom the forgiveness of sin is given, and from whom sin is put
away, be happy, as it is said in the xxxij. Psalm: Happy is the man to whom
God imputes no sin. He needs not to doubt, but on the contrary part he is
unhappy, which is tied and bound in sin, he must look for none other thing
but for his condemnation, and ruin only. Be it for a time he lives in ease,
and takes his pleasure, and altogether gives himself to delight: though he be
increased with honor, and every body do love and cheer him: yet he is
nevertheless unhappy, if he be not set at liberty by grace, and forgiveness
of his iniquities: for sin is a burden so hard, and heavy, that no man is
able to bear it, pulling down every one that is laden with it: from whence it
appears, that some do bow under it, and falls into ruin, and brings them
selves into despair: as it happened to Judas. Other being oppressed in such
sort, that they cannot scant receive any comfort and rest. I have seen a man,
which having committed, as himself does confess, some great and notorious
faults, was so abated and troubled in his spirit by the memory of them, that
he did resemble a poor man, which was indepted, and condemned to a grievous
sufferance and shameful death, he did always groan and sigh with the trouble
and pain of his Soul, feeling himself so guilty, and doubting of the
mercies of God, for the inormitie of his sins: in such sort, that he made not
any account to eat any meat, and refused to take any nourishment if he had
not been carefully moved thereunto by those which did keep him company: his
heart being so oppressed with dolor, that sometimes he wished that his body
might be punished with Justice, and that he might suffer some grievous pain
to make his torment less: which he thought, he had deserved in his soul:
Sometimes in his anguish, he did require to be comforted, and received into
the Church by public penance, but he was a stranger, and did but pass
away. I have seen an other, which having a long time abused the true knowledge
of God: yet at the last had such remorse of conscience, which did gnawe his
heart so, that he was constrained to lie as sick, and out of breath. See
therefore how horrible and heavy sin is of it self, from which whosoever is
lightened, though he be never so poor, miserable, and despised of the world,
or otherwise afflicted, he is nevertheless an happy man. The blind man of
this world does not esteem nor judge of these things otherwise then by
appearance of deceiptfull vanities, and not in truth, as it appears daily:
but the spirit of GOD does teach the godly otherwise, as it is before said.
That man is then very happy, that feels the grace of God to be such, as to
have his sin forgiven him: for then his conscience is in peace and rest, and
he fears not to perish, neither has he the judgments of God in horror, but
assures himself of his favor, and bountifulness, which God is to be
esteemed the greatest, that a man can receive in this mortal world. Among the
Sarasines, those which have not considered of things very narrowly, have yet
well known, that it was a precious treasure not to be troubled by any
committed forfeite: of which the most witty and sufficient among them have
made a treatise, which he calls the quietness of the Soul: but altogether
ignorant of this point of the free forgiveness of sin, as all other
Philosophers, not esteming any other rest of conscience, but in virtue and
integrity of life, which is but an imagination of no value before God: for
this man is like unto him, which builds without foundation, and would make a
show of that thing which is not. For to come then unto such blessedness, and
to inioye so happy felicity, we must know, that GOD to whom we must give an
account, is gentle and merciful, to whom we ought to have all our refuge,
being certain, that he will be quiet and merciful toward us: neither
imputing our iniquities, but will forgive us them freely.

Then as the m^st sick and lingering deseased have more need of remedies for
to be helped, and eased of their grief and pain: likewise also the most
troubled souls, which are tormented with sorrow, and anguish by feeling, and
acknowledging their great sins, dreading the anger and most fearful
judgment of God, have more need of consolation, and greater assurances of the
mercy of God, whereupon their hope should be totally founded and rooted. Who
although some times they be debased by diverse temptations, yet by the mercies
of their God, they never fall into any dissolation or confusion by despair:
although it happen, that the most forward in Religion and in the fear of God,
have to sustain many temptations of Satan, who does often give them hot
skirmishes, and shoots against them his poisoned and mortal arrows, for to
abate their faith, and to cast them into everlasting destruction, if it were
possible for them so to fall, and if they some times seem to doubt, being
trobled by distrust, and fearefulnes, yet it never happens, that they can
fall utterly from the trust which they once conceived of the mercies of God.
David was not without some anguish and perturbation of spirit, when he cried,
My soul why art thou vexed, and why art thou so disquieted within me? But when
he adds by exhortation that it should hope still in God, he declares the
stedfastnes and constancy of his faith, wherein he says, that he was shut up
from the sight of the Lord, it seemed that by the great adversity which
happened to him, that God had cast him of, and quite forsaken him: yet he did not
for all this leave to call and to hope in him: so that in the end he was
highly exalted. And thus it happens oftentimes to the children of God,
finding them selves entangled with a gulf of evils, their hope seems to be
swallowed up and drowned, although in the end it freshly appears, and lifts
up the head and coming unto it self again, wholly trusts in GOD, and
rests unremovable upon his great bounty and mercy, in which only they
glade and comfort themselves, and not by any virtue or desert which is in them,
aluding to that which is in the 9. Chap: of Jeremy: that he which glories may
glory in the Lord, that is in his blessedness, and in his mercy.

In this point then, consists our trust, by the which we must needs see
what the foundation is, and how far it reaches, if so be it be firm and
sure, and because we ought to be certain and resolved thereof, for this
cause we will bring forth the holy Scripture, as well of the Old as New
Testament, which are most fit and notable promises of the grace and mercy of
God, for the forgiveness of sins, which being here set on a row one by
another, and placed as it were on a table all in sight, it shall serve for the
instruction of the poor penitent sinner, and that in this we may keep some
order, we will first show the testimonies which are apparent of the goodness of
God, which is as it were the surest foundation, and the first cause of all our
hope. In the second place we will add the causes, which are as it were the
matter and substance concerning the desert and intercession of our Lord Jesus
Christ the son of GOD, then the causes of faith and repentance shall
follow, and finally that which belongs to Invocation and prayer, these are
the points and degrees by which the faithful soul ought to go up to the
throne, and to the grace of God, for to receive the consolation and Spiritual
health: First therefore it must look upon the objects of the love and mercy
of God, and the benefits of Christ, to have therein a perfect knowledge, then
it must by Faith allie, and wholly trust upon him, with a perfect consolation
of God in calling upon him: it must I say persuade it self of the love and
mercy of God, and after have full assurance of the merits of Christ, which
cannot be done without faith: it is therefore requisite to use this prayer,
which follows.

Of the bounty, and mercy of God. Exo. Chap. xxxiiij. WHen ye Lord passed
before Moses face, he cried out. The Lord, the Lord strong, merciful, and
gracious, slow to anger, and abou^dant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy
for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin, and not pardoning
the wicked. As God has created the world, mainteineth and preserves it, so
does he mainteyne, nourish, and gives us health and prosperity in this life:
wherein he shows unto us his omnipotent and eternal power, his wisdom and
wonderful foresight, and his great bou^tie: but in that we have offended him
by our sins and iniquities, yet he receives us into his mercy again,
reconciling himself to us, forgiving us our transgressions: so that in this he
declares unto us his clemency and infinite mercy, whereof he certifieth and
gives us full assurance in his word, as he does in this place to Moses:
saying, that he is not only the eternal God almighty, but also merciful
and gentle: for to have mercy and compassion upon poor miserable sinners
belongs to God: and in that he is of great patience, he shows a manifest
declaration, that he never punishes the wicked so soon as they offend, but a
long time staieth for their amendment, before he makes them feel his wrath and
indignation: by which reason, he accompteth himself to be slow to anger, and
of great patience. And in the end, that none may think his mercy be either
short, or scant, that it cannot suffice for diverse sinners, he also adds,
that he abundant in benignity: showing by the same, that his bounty is so
full, that it can never be emptied. He is altogether infinite, eternal, and
cannot be restrained, nor contained in the heaven of heavens, nor determined in
the measure of any time: it can never be stayed, being a lively flowing spring,
which cannot be dried up: for most certainty whereof, he makes mention of his
fidelity, repeating up his promises, by which he may assure us, that he will
merciful unto us: wherein he shows himself always to be true, in that he
is abundant in benignity, and also faithful in keeping promise: how full of
mercy he is, he declares in that which follows, that he is merciful unto
thousands: wherein we may learn, that he shows not his mercies unto some
little number, or some particular place, but to many hundredth and thousands:
showing by this word an infinite, and the greatest number that can be
expressed: by which manner of speech, diversity of ages, and variety of lives
may be understood, as it is said in other places, that he is merciful,
gentle, and faithful: in which words, he expresses that he is always prone
and ready to forgive our sins, and to pardon our misdeedes: wherein we see
that the true and proper effect of God is, to have forgiveness of our sins.
Then to the end, that none may think that he forgiueth some light offenses
only, he uses diverse words, which comprehend all kind of sins: not only
naming the sin whereby all offenses are showed, but also the iniquity, which
is done maliciously with deliberation and settled purpose, when injury or hurt
is wrought against others. The meaning then of this word transgression, is a
disobedience, or rebellious action, or intent against God, which is a grievous
and horrible sin: which although of all others it be most detestable, yet God
does here promise to make full remission, and forgiveness of sin. Let us hold
this then for a certain and vnf^llible rule, that there is no forfeite so
great, or transgression so monsterous, but it is forgiven by the mere mercy
of God. And whereas it is said in the end, that he forgiueth none: it is only
meant of those, which are wicked and obstinate in their wickedness, and those
which shall feel finally the severe vengeance of God: For so much then as he
is named gentle, it is to poor and penitent sinners, which do repent them of
their sins committed: so is he also termed a just Judge, for to give
punishment to the hard and impenitent sinner, to the end that none should
abuse his grace and clemency over much.

Deuteronomy. Chap. 32. ver. 4. Ye nations praise him, praise him his people, for he
will avenge the blood of his servants, and will execute vengaunce upon his
adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people. MOses
speaks this here in ye name and authority of GOD, as a Prophet, assuring the
people of Israel, that after GOD has visited them with his rod, and punished
them with sudden and strange calamities for their misdeedes, he would also
make punishment of their enemies, and deliver them from their miseries and
tribulations, being merciful unto the land: that is, to the inhabitants of the
land. The Children of Israel having purged themselves, and made them clean of
their sins by Gods mere favor and only mercy that he might be always
favorable toward them, and that foreign nations and strange people might
praise the children of God, and have them in estimation, and account them
happy in having the favor of such a mighty God, and that thereby others
should have occasion to rejoice together for so great and bountiful benefits
from the Lord. If then the Gentiles had received such joy, as to be partakers
of so great happiness, we must needs esteem this promise to pertain to us
also, and that continually, though he does afflict us, which is not but in good
cause, and justly for to correct us for our offenses. Yet he is gentle, and
very ready to receive us into favor of his bountiful favor, not imputing
unto us our iniquities, whereof we may have always cause to praise our God
eternally, after that he has drawn us forth out of the hands of the
oppressors and calamities of this world, and has received us into his eternal
rest.

Psalm. 103. The Lord is full of compassion and mercy, slow to anger, and of
great kindness: he will not always chide, nor keep his anger for ever. He
has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities: for as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is his
mercy toward them that fear him. As far as the East is from the West: so
far has he put our sins from us. As a father has compassion on his
children: so has the Lord compassion on them that fear him. THe more a man
is miserable and worthy of death and damnation, the more the mercy of God
surmounteth and ouerpasseth our misery and calamity, which is declared unto
us in diverse places of holy Scriptures, as it may appear in that, which we
have heretofore spoken of. Exodus 34. which portion of Scripture is agreeable
unto this, although it contain a more ample declaration (so great is the
mercies of God) to advance and amplify the time and knowledge of him, and his
clemency toward his people by the ministry of his Prophets, by whom the
mercy of God is showed unto us, either by a singnall promise by holy scripture,
and marueilously amplified by comparisons, and parables both fit and excellent
to this end, that we may be better persuaded of ye Lord, and his mercy as
David confesses, saying, The Lord is merciful, gentle, slow to anger, and of
great compassion. These are the very self same titles which God does attribute
unto himself in the place aforesaid, wherein his nature is described unto us,
because this matter concerns our salvation principally, for this thing is
showed plainly by his effects, in that he says, That he is not always
angry, etc. for seeing we be disobedient and rebellious unto him, and do not
give him such honor as we ought, yet he pleads not in his wrath against us,
for to have his right, and that which especially does pertain unto him, but
that which he does, he does by admonitions, reprehensions, threatenings of his
word, corrections: that her by he may punish the transgressors, and in this
manner it is said, that by the space of forty years, he striued in the
Wilderness with a stubber generation, an unthankful people of Israel, as the
Prophet witnesses in the 95. Psalm. verse. 10. Neither leaves he here, but does
the like with their posterity and offspring, in forbearing with their sins
and wickedness, as it appears in the first verse of the 4. Chap. of Hoseas, in
all which places he shows himself marvelous patient, when being Lord
almighty, and sovereign judge of all the earth, yet abaseth him self so much
as to contend and maintain his right against so poor and feeble creatures,
whom he might have destroyed and overthrown in a moment, if he had extended
his just judgment and severity against them, for although he might justly
complain of us at all times, and at every hour, because of our wickedness,
yet he is so merciful, that he chideth us not continually, but many times
demisseth all complaints and suites, and yields up his own right, because
his mercy endures for ever, neither does he correct us continually as we
deserve, neither is he angry with us for ever, and although he punish us for
our iniquities, yet not according to the custom of men, who suffer them selves
to be carried away, by the rage and strength of her violence and excessive
affections, but according to the reprehension and feeling of those, which he
strikes with his rod, and visits with his Plagues, if he seem to be
angry, it is for a time, it can not continue for ever, neither last long.
Wherefore they which be stricken by him, do truly feel it, and makes their
complaint unto God saying, why? do thou continue thine anger for ever? or
shall thy wrath burn against the sheep of thy pasture? Psalm. 74. How long Lord
shall thine anger continue without ceasing? Psalm. 79. verse. 5. But if we
consider the greatness and multitude of our sins, we shall find, that the
wrath of God is of small continuance toward us, seeing we be not consumed of
him, we may find him as we imagine sharp, whereas on the contrary, we shall
think him in his great and inestimable goodness freely to forgive us, after so
many sorts and fashions. For this cause it is said, that his wrath continues
but a short time, but in his favor rests life everlasting: Heaviness may
lodge with a man one night, but joy comes in the morning: as it appears by
this which follows. The church speaking unto God, by declaring his
everlasting mercy, that although he hides his face from them, and consumes
them because of their sins: yet in as much as they be the work of his own
hands, he will not suffer ^he City of his Sanctuary to lie waste. Esaias. 54.
For after that GOD had afflicted Israel by the Asserians, and troubled them ^y
the Madianites, by the Philistines, Moa^ites, and such other nations that knew
not him, he sufficiently shows, that he was angry against his people: yet in
that he raised up Judges, Heads and Captains, by whom he delivered the^ from
the hands of their oppressors, and gave them quietness and peace in the Land,
whereby he caused them to know that his indignation was past, neither did it
continue or last for ever: The captivity of Babylon was an evident testimony
of the wrath of God against the Jews: yet by the Commandment and Edict of
Cyrus he brought them back again into their country, and caused the people
to know that he had altogether ceased from his anger, and put away the
burning of his indignation, as he shows in the 85. Psalm. verse. 4. See how he
has quieted himself, and does not hold his anger for ever. But all this
which is spoken, touches the faithful only, as for the unfaithful, which do
not believe the wrath of God remaynes on them, as it is said. Ioh. Cha. 3. ver.
36. The third effect of Gods clemency, and the cheifest toward us is, that he
rewards us not acccording to our wickedness, neither corrects us according
to our sins, for the fruits and reward of sin is anguish, tribulation,
damnation, and death on every soul as it is written to the Romans Chap. 2. ver.
9. and Chap. 6. verse. 23. Then if God should punish us, and handle us according
to our deserts, we should be excessiuely afflicted, and continually in anguish
without end: yea, one should be already overthrown and destroyed, but in as
much as he spares and forbeareth us, defending us from so many perrils, and
delivering us from so manyfold dangers, and which is more, that he makes us
know that we be his, and adorneth us with all the gifts of his holy spirit,
and puts us in hope of life everlasting: he shows manifestly by these,
that he does not reward us according to our deserts, neither recompense us as
we have deserved. By nature therefore we do nothing but offend, yet for our
unhappiness he restores goodness again. Wherefore it is said, that there is
great mercy with the Lord, true it is, that sometimes he corrects us for
our wickedness, but never chasteneth nor puni^heth us according to our deserts:
no more then if he had not regarded them, or as they had never been committed,
seeing then that he remits and wholly forgiues us, by which it is said, that the
mercies of the Lord is over all his works, and his goodness reaches unto the
clouds, not that it ends there, for it can not be contained in the Heaven of
heavens, but because in this world nothing can seem higher then Heaven, which
is raised above the earth by an incomprehensible distaunce, as it is said in
the Psalm. 36. that the goodness of God reaches unto the heavens, therefore it
is added afterward, that it is excellent, it is over our heads, it does
ouerpasse our sight, it is altogether to be marueled at, this is the height,
the breadth, the deapth of the love of Christ, which is spoken of in the 3.
Chap. to the Ephesians. It is marvelous high and wonderful to behold, it reaches
to the deepes beneath, there is nothing which the spirit of man can Imagine to
be greater, but only Gods love and bounty toward us, who from the highest
Heavens, from his celestial and glorious throne vouchsafes to come to the
bottomless Pit of the earth, to draw us from it, and to make us ascende^
where himself abides, it scatereth it self here and there, in length
infinite, in breadth wonderful, so that among so many regions the people may
feel the virtue of it in their hearts by the holy ghost, and yet we must
know, that God never uses this clemency to them which show themselves
profayned and co^temners of his grace, but those which do fear him and
shows him honor and reverence, therein lies properly the greatness of the
bountifulness of the Almighty. This is again showed by a notable effect,
when it is said, that he casts from us our offenses: as for the wicked,
their malice does not remove, but remaynes still, lying even at the gate: as
the Lord speaks of the sin of Cain Genesis Chap. 4. ver. 7. concerning the
offenses of the faithful, although they be set before the^, and that they do
present them selves oftentimes before the eyes of ye soul: as it happened to
the Prophet, when he said, that his sins was continually before him. Psalm.
51. ver. 5. which is nothing unto them, but an exercise of true repentance, to
bring them unto humility, and after makes them more circumspect: yet
nevertheless, in respect of Gods mercy, they be all put away: for he puts
them far from him, scatters them abroad, and casts them behind ^im,
never to be remembered again. Which is showed by a comparison of the distaunce
between the East and the West, which is the farthest distaunce that can be
imagined under the Sun: even so then, as the East is far from the West, and
the West far from the East by a separation and great distance: even so far
GOD does cast all our sins away from us: yea so far, that they cannot be
perceived or no more appear, the^ that which is carried away from one end of
the world unto the other. And to confirm all that is spoken before, God is in
holy Scripture compared unto a father, which is merciful unto his children:
for as you see a father cover many of his sons imperfectio^s, neither uses
such rigor and severity toward them as he might, but spares them as much as
possibly he can. In like manner also, God (who is our great and celestial
father) is moved with all pity and compassion toward us, and ready to
forgive us all our sins: so that we fear to offend him, neither do abound
in our iniquities.

Psalm. 130. If thou O Lord should straightly mark our iniquities, O Lord who
should stand before thee: but mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared.
Let Israel wait on the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him
is great redemption, and he shall redeem Jsrael from all his iniquities. THere
is none of us, which are not in danger to fall into eternal ruin and
destruction, if God should look narrowly into our sins and offenses, to
examine them in severity, and execute a just punishment for them: for there is
no man that could stand before his tribunal Seat, nor be able to justify
himself by his own righteousness. Therefore David in his prayers and
supplications to the Lord, desires him not to enter into judgment with him,
as he had deserved. Psalm. 144. ver. 2. neither may this seem strange, or
spoken without special purpose, but it is the same in substance, which the
author of this Psalm speaks of here: which is done for our consolation and
trust, that forgiveness of our sins only comes from the Lord: neither does
he take any heed of them thereby to condemn us, but he shows himself
gentle, and merciful to us: which made the Prophet in conclusion to say, That
because there is mercy with God, therefore he should be feared. And that this
might not be done in himself only, he stirs up all sorts of men, and
every state and condition of nations to the due fear and true reverence of his
Majesty, thereby that high and low, rich and poor, one with an other might
wholly give themselves to serve him in thankfulness and heavenly melody: for
the more he powers on us his bou^tifull and merciful liberality, the more we
are bound to him, and ought to be much more desirous to serve him in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life. So that the forgiveness of our
sins is joined with the honor and glory of GOD, and our obedience, which
ought to follow his grace, not only particulerly, but also generally among
all true Christians. For, for this cause David does give certain assurance
unto the Catholic Church of GOD, under the name of Israel: saying, that the
Lord would deliver Israel from all his iniquities, and purge them from all
their sins: and although the Church be not without sin during the time that
it is in this earthly perigrination, but has wrinckles and spots subject to
many infirmities and transgressions, by whom it is as it were made captive and
brought into bondage: yet God will deliver it continually out of such misery,
and by his infinite mercy forgive it not some faults only, but all her
iniquities how great soever they be, and of what number soever. Upon this hope
then, the Prophet exhorts the Church to trust in the Lord, hoping in him in
time of oppression, when we are in distress and extreme affliction. In as
much as there is abundance of mercy with him, he wants no means to redeem
and draw his out of anguish and tribulation: his ways are infinite, he
needs no good affection, being inclined and given by his own nature to
clemency and mercy.

Esaias Chap. 1. ver. 18. Though your sins were as Crimsin, they shall be made
white as Snow: though they were made red like Skarlet, they shall be as wool.
THis is an excellent and comfortable promise, which God has made to his
ancient people, that of his mercy he has put all their sins out of
account, even as though they had never been committed: were they never so great
and filthy, yet Gods mercy is greater: and therefore they ought not to
despair. The Prophet declares the small honor they showed to God, and their
wonderful imperfections, when he gives unto them such opprobrius titles,
calling them rebellious Children, a generation of Vipers, a people altogether
given to iniquity, a wicked seed, base borne, corrupt children, yea, sparing
none, no not one: he says that they are all naught, from the greatest to the
lowest, from the head to the foot, both Priest and people, Magestrate and
subject are like to them of Zodome, and as the inhabitaunce of Gomorra, all
defiled with murder, and shedding of innocent blood: yet GOD does promise that
he will never bring their sins to account, be their iniquities never so
grievous and monstrous, as the comparison of colors, even of the red and
bloody color, of the Skarlet and Purple dye shows: yet the Lord will make
the^ as wool, yea, as white as the driven snow, then the which, what can be
whiter? Therefore the Lord sets down these words, to assure us, by fit and
probable similitudes, that although their sins were ripe, and as it were dyed
in grain, which will not easily alter or change the color: yet they shall be
no more remembered, nor once appear again before him, no more then the old
color is known which has taken on it a new dye: So all the filthiness and
infamy that was found in them shall be made very pure, and very clean. And
after this sort does ye Prophet pray, that if God would wash, purify, and make
him clean again from his sin, then he should be whiter then Snow, and
clearer, yea far clearer then the Crystal glass. Psalm. 51. ver. 9. And
although it may seem, that this promise was made particulary to the Jews: yet
notwithstanding it does appertain to us also, that hereby we might know,
that the mercy of God is no less toward us, nor his arm shortened in our
days: but rather more amply declared, and showed by the coming of his Son,
and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Esaias Chap. 43. ver. 25. I, even I am he that puts away thine iniquities for
mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins. ALthough our sins be as
they were written with a pen of Iron, and with a diamond point, and profoundly
engraven in the tables of our hearts, and in our souls, and noted by too much
appearance: nevertheless the Lord our God does certify us here, of the
forgiveness of the^, saying yt it is himself, which does blot, put out, and
raise them in such sort, that they are not to be perceived any more, neither
do they appear at any time before his face, no otherwise the^ if they had
never been committed, he I say blotteth them out, not for one day, nor for
certain months or years, or for some space of time prescribed or limited,
but continually and to the last gasp, which is showed by this phrase of
speaking, for this word to blot out, is a perpetual extinguishing of that,
which has bin manifested never to be in the like state again, whereby we may
learn, yt we have al need of his great grace, not for a time, but unto the
end of our life, yea so long as sin shall remain in us, for we are ever
molested and grieved, and therforefore have need of mercy, as it is declared
in the Romans. Chap. 7. verse. 23.24. and in that he says, that it is he
himself, which blotteth out our iniquities, he shows none other can do it
but he, neither is there any creature either in heaven or in earth, that has
such power either in themselves, or from themselves. Now then we must learn,
how this can be true, seeing it is said, that the Apostles and Shepherds of the
Church of God have received such authority to forgive sins, as in S. Math.
Chap. 18. verse. 18. and S. John. Chap. 20. verse. 23. but this is by reason of
their charge and ministry, and not that it belongs to them selves properly,
they may in deed remit the offenses committed, but by and in the name of the
Lord, to whom they be Herraltes and Ambassadors, it then belongs unto God
only to remit sins, for the which he will have us to be fully assured, in
considering that it is himself which does speak it, and which makes this
promise, even he, which is eternal and everlasting: even he, which is good and
full of mercy: this repetition and manner of speaking belongs to him, in that
it is said: I my self forgive sins to this end, that we may not in any wise
doubt, but therein wholly be persuaded by what means he is moved and stirred
up, for in blotting out our sins, he declares that it is for his name sake,
it is not then for any worthiness in us, nor in consideration of any deserts
of ours: Neither obtained by any Saints or indulgences found out by man's
imagination, but by his free bounty, according to that which David does desire
of the Lord, that according to his great compassion, he would blot out our
iniquities. Psalm. 51. verse. 3. He adds also for the confirmation of this,
that which is spoken before, that he will not bring our sins to account, not
that he is forgetful, for we must know, that all things be present unto him,
and before his eyes: but this is to show, that he will not bring them to
account, for to make punishment of them again.

Esaias. Chap. 44. verse. 22. I have put away thy tra^sgressions like a cloud,
and thy sins like a Mist, turn unto me for I have redeemed thee. FOrasmuch
as sin is nothing but filth and dirt, wherewith we be all infected and
abhominably polluted, behold God which says that he himself blotteth them
out, not in half, nor in some part, but wholly, and altogether: neither more,
nor less, but as a very thick and dark cloud, which by the abundance and
force of rain, and ouerflowing waters do take and carry away with them selves
the filthiness of the earth: so we when we be washed, and purified from such
filthiness, and faults, he will not have us return back again unto the mud,
there to defile our selves, but wills us to continue with him, setting us in
ye fair way and obedience, which does appertain unto him, not only by nature
and creation, but also by right of redemption, for he is our redeemer, and our
pledge, which has redeemed us, and keeps us against all enemies.

Mich. Chap. 7. verse. 18. Who is a God like unto the Lord, that takes away
iniquity, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his heritage, he
retains not his wrath for ever, because mercy pleases him, he will turn
again and have compassion, he will subdue our iniquities, and cast all our
sins into the bottom of the sea, thou will perform thy truth to Jacob, and
mercy to Abraham, as thou have sworn to our fathers in old time. Truly there
is none that may be compared unto God, either in gentleness, or in power: for
he and none other remitteth sin, and although he met a sinner in the way,
(because all things be present unto him) yet he will not stay himself to
punish, but depart farther of, as though he took no heed what is done, and
leave behind him the offense committed. By this manner of speech it is said,
that God casts our sins back from him. Esaias Chap. 38. ver. 17. yet only
to those which do properly appertain unto him, whom he does avouch and
acknowledge for his inheritance, and peculiar people, who are of that Church,
to whom he grants grace, from which all others be sequestered. And be it,
that sometimes he does anger himself, and his wrath be moved against his own
justly: yet it is not of long continuance, in so much that he is rather prone
to mercy and clemency, then to severity and rigor. And although he seem by
our offenses and vices to turn himself back from us, and to afflict us, as we
deserve: yet he will return again, and will show us the cherefull and
comfortable light of his countenance, in showing compassion on us, he forgiueth
all our sins, by putting down and destroying all the violence and force of
death: so that we are no more houlden in captivity and bondage, but made free,
and set at liberty by him, not by casting them on the ground only, but by
destroying, and delivering us from them, by throwing them into the bottom of
the Sea, that they may appear no more, but the memory of them pass away, as
a thing which is bound up and cast into the deepest Sea. And in this we see,
that he is not moved for any worthiness that is in us, but of his only
bounty and clemency, being gentle and full of mercy, slow to anger, and of
great goodness by nature, faithful in his promises which he made unto the
fathers, and confirmed by his oath, and in these latter times fulfilled the
bountifulness of his mercy in his only Son: who is the only pledge to
assure us of the forgiveness of our sins. And whereas the Prophet says that
God does not only forgive our sins, but passes them over, not by putting
them down only, but casting them into the bottom of the Sea, for to abolish
them wholly: it cannot be more plainly expressed or declared, how God forgiueth
us. Then, if in the time of the law and shadows, his promise was not in
vain: how much ought we now to be more certain of it under the kingdom of
Christ, by whom we obtain truth and grace?

The grace of GOD toward us, by means of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Jeremy Chap. 31. ver. 31. Behold the day is come, says the Lord, that I will
make a new covenant with the house of Jsrael, and with the house of Judah. J
will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be
their God, and they shall be my people: I will pardon their iniquities, and
will remember their sins no more. THis is the holy and happy alliance, that
we obtain with God by Jesus Christ his Son, by whom, albeit we be
sufficiently taught, and instructed in the knowledge of his truth, both in will
and affection to obey him, according to his commandments, yet we go
oftentimes astray, and do against his divine precepts, by the wickedness and
imperfections which remaynes in us: wherefore we have always need of his
grace, for the remission of our sins, in the promise which he has made unto
us, as we are taught in this place of Scripture: which although it was made in
the ancient covenant of the law wherein al things also are included, yet it
partaineth properly unto the new promise, obtained by Jesus Christ the very
Son of GOD, the sure foundation and perfect substance of our salvation: for
he is the mediator of the new Testament, as it is said in the Epistle to the
Heb. Chap. 9. It is he by whose desert all our sins are forgiven, which could
not be remitted by the outward figures, and vain shadows of the law.

Esaias Chap. 53. ver. 4. Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our
sorrows: he was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities:
the chastisment of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
The Lord has laid upon him the iniquities of us all, by his knowledge shall my
just servant justify many, for he shall bear their sins. AS God is by
nature gentle and merciful, so is he a severe and just Judge: for he leaves
not sin unpunished, but lays the punishment of it upon his only Son, who
in the fullness of time delivered him for us unto the shameful and accursed
death of the Cross, wherein his justice and mercy is found by joining both
together in an inseparable bond of unity. And first in that, that Jesus Christ
suffered for our iniquities: the other in that, that he was well pleased to
suffer his Son to be a pledge, and an atonement for us. This then the
Prophet teaches in this place, that Christ has suffered for us an infinite
number of greefes, torments, and punishments, as touching his soul: he
suffered a death full of shame and reproach in the world, to justify and
deliver us from damnation and eternal death, acquiting us from the wrath of
God. Seeing then, that in heart and affection we acknowledge him for our tru^
Savior and Redeemer, we need not to fear, although we shall perceive, and
acknowledge our selves to be guilty: yet we may be assured, that we are in
peace with God, because Jesus Christ our Redeemer has borne the pains due for
our iniquities. If Satan then do assail us by terrible imaginations of the
pains and torments, which we have justly deserved in respect of our
iniquities, let us present our selves in the righteousness and holiness of
Jesus Christ: for he has borne our greefes, and laid our sorrows on him: he
has been wounded, hurt, and murdered: he died for us which are unjust, and
rose again for our sanctification, to the end he might justify and absolve us.

Zach. Chap. 12. ver. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the
house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin, and for
uncleanness. THis is the fair and clear fountain of grace, the lively water
that flows to us by Jesus Christ, by the shedding of his precious blood,
which is opened to all those which are of the household of God, and made
Citizens of the heavenly and spiritual Jerusalem, which is the true Church
wherein they wash and purge their sins. Let us therefore go unto this lively
water, and into this life everlasting, where the one never stays running, and
cannot be dried up, nor the possessors of the other shall ever taste of the
second death: for this spring flows in great abundance, so that we shall be
washed fair and clean, be our iniquities never so foul and polluted.

Math. Chap. 11. ver. 18. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden,
and J will refresh you. THe admirable and bountiful love of the Lord Jesus is
in this place showed, in that he vouchsafes to help and succor those, which
be poor and in misery, he will not cast them away, neither send them to
others to make their moan and complaints: but he calls them himself unto him,
I say he, which is the very Son of God, the Lord of glory, calls those unto
him which are oppressed, and troubled in their consciences by the feeling of
their sins, and therefore promises to aid them, and give them rest, the
true tranquillity and happy quietness of the soul: Let us go therefore to
Jesus Christ our only Savior and redeemer: let us go in a true faith, and
earnest repentance, seeing he stretches forth his arms to receive us: seeing
he is sweet, gentle, merciful, of great goodness. Are we therefore heavy
laden with the burden of our sins? he will deliver us from the yoke and
servitude of the house of bondage. Are we over hayled, and tied by the tyranny
of sin and death? he will preserve us from the servitude of the one, and from
the deadly sting of the other.

John Chap. 1. ver. 29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins
of the world. THis is the testimony that John the Baptist witnesses openly of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who was ordained and sent of God to be the Lamb
(without fault, without spotte) which in former times was figured in sundry
Sacrifices of the law, yet more especially in the Passover or Lamb, which was
offered every day, morning, and evening for ye sins of the Priest, and people:
but this Lamb, when none was worthy to offer him up to his father, has
willingly offered himself, that by dying once for all, he might obtain
forgiveness of sins for all: and by this means he has brought us unto God
the father, that he might continually, not for once acquit, and deliver us
from our sins, which is showed more forceable, if we mark the word which
he uses (he does take away) which is declared in the time present, and that by
the merit of his death, which is always of one and the same virtue, and
perpetual efficacy, whereby we obtain our eternal redemption: as it is said
by the author to the Heb. Chap. 9. And this benefit being so precious and
great, serves not for one, or two only, neither for one only Nation, but
reaches over al people, and every Nation of the earth, as this word (world)
proves. Let us not then doubt that our sins are remitted by the death of
Christ, whose death should nothing avail us, if we should not receive the
fruit of it by faith in his promises, seeing that sin dwells in us
continually, as it is proved in the 7. Chapter to the Romans. Therefore we
receive pardon for them continually by him, who has brought us to the throne
of grace, where with boldness we may call his father abba our father.

Acts Chap. 5. ver. 31. This is that Jesus, which God has lifted up with his
right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and
forgiveness of sins. THe Empire and sovereign dominion of Christ is here
showed unto us by S. Peter, to the end, he might declare unto us the power and
spiritual liberty, which he bestows on his Church, meaning his people of
Israel: that is to say, that by him our sins are remitted, with change of
newness of life, promised to our eternal salvation. These two graces then
being joined together, can never be separated, that thereby none may doubt of
the obtaining of this excellent benefit purchased by the Lord Jesus: which
otherwise would pull back from his highness, and debate his power, who will for
these benefits be honored in word, and glorified in deed.

Acts Chap. 13. ver. 38. Be it known unto you, that through this man (our
Savior Christ) is preached unto you forgiveness of sins. THis place is like
unto the former, concerning the benefit purchased by Christ, by whom we
obtain forgiveness of our sins: a thing worthy of all men to be had in
memory, of the which every man ought to be certain, and resolved in the
assurance of his salvation.

Romans Chap. 5. ver. 8. God shows his love toward us, seeing that while we
were yet sinners Christ dyed for us, much more now being justified by his
blood: we shall be saved from wrath through him, for if when we were enemies we
were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much more being reconciled,
shall be saved by his life, and not only so, but also rejoice in God through our
Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have obtained reconciliation. THis is to assure
us of ye love and mercy of God toward us, and of our salvation, when we
consider what Christ Jesus has done for us, who being the Son of God, just,
and innocent, suffered so many torments for us unjust, and guilty, so that now
we are purged, and made clear of al our faults and iniquities: yea, we are
acquitted and absolved from the wrath and anger of GOD: who is wholly quieted,
peace being made between him and us by the reconciliation of the Lord Jesus,
who is the means, by the virtue of his death, and preserver of our life by ye
virtue and power of his dietie: for our life is hid in him, and our death is
buried in him: in him therefore all our glory consists, for there is nothing
wherein we may glory our selves, nor our works, but only in the great favor
and mercy of our God, and in the grace and mercy of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

John 1. Epist. 1. Chap. ver. 7. The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from
all our sins. ALthough we be guilty, and polluted with many sins, which
are in the eyes of the Lord stained and filthy: yet the holy Apostle does
assure us, that we are washed and purified from them, not by any counterfeite
water of man's fancy, nor by a feigned imagination of fire in Purgatory, in any
other world, neither by the blood of Martyrs, as some have falsely taught, but
only by the precious blood of the Son of God: which is of such efficacy, and
continual virtue, that he can blot out our sins perticularly how many soever
they be.

John 1. Epist. Chap. 2. ver. 1. If any man sin, we have an advocate with
the father Jesus Christ the rightuous, and he is the reconciliation for our
sins, and not for ours only, but also the sins of the whole world. THere
is none without sin, and consequently al are guilty before GOD: yet behold
the Apostle witnesses, that the Lord Jesus Christ does pray, and make request
for us: as it is said in the Epistle to the Romans Chap. 8. and to the Heb.
Chap. 7. which intercession between God and man was of such force and virtue,
that no others but he was found worthy and able to make us understand the
gentle and favorable goodwill of God the father: for he dyed for our sins,
and undertook to make an agreement and reconciliation for our misdeedes to
God: which excellent and worthy desert is not only restrained to some
particular person, but reaches to all generally, that all might perceive the
love of their Redeemer.

John 1. Epist. Chap. 3. ver. 10. In this are the children of God known, and
the children of the devil: whosoever does not rightly is not of God, neither
he that loves not his brother: and this is appointed a reward for sins. THis
place is like unto the place before rehearsed, containing more fully the love,
and mercifulness of GOD toward us, in that he has brought us again unto him
by his well-beloved Son, who gave himself for us.

Of faith in Christ, Ioh. Cap. 3. ver. 16. God so loved the world, that he has
given his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have life everlasting. THe beginning and first cause of our
salvation is in GOD, who in his mercy and fatherly love saved us. The second
is in Christ, who by the merit of his death and passion redeemed us: the only
instrument and means to obtain such great good is by faith in Jesus Christ,
which is of such virtue and efficacy, that by it man is reconciled unto God by
the free remission of sin: wherefore he cannot fall utterly in as much as he
is delivered from eternal death, and made partaker of an happy life.

John. Chap. 5. verse. 24. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my
words and believes in him that sent me, has everlasting life: and shall not
come into condemnation, but passes from death to life. THis is to confirm our
selves in the assurance we have in Christ, and in the certain persuasion of
his doctrine, when as we do understand that our faith resting in him, is not
founded upon a mortal man, but on the very and true son of God, wherefore
it is said that we are justified: that we are sanctified in and by the blood
of Christ Jesus. Romans Chap. 3. verse. 27. we be absolved from our sins,
neither can be condemned any wise, being so warranted by him, which is
eternal, by whom we obtain life and felicity, which continues for ever.

Romans Chap. 10. verse. 9. If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thy heart that God raised him up from death, thou shall be
saved. HOw easy the way of salvation is unto us, S. Paul shows in this
place, not using many words, neither sending us back to the profound and deep
secrets of almighty God, but gives us to understand, that by the grace of God
which is in us, we are saved if so be we hold fast the faith, not lightly in
the Brain, but rooted profoundly in the heart, apprehending perfectly Jesus
Christ: which once died for our sins, and rose again for our justification,
as it is in the 4. Chap. of this Epistle. And although the confession of the
mouth be required: which principally serves for an outward testimony, and a
manifest declaration of the hope which is in us, yet especially we must have
the heart line lie touched with a sure persuasion of faith, whose mouth will
not be stopped. Seeing that with the heart we believe: and with the mouth
declare our justification, and as the Prophet says in 116. Psalm. verse. 10. I
have believed, and therefore I have spoken.

Acts Chap. 10. ver. 43. To him do all the Prophets give witness, that through
his name all that believe in him might receive remission of sin. IT is the^
by the means of faith in Christ, that we do obtain forgiveness of sin if
so be we assure and rest our selves wholly upon the merit and intercession of
him, following the predictions and writings not only of the Prophets, but of
those also which have Prophesied in the unity of the same spirit, whereby we
attain fully all the promises of eternal life, by and through the means of
Christ Jesus, and let this be for a full confirmation of this Article.

Of Repentance.
FOr so much as the grace of God and salvation has appeared to al men, to the
end we might give over al unfaithfulness and worldly desires, and that we
should live justly in all christianity, seeing we be bought by the blood of
the immaculate La^be Jesus Christ, and therefore ought to be unto him a
peculiar people, given unto all good works, for this cause we must take great
heed, that we abuse not the great benignity and long sufferance of God, by
continuing in sin and iniquity, which is the only means to heap upon us
his wrath and vengeance to our condemnation. For whenever we err or fall
into sin, whether it be by the imperfection of our nature, or frailty of our
flesh (sufficient means to heap the burning coals of Gods severity upon us,
if in judgment he should stand against us) yet we must not defer from day
to day: but rent our hearts not our garments, and in earnest contrition of our
souls, and sincere repenting by confessing our miserable estate, and desirous
to be loosed from the heavy burden of our sins, show all duty and
amendment of life. For as saint Cyprian says, that the first degree of our
felicity, is to commit no sin: so the second is to acknowledge our sin
committed. Therefore whenever we fall (as who is not unclean in the eyes of
his Creator: And the righteous man sins seven times aday) yet we must not
lie groueling on the ground, but raise up our selves by faith in the promises
of God, and in the hope of eternal life, assuring our selves, that he will
receive us to mercy, and spread upon us his grace: for he is our Shepherd, and
we shall not want: he has placed us as a signet on his finger, and printed us
in the palm of his right hand, so that none shall be able to pluck us of, or
blot us out of his remembrance, but of his mercy he has regenerated us, and
made us partakers of the inward washing sealed into us in the outward Baptism,
and grafting us into the body of Christ by receiving us into his Church, never
to be hereafter excluded from his grace, and forgiveness of sin, though we
fall by infirmity into the same sin again: which may be a confutation of
the irronious and detestable opinion of the Nouations, renewed by certain
Heritickes in our time, but sufficiently reproved and condemned by the fathers
out of the word of God: For seeing the promises of God be made only for his
people and his Church, through grace and mercy unto them, which may appear in
the effects of the same, by notable example of worthy memory hereafter
declared, that if in the time of the Law and old Testament, GOD has showed
himself favorable toward those, which of good will have drawn themselves
toward him: how much more will he spread abroad the bright beams of his
mercy to us, under ye reign of his son Jesus Christ, by whom and through
whom he makes us free inheritours of the treasures of his grace. Let us see
now what declaration we have of these things in holy Scripture.

Deuteronomy. Chap. 4. ver. 30. When thou art in tribulation, and all these things are
come upon thee, if thou return to the Lord thy God, and be obedient to his
voice, for the Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will not forsake thee,
neither destroy, nor forget he swear to thy fathers to perform it. MOses
speaks in this place unto us under the person of the people of Israel, that
thereby we might make our selves sure, that if by the vanities of our mind
we commit Idolatry, and worship strange Gods, thereby corrupting our selves,
and deserving the wrath of our God upon us, by falling into diverse euilles and
calamities: yet if we repent, and be displeased with our selves in having
offended such a merciful GOD, and desiring to serve him hereafter in holiness
and righteousness all the days of our life, he will cease from punishing, and
perform his promises made in and by the meditation of his Son Christ Jesus.

Psalm. 51. ver. 19. The sacrifice of God is a holy spirit, a contrite and
broken heart, O Lord thou will not despise. THese are the words of David,
which he sets down as a pattern and example of a true penitent man,
stricken by the spirit of God, who declares unto us, that in the feeling of
his weakness and unworthiness, he is overcome, he is afflicted in his soul, and
sorrowful in his heart, complaining for his sins, watering his couch with his
tears, grievously pained lies groaning all the day long, he repents that he
has done amiss, he humbles himself before his God in Sackcloth and Ashes:
This is the man whose Sacrifice the Lord receives, whose broken and contrite
heart he never despises: who pleases him more then all the Sacrifices of the
Beasts yt have horns and houfes, then the offerings of their new Moneys, and
the gifts of high and proud hippocrites, then all the vanities of the
supersticious Idolatours, which think to honor and serve him with any faith
and repentance.

Prouer. Chap. 28. ver. 13. He that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he
that confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. THe holy Ghost does
certify us here, that although there can no evil happen unto him, which
humbles himself before God by acknowledging his sin, and that there is
grace, forgiveness and mercy offered to those which feel themselves guilty,
and acknowledge their transgressions, asking absolutio^ and deliverance by a
true ame^dment of life. I do think this place of Scripture principally to be
touched among the rest, because the holy Ghost of purpose sets it down to
comfort the penitent Sinner, which are very sorry that they have offended so
heavenly a father, who is of long suffering and compassion, who is in Scripture
named the God of all comfort and consolation: and therefore they will not hide
their sin, but confess it unto the Lord, who will heal all their
infirmities, and cleanse them from their sins: for the Lord is merciful unto
al such as call upon him, yea, al such as call upon him faithfully. Have thou
then been a blasphemer, a robber, a liar? Have thou given thy self to Usury?
Art thou covetous? Have thou been a Fornicator? an Adulterer? If thou leave thy
blasphemy, forsake thy evil doing, shun covetousness as a Serpent: if thou
fly from the paths of the strange woman, and the delicious pampering of the
belly: if thou flyest from evil, and do the thing that is good: if thou
abhorrest the bosom of the light woman, and the alluring bed of the Harlot:
doubt not, but thy sins be forgiven, the debt paid, the wrath of God against
thee is pacified by the sight of the Lamb which stands on the Mount. Hear
the wisdom of God, which says, he that leaves his sin shall obtain
mercy: Have thou then left thy wickedness? Art thou become a new man? Have
thou amended thy evil life? God will show thee mercy and compassion: we
need not to go far to seek proofs and testimonies of the grace of God
toward us, the very amendment of our life is an evident demo^stration of the
same, which the Prophet David felt in the 32. Psalm: when he says, then I
acknowledged my sin unto thee, neither did I hide mine iniquity: for I
thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness unto the Lord, and
thou forgauest the punishment of my fault. Therefore shall every one that is
godly make his prayer unto thee in a time when thou may be found: surely the
flood of great water shall not come nere him. Thou art my secret place, thou
preseruest me from my trouble, and compasses me about with joyful deliverance.

Esaias Chap. 55. ver. 7. Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, call upon him
while he is near. Let the wicked forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous
his own imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon
him, for he is ready to forgive. For my thoughts are not as your thoughts,
neither are your ways as my ways says the Lord. For as the heavens are
higher then the earth: so are my ways higher then your ways, and my thoughts
above your thoughts. ALthough by our offenses we estra^ge and withdraw our
selves greatly from God, he is nevertheless nere at hand if we draw our selves
from our evil and sinful life: if we be touched with a true repentance: if
we commit our selves unto him: if we call upon him with all our hearts, and
with all our souls, we may be sure he will be merciful unto us, as the Prophet
says. And although our sins abound, yet his mercy abounds much more:
though our iniquities (as we think) are infinite, and without pardon, not
esteeming the goodness and clemency of God, according to his greatness and
infinite mercies, but according to the weakness and frailty of our
understanding: yet we see that the Lord shows by his Prophet, that his
thoughts and his works do surpass all that is in us, or can come from us.
For although our sins were in number as the sand of the Sea, or as the
stars of Heaven: yet we know that he holds the Sea in his hand, and calls
the Stars by their names: for as the Heaven is in comparison of the Earth, so
are his mercies toward all that call upon him. Why should any then mistrust
the benignity of GOD, seeing he is so careful to assure us of the
forgiveness of our sins, whenever we do call upon him.

Exech. Chap. 18. ver. 21. If the wicked will turn from his sins, that he
has committed, and keep all my statutes, and do all that is lawful and
right, he shall surely live, and not dye: al his transgressions which he has
committed shall not be mentioned unto him. Have J any desire that the wicked
should dye, says the Lord, or shall he not live if he return from his
ways? Therefore return and repent you for your transgressions, so iniquity
shall not be your destruction. Cast away from you all your transgressions,
whereby you have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit:
for why will you dye O house of Israel. THe Lord in this place speaks not
directly unto the sinner, which falls by frailty and weakness of flesh,
but to the wicked, which of malice and cruelty has robbed and shed innocent
blood, who has oppressed the needy, and sold the poor for old shoes, who
has whined after his neighbors wife, and has been partakers with the
Adulterers: which have runned from Bethel to Dan, and from Dan to Bethel to
serve strange Gods: which have sacrificed of their own flesh to Molocke, and
have eaten the offringes of the dead: to these which ^^^nke sin as water, and
draw iniquity with cords: to these I say speaks the Lord, and tells them,
that if they do truly repent them of all their misdeedes which they have
committed, they shall never be imputed to them again, they shall be delivered
from them, and made partakers of eternal life, if his repentance be true, not
fained, but yields himself wholly to serve his God, though his obedience be
imperfect, and there be some want in him: yet he shall be washed in the
blood of the Lamb, by his wounds he shall be healed, and in his weakness he
shall be made strong: he shall be holy, because he which has called him is
holy. And in this respect are Christians called oftentimes just in holy
Scripture, though there be some imperfections in them daily to be seen, yet
this is showed to declare the wonderful and great bounty and clemency of God
toward us, that having offended him in breaking his ordinances, and so made
guilty of eternal death: yet that he vouchsafes to call us again unto him,
and to stretch forth his arm all the day long to take us up when we were
fallen, and exhorts us to repentance, and to newness of life, which is the
token and evident testimony of a true conversion and new regeneration by the
holy Ghost. And whereas he commands us to repent, adding a promise of life
and salvation, he shows that he would have us touched to the quick, and
truly sorry for our faults committed, with firm and steadfast purpose to live
better in time to come: so that here we may know what kind of man he is,
which shall not perish, but shall have eternal life, according to this promise.

Zach. Chap. 1. ver. 3. Return you unto me says the Lord of hosts, and J will
return unto you. HEre is an other exhortation to repentance joined with the
promise and reconciliation to God, very like unto that before.

Math. Chap. 4. ver. 17. Amend your lives for the kingdom of heaven is at
hand. THis is the first exhortation that the Lord made to the people of Israel,
agreeable to that where John Baptist admonishes every one to repentance and
amendment of life: which that they may ye better perform, he adds this
reason and promise, that the grace of God, the remission of sins, and the
reconciliation with God, is present and near to them by the preaching of the
Gospel, which is here called the kingdom of God: for by this means the
tyranny of Satan is destroyed and overthrown: the force of sin dead: the
kingdom of Christ gloriously extolled and lift up on hye, reigning in the
hearts of those, which by his spirit have felt the virtue unto newness of
life, a sufficient token to assure us in this life to be made partakers of his
inheritance in the life to come.

Math. Chap. 9.13. J am not come to call the rightuous, but sinners to
repentance. THis is the answer of our Savior made to ye Pharisees, who
finding themselves offended that he and his company did eat with Publicanes
and Harlots, with sinful and leaud livers, thought him a glutton and lose
fellow. For these men counting them selves only the people of GOD, erred and
corrupted themselves, in such a sort, that they accounted all other utterly
profayne. Whereupon our Savior Christ shows wherefore he leaves their
companies, who so much justified themselves, and betaketh himself and all his
to poor sinners, though they were wicked and evil in life, that by this
means he might draw them from their vice and iniquities, and bring them into
the right way. To those then, which do repent of their sins, appertains
the grace of God, for repentance is the very effect of the son of God, which
brings salvation unto all people.

Acts 3. ver. 19. Amend your lives therefore and turn, that your sins may be
put away. THose to whom Peter spoke in this place, had put and delivered to
death the holy and the just, the Prince of life, that is to say, our Lord
Jesus Christ: yet he exhorts the^ to a godly conversation of life, promising
that their sins shall be forgiven them, so that the grace of God is showed
forth to all men, whom the Lord counts by putting from them their iniquities.

Acts Chap. 5. ver. 31. This is that Jesus whom GOD has lift up with his
right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance of sins to
Jsrael, and forgiveness of sins. THis is spoken to this end, that the Lord
Jesus has brought us unto salvation by repentance, which is never separated
from the forgiveness of sin.

1. Cor. Chap. 7. ver. 10. Godly sorrow causes repentance to salvation. THe
profayne and wicked men continually do rejoice in their wickedness, and
harden their hearts in their sins, never ceasing till their accursed joy be
turned into weeping and gnashing of teeth, by the just and fearful judgment
of God, who casts all such into utter perdition: but they, which have the
fear of God, after that they have done amiss in any sort be greatly sorry
in heart, weeping and lamenting that have offended such a gracious God, and
always suffer extreme greifes because they offended him, in breaking his
commandments. The rulers which had the oversight of the church of Corinth,
being reprehended by S. Paul for their slouthfulnes and slownes, in not
acquitting themselves from the slanders, which was reported of them, had for
this thing such a displeasure and sorrow in themselves, that the Apostle
thought it commodious and profitable for their salvation. On which example he
draws this excellent and notable sentence, that the sorrow, which is
according to the will of God for offending him in neglecting the charge
committed to us, is profitable. And this is drawn by an usual fashion, to
bring the offender to repentance, and to induce a man into an ardent desire to
do better in time to come: which is the way and perfect means to come into the
port of salvation: for such a kind of repentance none ought to be
displeased, but rather be glad and rejoice for it.

Ioh. 1. Epist. Chap. 1. ver. 9. If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful
and just to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness. AS the
poor sick man ought to declare his disease to the Phisitio^, thereby to
receive help of his grief: even so ought we in like manner to acknowledge the
spiritual desire of the soul before God, not that he is ignorant of them, or
that he has need of any advertisement: but to this end, that we may bear
witness of our sorrowful repentance and humility, which shall never be
without forgiveness of sins, apprehending the promises of God, who infallably
will fulfill his works, being true and just in all his promises.

Of Prayer.
THe great and wonderful bounty of God is showed, when he vouchsafes to open
the heavens unto us poor wretched creatures of the earth, making us fit to
enter into his glorious kingdom, laying down his ear to hear and understand
our desires and requests, and exalting the prayers which we make to him in our
need, at such time as we be most poor and miserable, and in greatest danger:
but the care he has of us, and how much he loves us is seen in this, that
he himself warns and stirs us up, by teaching us to pray, with assurance
that he will grant us our requests, which he fulfilleth when we truly
require him of his grace, goodness, and mercy, whereof we have manifould
testimonies in the word of GOD, which we will set down as worth the noting.

Psalm. 50. ver. 15. Call upon me in time of trouble, and I will help thee,
and thou shall honor me. ALthough the time when in our souls we are afflicted
by feeling our sin, or otherwise be in tribulation or pain, or some perrill
or danger: may threaten us that our God is offended with us, and will destroy
us: yet he promises us by the Prophet David to deliver us from all evil, if
so we honor him, and earnestly desire in our prayers to have him our aid, and
refuge in our trouble.

Psalm. 145. ver. 18. The Lord is near to all that call upon him, yea to all
that call upon him in truth, he will fulfill the desire of those that fear
him, and will hear their cry and save them. ALbeit sometime it may seem that
God should be far from us, in that he does not so visibly appear unto us,
as he is wont, yet we may be sure that he is not far of, if with our whole
heart and affection we pray unto him, if we be moved by the fear and
reverence of his name, to obey him: if we call upon him in this sort, he
will exalt us, and will deliver us from all our sins.

Psalm. 6. ver. 1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in
thy heavy displeasure: have mercy upon me for I am weak, O Lord heal me
for my bones are bruised: my soul is sore troubled, but Lord how long will thou delay. Return O Lord deliver my soul, save me for thy mercy sake: for
in death there is no remembrance of thee, and in the grave who shall praise
thee. FOr as much as David says in the 34. Psalm, that the eyes of the Lord
are upon the just, and his ears are ready to hear their moan, in harkening
unto them when they cry, and delivering them from al their tribulations: and
least some men might think, that poor sinners are cast away from God, and he
will not vouchsafe to hear their requests, we hear the Prophet David praying
unto him, not as a just man, but as one feeling himself greatly guilty of his
infirmities, as it is plainly showed in the 38. Psalm: of the like sort also is
it when he confesses his iniquities to have overwhelmed him, which like a
burden is heavier then he is able to bear: For all this, yet he testifies
that although he were poor and miserable, by reason of his sins, yet God had
accepted his prayers, and taken pity and compassion on him.

Psalm. 86. ver. 3. Be merciful unto me O Lord, for J cry unto thee
continually, rejoice the soul of thy servant, for unto thee O Lord do I lift
up my head. For thou O Lord art good, merciful, and of great kindness to all
them that call upon thee. David being in calamity, desired of God to be
restored in his soul, putting the assurance of his prayers upon the natural
love of God, who is by nature gentle, and merciful, according to his promise:
yea, he is the very self same foundation, upon which the poor afflicted ought
to comfort and rejoice themselves in heart and soul, and by fervent prayer
unto God be delivered from their iniquities.

Joel Chap. 2. ver. 32. Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be
saved. AS faith is never without repentance, so it cannot be without help,
goodness, and sovereign power of God, by calling upon him according to his
promises, to the end we may get his favor and grace, which is here promised
unto us, as a consolation and comfort in the greatest misery and affliction
that we have: whosoever then of what condition or estate he be, whether rich
or poor, great or small, that does acknowledge his omnipotent and infinite
power, if he humble himself before his Majesty, and heartely pray him for
mercy, let him assure himself that he shall be exalted, and that God will be
favorable unto him.

John Chap. 16. ver. 23. Verily, verily J say unto you, whatsoever you shall
ask my father in my name he shall give it you, ask and you shall receive,
that your joy may be full. THis is the Son of God our Savior Christ which
speaks, and makes us certain that our prayers are exalted: not for our own
worthiness, but by his favor: not by the desert of any creature either in
heaven or earth, but in and for his sake only, who is our advocate and
redeemer. Upon this confidence he does warn and teach us to pray unto his
father with this promise, that we shall never be sent empty away, but after
this mortality has put on immortality, this corruption shall put on
incorruption: we shall be received into joy and consolation for ever.

Ion 1. Epist. Chap. 5. ver. 14. This is the assurance that we have of GOD,
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he will hear us. And if we
know that he hears us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we shall obtain, that
we have desired of him. WE cannot be in doubt when we come to God in our
prayers grounded on his commandments and promise, but that we shall be heard
and receive such things as we want, which condemns those men that call upon
strange Gods: yea, on those which are no Gods, and pray to those which are
departed out of this life, who can have no certainty of their prayers. But we
must be certain, that GOD does hearken unto us when we pray to him, as we
are taught in his holy word: for he has promised to give and grant us such
things as we ask him, being necessary and conformable unto his will, which are
the means whereby he uses to do us good, and to give us his grace in full
and convenient time.

Romans Chap. 8. ver. 26. Likewise the spirit also helps our infirmities, for
we know not how to pray as we ought, but the spirit makes request for us
with sighings, which cannot be expressed, but he which searches knows what
is the meaning of the spirit, seeing he makes requests for the Saints
according to the will of God. AS by the holy Ghost we are lead to the true
knowledge of our salvation: so by it we are made certain of the same, being
the seal and earnest of our inheritance, which testifies with our Spirit,
that we be the sons of God in that we hate all evil, and on the contrary
take pleasure in the laws of the Lord. For it is the Spirit which comfort
us in our affliction, and strengthened us in our weakness, in making us bear
patiently the burden of our tribulation and adversities: in so much, that our
affections being at variance among themselves, and many times slow to prayer,
are yet stirred up by the holy Ghost, who teaches us to stay our selves upon
the promises, that we are to ask of God with desire and earnest affection of
heart, which cannot be declared in words. By this means are our prayers
exalted to God, and accoumpted just and reasonable, being made by the holy
Ghost, which is the Spirit of God, God who acknowledges and accepts that
which is his, and proceeds from him by giving us deliverance, and adiudge us
unto salvation. Seeing then that our prayers ought to be ordered according unto
the will of God, and done in such sincerity and singlenes of heart, we may
comfort our selves in the virtue of his grace, and operation of the holy Ghost.
To this is added that, which the Apostle teaches in this Chapter, that by the
spirit of adoption we may boldly cry abba father. In this manner then ought
we to ask in faith, and certainty without doubting, (as S. James exhorts
us) being founded upon the assurance, that we have of the fatherly goodness
of God toward us, by the holy Ghost.

Parables, and similitudes of the grace and mercy of God toward poor
sinners, which do repent them selves.
IT is manifest not only by all the sayings which heretofore are showed, and
other places of holy Scripture to the same purpose, touching the grace of God
proffered unto us by the forgiveness of our sins: but also by certain
Parables and Similitudes, which serve us as promises, and which our Savior
Christ has used for our comfort: as we may read in the 15. of S. Luke. The
first is of the Sheep that went astray, and was lost in the wilderness, whom
the Shepherd seeks earnestly, and finding it, takes it upon his shoulders,
brings it home, and rejoices more over that one, then for the nintie and
nine which he had: in like sort (says our Savior) is it in Heaven, for one
sinner that repents him self. Has sin then deceived thee? has it carried
thee away from the flock of Christ, and made thee stray from the right path?
Art thou in the midst of a Desert, in danger of a roaring Lion, the enemy to
thy salvation? Withdraw thy self betimes, and recant of thy straying, and go
to thy flock, least thou perish utterly: return unto thy sovereign
Shepherd Jesus Christ, which will be gentle unto thee, neither stand in
doubt but that he will receive thee, if thou return to him, seeing he goes
seeking and calling those which go astraye to bring them into his fould: and
when thou art returned be not afraid, but be sure of thy salvation, and
rejoice, for the Angels in heaven rejoice for thee.

Luke. Chap. 16. ver. 18. As a woman which has lost a piece of silver, after
she has found it again rejoices: so does the Angels of God for a sinner
which does repent. ALthough we lose our selves by our own fault, and be
guilty of our estraying from God: yet for all this he houldeth us so dear and
precious, and has such care of us, that he will never forget us, but provides
for our salvation, brings us to himself, keeps us as his own, even as
though he should keep some excellent treasure: for which the celestial and
heavenly Angels do sing for joy and gladness.

Luke Chap. 15. ver. 11.12. BY the goodness of the father toward his
prodigal son, our Savior shows the great clemency of God our celestial
father toward poor sinners, which convert themselves unto him. If by the
lightness and foolishness of our minds, and by the vanities of our hearts we
have abused the goodness of God, either temporally or spiritually, and by our
own means are drawn from his commandments in slothful and dissolute
life, and so fallen into confusion, by feeling our poverty and misery? let us
not fear to turn again to our God with true humblenes, acknowledging our
misdeedes, seeing he is gentle and merciful, he will receive us as his
children, he will clothe us with his benefits and spiritual graces, with all
joy and mirth.

By the Parable and Similitude of the Publicane, acknowledging himself a poor
sinner, standing a far of, and thinking him self unworthy to lift up his
eyes to heaven, striking his breasts, and bewayling that he had neglected the
mercies of God: our Savior makes us certain, and persuades us of the
justification and mercy for our sins, if truly we feel our selves guilty:
if we be beaten and humbled in our hearts: if we have a true displeasure, and
are sorry that we have offended our God: if we be so touched, we shall find
him gentle and quiet toward us.

Worthy examples touching the great mercy of God toward poor sinners.
ALthough many promises and excellent proofs be here set before us, as
sufficient to quiet the conscience of every one: notwithstanding it shall be
needful to set forth some examples, for more certainty and confirmation of
the same, seeing that such examples and instructions do stir us up the more
to consider better of the matter. Wherefore, as in our first father Adam sin
began to appear: so in him also God showed the first token of mercy, when he
saw him lost and fallen into death, he was careful to raise him and set him up
again, his clemency he showed there to be so much the greater, and his
goodness declared it self so much openly: for after he had done so much good,
and showed him such favor to create him after his own likeness, having
committed to him the sole authority and dominion of all things which are under
heaven, only aduertising him to obedience, which he ought in truth to have
performed: yet among all these things so easy, he lends his ears to the
craftiness of Satan, rather then to the voice of his God, and at the length
fell into infidelity and unthankfulness toward him: yet he left him not, nor
gave him over in such euilles, but goes after him, although he had despised
and offended him so much, neither stays he till Adam came to seek him: yea,
the Lord goes first to find him, not to avenge himself, or to chide him by
hard reprehensions, as in good right he might do, but to bring him to the
knowledge of his sin, and to give him help for his salvation. Oh the
goodness of God, how marvelous and how wonderful are his doings, his mercy
is excellent and great: for who knows not that where iniquity abounds,
there his grace abounds much more.

The sin of Lot was no light sin in committing incest (without thinking on
it) with his own daughters, yet God had mercy on him, (as S. Peter
testifies) calling him a just man, not in respect of the abominable deed,
but because of the grace of God which showed it self in him, for ye just works
and godliness, that were in him all his life time.

Jacob has not been guiltles, for defiling himself by incest with his two
wives being sisters: yet God ceased not to continue his grace and favor
toward him, following the promise made to his posterity for ever.

The xij. Patriarks the children of Jacob, are accused for many diverse great
faults and misdeedes: as Ruben the first borne defiled his fathers bed with
Bilha one of his Concubines. Judah did the like with Thamar his daughter in
law, and although he knew her not, yet he is not excused.

Simeon and Leuy, showed themselves altogether unfaithful, disloyal, cruel,
and bloody in the murder of the Shechimites. The other brethren moved with
wrath, and fed with hatered, were like murders on Joseph their younger
brother, they were so impudent and without humanity, that they cared not to
afflict their old father, by making him think that some wild beast had
devoured his son and their brother Joseph: notwithstanding, for all their
misdeedes, God has been merciful and blessed them.

The sin of Aaron is in no wise to be excused, although he had this honor of
God to bear his word with his brother Moses to the people of Israel, and
before the King of Egypt, being ordained an high Priest, a ruler of his Church
in the service was instituted by the law: yet he became so slothful of so
small courage, that he suffered himself to be guided by the affection of the
blind people, ignorant, and supersticious, and not only consented to them in
their wicked interprice, but he himself became a workman and founder of their
Idol, and a minister to their Idolatry, setting up the Alter, and appoynting
a feast to be solemnized for the service of their Calfe: for which Moses his
brother reproved him very sharply, as though he had been only the cause of
this evil: for he had by this means destituted, and disapointed the people of
the grace of God, who was ready to give them over into the hands of their
enemies: as we may read in Deuteronomy. 9. Chap. verse. 22. Yet his wrath was
pacified, neither ceased he to continue his goodness toward him, but raised
and established him to the office of the high Priest.

It happened also that afterward he committed a great fault, when he contented
not himself with the great office of the high Priest, which was granted him
and his sons for ever, but envied his brother Moses, accusing him as an
usurper, in taking on him the government of the people, for which he esteemed
himself as worthy as Moses was. For which cause, though ye Lord was angry
against him, and his Sister, and stroke them with Leaprosie for the space of
seven days, (a just punishment for such a quarrel) yet he used so great
clemency toward them, that his wrath went no farther, and healed them.

After that David had concealed his flight from Saul unto Abimilecke, and
reporting not the truth, was some cause yt 85 Priests were put to death by
the commandment of Saul, their towns were destroyed and sacked, and all the
dwellers therein passed on the edge of the sword, both men, women and
children. Afterward being placed in the Crown by the singular grace of God,
who had delivered him from so many dangers, and made him happily to reign,
and fought so many worthy victories, conquering all Gods and his enemies in
the land, made them tributaries to him: yet when the Soldiers fought against
the Ammonites, and besieged the City of Rabba, the Ark of the Lord being in
Camp, he began to live in ease and pleasure, remaining quietly in Jerusalem,
at which time he committed adultery with Bethsabeth, not by the infirmity of
the flesh, as if had not other means to satisfy his incontinencie, and to
quench the heat of his lust: but by a disordered desire, which made him commit
whoredom with his Subjects wife: and this also made his sin much more
grievous, considering the time wherein he should have bestowed him self in
prayer for the good estate of his kingdom, and the Ark of God: neither was he
so satisfied, (but cloked sin with sin) for he caused Vrias his faithful
subject to be murdered by the enemies of God, thereby to cover the sin of
adultery: but after he knew his sin, and God had received him to mercy,
he repented him of his misdeedes, and received grace and favor from the Lord.

Great and filthy were the sins of Manasse the King of Judah: for he builded
up the high places that his father Ezechias had plucked down, and worshipped
the Planets as the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars, and profaned the walls
of the Temple with the Alters that he caused to be built, following all the
abominations of the Gentiles, he burnt his sons in the fire looking himself
on them: he received Sorcerers, and familiar Spirits: he used Witchcraft, and
set up graven Images in the house of God, expressly against the commandment of
the Law: neither did he this himself, but caused the people also to go astray
and do the like: and which is more, he rejects the atonement which was made
unto him and his fathers, but gave himself more and more unto evil, and sold
himself altogether to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord: he shed in
Jerusalem much innocent blood, and put to death, those which did reprove him,
because they would not frame themselves according to his abominations. For
these things the wrath of GOD was kindled against him, in so much that he was
overcome of the Asserians, and lead captive to Babylon bound with chains: but
being there in anguish, he humbled himself to God, confessing that he had
been wicked, cruel, and abominable: at whose complaint God had mercy on
him, delivered him from such miserable bondage, caused him to return to
Jerusalem, and set him in his kingdom again, who being thankful to his God
for his goodness, took away the strange Gods, pulled down the Alters, and
established the pure service of GOD, with a straight commandment to all his
people to observe it, giving in this a full testimony of his true repentance
and conversion to God: by this we have an example, and evident apparent sign
of the infinite mercy of GOD toward us poor and miserable sinners, to this
end, that none despair in his sins how great and filthy soever they be:
for (as I have showed out of Gods word) where sin abounds, there grace
abounds much more.

It was a great and filthy offense, when many of the high Priests and Levites
in the time of the Captivity, and when the wrath of God was spread over them,
and over all the people because of their iniquities, who never thought on their
transgressions, nor sorry for their sins, in turning to the Lord by a true
repentance, but forgot what he had commanded them, and took strange wives,
lincking themselves to strange people, betrothing their sons and daughters
in marriage, and mingling by this means the holy seed with profane people, a
thing generally forbidden to all the people of GOD, Deuteronomy. 7.3. but especially
prohibited in Leuit. 21.14. Yet when Esdras a sovereign high Priest, a Scribe
of the law, a rightuous man understood this disorder and confusion, he was very
sorry, and greatly offended, making lamentation before GOD for it. The people
also were taken with fear and trembling, acknowledging their faults, and by
the commandment of Esdras, sent away their strange wives with their
children, making certain Offringes in respect of their sins, and so the
bounty and mercifulness of God remained among them.

There was a woman says S. Luke in the 7. Chapter of the Gospel, which was of
evil life, who having cast her self at the feet of Jesus Christ weeping,
received of him such joy and consolation, to assure her self that her sin
was forgiven her though they were never so great.

There was also says the self same Euangilist in the 19. Chapter, a man
called Zacheus, who was a principal Master of the Custom, rich, and of a
wicked life: yet when Jesus promised to lodge with him, he showed that he was
come to seek and save that which was lo^^, by which means this poor sinner
was received into grace, with a true repentance, and goodwill to satisfy
again the hurt which he had done to others.

I pray you behold the fall of S. Peter, it is an example to every one, who
being one of the twelve Apostles and Doctors of the world, brought up in the
knowledge of the Lord, by seeing his wonderful miracles, and being one of the
three witnesses which saved his glory in the Mountain, promised never to
forsake him, neither in prison or in death: yet his infirmity was so great,
and so fearful, that he not only forsook him, but forsware him three times:
yet the Lord in mercy had compassion on him, and beheld him though he had
made himself unworthy of the honorable office whereunto he was ordained: but
repenting and weeping in tears, was one of the first which was called unto his
office, and fitted with the gifts of the holy Ghost, to be a servant and
faithful witness, a courageous and valiant Martyr of Jesus Christ.

The unhappy and wicked man, which for his misdeeds was hanged on the Cross,
had his recourse unto Jesus Christ in the time of death, and was not cast away
but received into joy and consolation, with promise, that after his death, not
after many years, or some space of time, or after he had been in the forged
fire of Purgatory, but presently when he should end this mortal life, he
should be with Christ in Paradise.

He was truly execrable, which was cut of from the number of the faithful by
the Church at Corinth, because against all honesty and ciuility, he did
entertain and uncover the nakedness of his fathers wife: for which cause,
although he well deserved to be delivered to Satan, excommunicated, and
utterly cut off from the mystical body of Christ: yet the Apostle S. Paul
seeing his repentance, and understanding the punishment which the Church had
laid upon him, used clemency and compassion, neither would have the man to
suffer any greater severity, but to have some regard in comforting him, for
fear he should be swallowed with too great sadness. See here what examples
the holy Ghost sets forth in holy Scriptures, as pure and clear
testimonies, to prove the great and inestimable mercies of God toward poor
sinners, which do convert themselves with all their hearts, without
dissimulation unto him, by a true repentance and amendment of life. These
examples be of some force to those whom God has received lately unto the
communion of his grace, when as he made a way unto the Gentiles, and called
them unto his Church: All those then, which have been before named were of the
people of God, and of his house: of which, some have sinned against the first
Table: others against the second: others against both by monstrous misdeedes:
some have robbed: some murdered, and done dissolutly. Some have committed
Adultery, Fornication, and Incest. Some Apostaties, Idolators, and reuolters
from the truth. Some given unto Witchcraft: all they nevertheless have been
received into the mercy of God. O the wonderful love of the Lord, how
excellent and full of compassion is he? Who would not be ravished to behold
his steadfastness? Who would not trust in him to rejoice and comfort himself
in his mercies? who is a strong hold for the poor afflicted, a refuge for
those that be amassed and desolate, a comfort to those which are in calamity,
ye whole hope of the poor. It is thou O Lord, which do surmount all our
iniquities, thou swallowest them down, and bring them to nothing, by
acquitting and delivering us from them. Is there any then that feels himself
guilty of any great fault, or any sin committed after they have bin
instructed in their salvation, occupying a place in the Sheepe-fould of the
Lord? let him not despair in the clemency of God, seeing he has here fair
examples before his eyes to follow for his comfort.

Seeing then it is so by so many places of holy Scripture, and by the promises
of God by good examples, lively exhortations of the grace and mercy of God
offered to us presently, and set forth by the love of his beloved son our
Lord Jesus Christ: let us be certain and full assured, that if we believe
and truly repent, and call upon him with a true heart and affection, he will
be pacified with us, what offense soever we have committed, he will wholly
forgive us. This is then the consolation in mine affliction, for thy word O
Lord has quickened me. Psalm. 119.

FINIS.

