The rooting out of the Romish Supremacy.

Wherein is declared, that the authority which the Pope of Rome does challenge
to him self over all Christian Bishops and Churches, is unlawfully usurped:
contrary to the express word and institution of our Savior Jesus Christ: who
did give equal power and authority to all the Apostles, Bishops, and
Ministers of his Church, whereof he is the true corner stone, and only head.

Set forth by William Chauncie Esquire. AT LONDON, Printed by H. Middleton, for
John Perin. AN. 1580.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and his singular good Lord, the Lord Robert Dudley,
Earl of Leycester, Baron of Denbigh Knight of the most Honorable orders of
the Garter, and of Saint Michell, Master of the Queens Majesty's horses, and
one of the Lords of her highness most honorable Privy Council. William
Chauncy Esquier, wishes prosperous continuance of health, long life, and
honor, with increase of the grace, and all blessings of Almighty God.
IT is very well known, and very worthy to be considered, how the
transgression and breaking the commandment of Almighty God by our first
parent Adam, in Paradise, did so vehemently displease the Lord through
disobedience, and so greatly infect al mankind with sin, that Adam lost
thereby, not only his Angelical estate of innocence, but also the most blessed
joys of paradise, from the which he was driven out into this worldly vale of
misery, therein to get and eat his food with the sweat of his face, Genesis
3.19.
as God did him command. Whereof it came to pass, that his two first
naturally begotten sons of Eua his wife, the Elder named Caine, and the
younger Abel, being the two first brethren in this world, who therefore should
most singularly and entirely have loved each the other above al other creatures:
yet the infection of their Father Adams sin wrought so, that because Abels
oblation to God dutifully made, was of him well accepted and Cains oblation was
not regarded, Caine therefore did so much hate and envy his brother Abel, that
when they were in the field, Genesis 4.8.
he maliciously fell upon and did wilfully murder him, of whom he never was
offended. This malice and sinful envy of Cain, has ever since that time so
cleaued to man's nature and infected all mankind, that no excellent work or
deed can be lightly done by any man, but some other straightways are ready
through envy to despise it, and speak reprochfully of it. Yea, not so much as
the singular and famous learned in divinity, or in any other knowledge of
commendable arts, can set his pen to the book for the devising or setting
forth of any work to the advancement of the glory of God, and benefit of his
Church, but some there are, who moved with malice and envy, by writing or
speaking will hinder and deprave it to the uttermost of their powers, as by
plain experience in all Christian kingdoms has been, and is showed, daily,
too manifestly, to the whole world. How greatly then, right honorable, ought
I, being not brought up in any University, nor instructed in the arts of
Logike and Philosophy, be abashed to take upon me to set down in writing
this my simple collection out of the Scriptures, and other laws, and
histories: to be thereby made by some others a mock and a gasing stock to
evil disposed persons? Wherefore, had not your honor so earnestly required to
have a copy of it, whereof my promise being past I might not deny it:
otherwise truly it should never have gone further, but have still remained in
my own hands, for the only putting of my self in memory of the things
therein gathered, as it may appear by the simple doing of it. But to present
it to you, this also made me the bolder, that I know your Lordship is of so
Noble a nature, and courteous conditions: that you will be a patron and
defender of it against all malicious and envious persons, which hereafter shall
endeavor them selves by word or writing to defame and slander it. I present
it therefore unto your Honor, according to my promise: committing it wholly to
your honorable protection, as unto one most worthy of it, for your true
favoring of Gods holy word, for setting forth of his glory, for mainteyning
the doctrine of his only son our Savior Jesus Christ, and the suppressing
of the Romish vain and superstitious traditions and abuses. The which your
godly virtues are joined together with singular affability, justice.
clemency: specially in forgiving of injuries. Which appears by that you have
not sought or wrought reuengement, or hinderance of any body for any wrongs
don, either to your own person, or to your noble progenitors, at any time since
you have been in great authority under our prince, and right able to have
revenged them: but gently and quietly have borne al such things with great
mildenes, and without opprobrious rebukes and rehearsals of them, made to any
person, as far as ever I could hear of, or learn. Wherein your great
modesty, and magnanimity, has so much redounded to your immortal fame and
honor, that I may right well therefore compare you with the right noble
Germanicus Caesar, Lieutenant unto the Emperor Tiberius over all Italy. Who
during the time of his Lieuetenantship, did behave himself so gently and
uprightly to all men, that he seldom entered into the City of Rome with out
great peril and danger of his life, by reason of the throng and press of the
multitude of people, which gathered about him, for very love and desire they
had to see, and welcome him to the City. These excellent gifts and qualities
of that noble man Germanicus Caesar, I say, can no more stain or blemish your
most noble virtues before touched: then the burning candle is able to dim or
darken the clear bright shining son, at the noone day: whereof I my self
(in the time of my great adversities, thorough most injurious vexations and
troubles of some envious persons) have felt and tasted, to my great comfort and
relief, as I can not but remember as long as I live. For the which I can but
pray, as I do heartily, to almighty God, and wish unto your honor the same
blessing, that he promises to the just and righteous man, by his holy prophet
David: Psalm. 91.16.
Longitudine dierum replebo eum, and ostendam illi salutare meum: Which
blessing of long life and assurance of salvation from almighty God, how
heartily I wish unto your honor, I have given testimony by presenting unto
you this my little work, set forth for the utter rooting out of the usurped
Romish Supremacy out of all the Church of Christ, chiefly out of this Church
of England: and also for the declaring of the most true perfect equal
authority, given by our Savior Jesus Christ, to al his Apostles, his Bishops,
and godly ministers of his word and sacraments, within his true Church, whereof
he is the only head and chief corner stone. Which things I my self have been
ignorant of, until it has now within these three years pleased God to give me
his grace to read his holy scriptures, and other good authors, and Doctors of
his Church, to my great comfort and consolation. Whereby I was stirred up to
gather, in this little treatise, these things which moved me to see and know
the truth: that if it were Gods will they might do some good to the
instruction of others also, to the only glory of his son our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, who have your honor always in his gracious protection.

May. 1580. Your good Lordships most humble at Commandment William Chauncy.

To the Christian Reader.
THe most excellent thing that Almighty God has given to mankind, is the
knowledge of the truth, the treasure of his wisdom, expressed in his holy
scriptures. For without it we can neither know God, nor Jesus Christ his son
our Savior and Redeemer, who says of him self, Ego sum via, John. 14.
veritas, and Vita. I am the way, the truth, and the life: and no man comes
to my father but by me: and he that knows me, knows also my father. But the
knowledge of this truth, which lightneth our minds with the faith of God, and
of his son Jesus Christ, by his holy word, delivered in the Scriptures, has
been many hundred years covered and hidden, from the most part of all temporal
men, as they are called: yea from mighty Emperors, Kings, Princes, and
Magistrates of this world, through the crafty practices of the Bishops of
Rome. Who to extol themselves and their Clergy, above all Emperors and
princes, have by wicked policy, hidden and withdrawn from them, and from all
Christians, the sacred Scriptures contained in the old and in the new
Testamentes, that thereby the detestable pride of the Bishops of Rome and their
Clergy, might not be known to men, least they should perceive how far they
did vary from the example of Christ, and the humble godly lives of his
Apostles and disciples, of Bishops and ministers, for the space of vj. hundred
years after the church was planted by our savior Christ. So that it came to
pass, that the Bishops of Rome raged and reigned like Gods upon the earth, and
no temporal prince durst as much as look upon the word of God, nor have any
books of the holy scriptures, least they should have been excommunicated for
heretics.

An ungodly policy, devised of them, to the intent, yt their deuelish pride
and intolerable ambition might not be reformed by ye doctrine of Christ: which
is most contrary to their usurped authority and supremacy, which they have
challenged and used, since the time yt the Emperor Phocas, more then six
hundred years after Christ, did grant unto Boniface the third of that name, the
title and authority of universal Bishop over all other Bishops: a thing most
contrary to our Savior Christ's institution and commandments. Wherefore,
gentle Reader, to the intent, that good Christian people should be no longer
abused and deceived, through the crafty practices of the Bishop of Romes
decrees and counterfeit gloses, whereby he has usurped his most unjust
authority and title of supremacy, with which he has almost blinded all
Christian people and kingdoms: I have in this treatise briefly declared the
truth of our Savior Christ's two co^missio^s, given jointly to all his
Apostles, in such manner, that they should be in like authority and power,
not one above the other in any degree. I have also showed how earnestly and
straightly Christ did forbid all superiority and dominion to be amongst
the^, which I have approved both by the holy Scriptures, and by Godly ancient
writers. I have noted farther, what account was made of the Bishop of Rome in
the four first general Councels, even the same which was made of other
Bishops of the chief Sees, in Egypt, in Asia, in Greece and other provinces.
I have declared, when this usurped supremacy did first begin, and by whom:
moreover how greatly the Bishops of Rome did fall from true Godliness, from
the faith of Christ, after they had obtained of the Emperors, that proud
ungodly title of universal Bishop. Wherein I have touched the wicked
behavior of a few of them, to give as it were a taste of the fruits of their
supremacy. Lastly, I have opened the dealinges of good princes against their
wickedness and tyranny, in our own country: making thereby manifest, that
King Henry the eight, was not the first king of this realm, who did expel
that usurped authority: but yt almost full two hundredth years before King
Henry the eight, it was spurned at, and diverse laws and statutes were made by
diverse Kings of this Realm against it. So that by reading over of this little
work, they yt desire to see the truth of this matter, shall wander, I trust, no
longer in the doubts of darkness, for lack of knowledge of the truth,
which is revealed to us by the word of God, that CHRIST our Savior teaches
us, even he who does say, Ioh. 8.12.
Ego sum lux mundi, I am the light of the werlde. Doubtless he that walks in
this light shall know the truth, and shall not wander in darkness of any
Popish traditions and superstitions, which is the most dangerous and deadly
kind of darkness.

Now, it is said of Christ. Ioh. 12.35.
Qui ambulat in tenebris, nescit quo vadit: He that walks in darkness
knows not whether he goes. Let us therefore hear our Savior Jesus
Christ. Ambulate dum lucem habetis, ne vos tenebrae comprehendant. Whilst ye
have the light of Gods word, walk in it, least the darkness come upon you,
and you return again unto it, 2. Pet. 2.22 Pro. 26.11.
ut canis ad vomitum and sus ad volutabrum. As a dog to his vomit, as a sow
to her wallowing in the filthy mire of Popish superstitions. To the which
intent, my trust is in God that this little book shall somewhat help you
forward by satisfying the consciences of good people, who will read it with
desire to learn the truth. GOD grant that we may all both learn it and
follow it: that we never fly from it unto errors of vain devises of men,
but only put our whole hope, our confidence, and trust, in the death and
passion of our savior Jesus Christ, and lead a holy life according to his
word, to the glory of God, to whom be all honor, Dominion, and Majesty for
ever and ever. Amen.

The rooting out of the Romish supremacy: wherein is declared, that the
authority which the Pope of Rome does challenge to himself, over all
Christian Bishops and Churches, is unlawfully usurped.
Chap. 1.
That in controversies of religion, the truth must be tried by the holy
Scriptures. That by the Scriptures no apostle, nor Bishop has a supremacy
over others.

IN all manner of doubts and controversies, which may arise in our Christian
religion, the truth thereof must be tried with the touch of Gods word, as well
in matters that concern godly instruction, as in those things, which do
belong to a Christian conversation.

in giving of laws to the Israelites, Dominus locutus est. Exo. 20.1.
The Lord spoke these words. And in the days of Ahas, when the service of God
was polluted, and they sacrificed their sons and daughters unto devils, by
causing them to pass through ye fire, 8. Isay. 20.
the Prophet wills them to repair to the law and to ye testimony, if they
speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. And
therefore the fearce wrath of the Lord was powered upon Nadab and Abihu, Leui.
10.1
sons unto Aaron the high Priest, because contrary to the law of God, they
offered strange fire: And this was the cause that Vzzah was stricken and slain,
because contrary to Gods commandment he would have stayed up the Ark of the Lord. And albeit the man had a good intention, and an honest meaning: yet the
spirit of God reproves the fact, and says, God smot him in the place for his
Fault, 2. Sam. 6.7.
and there he died by the Ark of God. And in the new Testament our Savior
does acknowledge that the doctrine was not his, but his fathers, and speaking
of the spirit, he says, that it shall call unto mind those things which he
has spoken: and the Apostle did deliver nothing else unto the Corrinthians,
but that which he had received of the Lord Jesus. And therefore Christ in the
Gospel says, John. 10.
My sheep hear my voice and as for a stranger they will not hear. And this
therefore moved the men of Berea to prove Paul's preaching by the writings of
the law, and the Prophets: Act. 17.11
and this moved Paul to denunce an accurse against those which went about to
preach an other Gospel, yea if it were himself, or an Angel from heaven. Gal.
1.8.
And therefore Augustine has this worthy saiing: Audi, dicit Dominus, Epist. 48.
non dicit Donatus, aut Rogatus, aut Vince^tius, aut Hilarious, aut Ambrosius,
aut Augustinus, sed dicit dominus. Hear, ye Lord says it, not Donatus says
it, or Rogatus, or Vincentius, or Hilarious, or Ambrose, or Augustine, but ye
Lord affirms and aduoucheth. And the same in an other place, Aug. de nuptiis
and concupiscentia. lib. 2. cap. 33.
Ista controuersia iudice^ quaerit, iudicet ergo Christus, and cui rei mors
eius profecerit, ipse dicat. This controversy seeks a judge, let Christ then
judge, and let him tell what thing his death has profited. And this did that
good and most Christian Constantine in ye council of Nice, for the appeasing of
Sects which were crept in to the Church, referred the Bishops and the
council to the scriptures of God. Trip. lib. 2. cap. 5.
But heretics cannot away with the word of God, as it may appear in the
Pharisees, which did greatly regard the doctrines of men, Mat. 15.
contemning and despising the commandments of almighty God. In Montanus, 1.
Tim. 4.3.
who being delighted in ye doctrine of Devils forbidding meats and marriage,
did leave the word, and did flee to revelations: in mad Manicheus, who for
the establishing of his errors did shroud him self in the harbor of his
hellish inspiratio^s: Chrisost. de sancto and adorando spiritu
in Adimantus his disciple, infected with the poison of his master, who did
bend him self fully and wholly to dispraise the scriptures of God: Aug. contra
Adimantum. cap. 3.
but most manifestly in the papists, which for the maintenance of their most
vile and abominable superstition have called the word of God a nose of wax,
or a shippmans hoose, as of late did that fleshly and carnal Cardinal
Cusanus, or a black or an inckie gospel, as did of late time Eckius and
Pighius, two princiall pillars of ye popish Sinagogue or Semen Turcicu^ a
turkish seed, whereas it is the seed of the immortal and everliving God, 1.
Pet. 1.23
as some time did that pestilent prelate, I mean poisoned Poole. Therefore
leaving these me^ in their errors, let us remember that are the Children of
God, if there be any error in doctrine to refer our selves to the written
word of God.

And as in doctrine, Conversation.
so in like manner for the ordering of our conversation, and for the amendment
of our leude lives. And therefore by Moses, Deu. 12.8. Number. 15.39.40.
almighty God says. Let not every one do that which is right in his own
eyes, but that which I command, you shall observe. Yea god calls the
following of a man's own fa^cie, and the seeking for to accomplish the desire
of his own heart, whoring. And whereas the Jews had a great opinion of their
fathers doings, being drawn thereto by a natuall affection, God reclameth
them, and by his prophet he says You shall not go in the ways of your
fathers, I am the Lord your GOD: Ezech. 20.18.
walk in my precepts. Psalm. 109.
And therefore David would have a young man to rule himself, according to Gods
word, and this would the graundmother of Timothy, 2. Tim. 1.5
and therefore she trained him in the scriptures from his very youth. Verily,
verily the ways of the Lord are righteous, and the just will walk therein:
but as for the ungodly which have sold them selves unto sin, do break in
sunder the cords of Gods law, because they hate and abhor to be reformed.
And therefore having committed the works of darkness, do envy and malice at
nothing so much, John. 3.
as at the light, for Qui male agit, odit lucem. He that does evil, hates the
light. As it may appear in the Popes of Rome, who will not have their doings
to be called in question, as it may appear by that speech of Paul the second.
Platina in vita Pauli secundi.
Pontifex sum, mihique licet pro arbitrio, etc. I am Pope, I may do as I list.
And therefore this is decreed in their decretals Sacrilegij esset instar,
Distinct. 40. si Papa in glossa.
disputare de facto Papae. It should be accounted sacrilege for any man to
reason of the Popes doing. And the rest of the popish clergy are sick of a
disease called Noli me ta^gere. But clean contrary is it in the Church of God,
where the members do commit themselves fully and wholly to be censured by the
word of God, neither going unto the right hand, or to the left: and whereas
they are called Gods building, are gladd to be squared by the rule of ye
scripture, and therefore no doubt, but peace, even that peace which passes all
understanding shall come unto them which so walk, Gal. 6.16.
and mercy to the Israel which does appertain to God. And therefore both in
things which do concern doctrine, or have a respect unto a godly life, let
that at al times take place, which our Savior Christ has willed us to search
out the truth of them by the Scriptures. John. 5.
For in the fifth Chapter of the Gospel after saint John, when he had rebuked
the Jews, because they would not believe his doctrine which he brought them
from God his Father, he said unto them, Verbum ejus non habetis manens in
vobis, quia quem misit ille, huic vos non creditis. Scrutamini scripturas, quia
vos putatis in ipsis vitam aeternam habere: and illae sunt, quae testimonium
perhibent de me. You have not gods word, says Christ, remaining in you: for
you do not believe him, whom the father has sent. Search you the scriptures,
for in them you think to have eternal life: and they bear witness of me. Which
words of our Savior Christ have enforced me the more boldly to search out by
his holy scriptures the bishop of Rome his suspect authority, I mean his
supremacy and universal jurisdiction, most unjustly clamed, and usurped by
him, for these eight or nine hundred years, clean contrary to Christ his word
and commandment.

For it is forbidden by him, as the stories of the Evangelists do show in the
holy scriptures. And, as it does appear by stories ecclesiastical, the
Bishops of Rome have challenged and used it only since Boniface the third
obtained it of the Emperor Phocas: of whom he was proclaimed universal
Bishop, to the overthrow of true religion, in the Church of Christ, of
virtue, godliness, humility, and obedience among all the clergy, of the
imperial estate, and majesty of the noble Emperors and kings, from whom
they had their first authority, and not from our Savior Jesus Christ. The
which I will endeavor to show in this little work, and specially by the two
co^missions that he gave: the one before his death and passion, the other after
his resurrection, to all his Apostles, in like and equal manner, that not one
of them might thereby challenge any jot of authority or power over or above
the other, as by the commissions themselves the whole world easily may see.
Now, as no subject can have any higher or larger authority then is limited
and expressed by plain words in his commission, by his emperors or prince,
whosoever it be that grants it, and as every one of the commissioners, to
whom it is directed, have that authority which in their commission is
mentioned, and no other: even so in the commission that our Savior Christ gave
to his Apostles, every one of them ought obediently to observe their masters
commandment with his authority given to them, and not to break it, and go
beyond the bonds and lemitation of it. Yea, much less should they dare to
break it, then any subject dare the commandment and commission given him by
his Prince, a Prince of this world: whose commission, no subject will be so
bold to break in any one point, because he knows the danger of it. As for
the Bishops of Rome how they have broken their master Christ's commission,
you shall find by their doings, most contrary to his two special co^missions
before mentioned: specially in taking upon the^ higher power, and greter
authority, then any other Bishop has, or ever had from our savior Christ:
to wit, that they are and ought to be sovereign heads and rulers, not only
over all other bishopes in this world, but also above all Emperors, Kings,
and Princes. Which being clean contrary to their Master Christ's
commandment and commission, thereby they have manifested themselves to be of
those very Antichrists of whom the scriptures do make mention. 1 John. 2.


Chap. 2.
That the first commission of Christ to his Apostles, when he sent them to
preach the Gospel, did give no authority to Peter above the rest, but like
and equal unto them all.

THE first message and commission given by our savior Christ to his Apostles,
is declared by the holy Evangelist Saint Matthew, in the 10. Chapter of his
Gospel. Matt. 10.
Where he shows, that the twelve Apostles being called together, they had
power given them over all unclean spirits, that they might cast them out, and
also cure and heal all manner sickness and diseases. Whereupon having recited
the names of Christ's Apostles, he says these words, Hos duodecim misit
Jesus, praecipiens eis and dicens: in viam gentium ne abieritis: in civitates
Samaritanorum ne intraueritis: sed potius ite ad oues quae perierunt domus
Israel. Euntes autem praedicate, dicentes, appropinquauit regnum coelorum.
Infirmos curate, mortuos suscitate, leprosos mundate, daemones eijcite: gratis
accepistis, gratis date. These twelve, his Apostles, Jesus sent forth,
co^ma^ding and saying to the^: You shall not go into the way of the gentiles:
you shall not enter into the cities of the Samarita^s: but rather go you to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel: and as you go, preach, saying, the kingdom
of heaven is at hand, heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse the leopers, and
cast out devils: freely you have received these things of me, freely give the^.
In this first message and commission of Christ, given to his twelve Apostles,
you may plainly understand that he gave equal and like authority unto them
al, without any preferring of any one of them before all his fellows, he gave
the very lowest (if any were lowest) as great and large power, as he gave unto
the highest, no exception being made of any one, as higher in authority then
they all. So that neither Peter nor any supposed successor of Peter can claim
any superiority by this ordinance and commission of our savior Christ. And
therefore if they enter into any higher authority, it must be otherwise then by
Christ, belike by that way, which Christ himself does mention in the gospel of
Saint John, where he says, Ego sum ostium: John. 10.
qui non intrat per ostium in ouile ouium, sed ascendit aliunde, ille fur est
and latro: I am the door: he that enters not by the door into the Shepehouse,
but climeth up some other way, he is a thief and a robber. Whereof it
follows, that if the Bishops of Rome have challenged such authority which
our savior Christ has not given them, but they have obtained it otherwise by
worldly policies: then they deserve to be called by the names, that Christ
has appointed for them, even thieves and robbers. Now this will easily and
clearly be proved that the Bishop of Rome has had no such universal authority
from our savior Christ. Then what names, what titles of dignity ought we to
attribute to the Bishops of Rome? which so have abused Christ's Church, since
the time of the good bishop Gregory the first: who did utterly withstand the
decree of the Emperor Mauricius, by the which he would have made John the
patriarch of Co^sta^tinople, universal bishop over all the bishops of Christ's
catholic Church. Gregor. epistolarum. Lib. 4. Epist. 32. and 38.
For he would not suffer this decree to be received within his province of
Italy but utterly rejected it: and wrote not only to the emperor, how greatly
he did offend almighty God, in admitting this new, profane, blasphemous name,
and authority into the Church of Christ, empairing the authority which he has
given to the rest of his bishops and ministers: but also to John the patriarch,
that he by taking and usurping that authority, did show him self in pride and
presu^ption to be the very forerunner of Antichrist. Whereby it came to pass
that Mauricius the Emperor was so greatly offended with this good Gregory,
Platina de vitis pontificum Romanoru^ in Gregorio primo. Volaterranus.
Centuria. 6. fol. 872.
that, as Platina does report, he exhorted the Lu^bardes to set upon the city
of Rome: which Agilulfus the king of Lumbardy did, beseeging it a whole year:
Howbeit in the end he was feign to go away without any hurt done to the city,
that was saved by the mighty providence of God.

Chap. 3.
That Christ in the promise of his second commission, saying unto Peter. To
thee will I give the keys of heaven, does give him no supremacy, Neither by
these words, I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith fail not.

Now, to return to the commissions of Christ, because that betwixt the
first, which was given before his passion to his Apostles, as I have declared,
and the second which he gave them after his death and resurrection, Christ did
open to them in the mean time his purpose and intent, both for giving them
further authority, then before he gave them, and for instructing of them what
they should do with it: he therefore demanded of his disciples, what men did
talk of him, and whom they said him to be. To whom when they answered:
some, that Thou art John Baptist, and some, Elias, and others, Ieremias, or one
of the prophets: Matt. 16.
then Jesus said unto them, Vos autem quem me esse dicitis. Respondens Simon
Petrus, dixit: tu es Christus filius Dei viui. Respondens autem Christus dixit
ei: beatus es Simon Bar-iona, quia caro and sanguis non reuelauit tibi hoc, sed
pater meus qui est in coelis. Et ego dico tibi, tu es Petrus, and super hanc
Petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae inferni non praeualebunt aduersus
eam. Et tibi dabo claues regni coelorum: and quidcunque ligaueris super terram,
erit ligatum in coelis, and quidcunque solueris super terram, erit solutum in
coelis. But whom, says Christ, do you say that I am. He said not, Peter, who
do thou say that I am: but in the plural number, to all his Apostles, who
do you say that I am. Then Peter, as the mouth and speaker of them al, said,
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. To whom our savior Christ
answered and said: blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonas: for flesh and
blood has not revealed it to thee, but my father which is in heaven. And I say
to thee. Tu es Petrus, alluding to the name of Peter, for his perfect faith on
the head corner stone, ye is to say, on Christ, whereupon Peter him self was
builded, and not Christ upon Peter: therefore Christ said, Upon this rock or
stone, of thy confession of me to be the son of the living God, will I build
my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Christ did not
say, against thee Peter, but against it, that is, his true Church, builded upon
that faith that Peter then confessed, and not upon Peter's person. I do believe
there is no man so ignorant or void of knowledge, that will judge our Savior
Christ would build his Church upon so weak and frail a foundation, as Peter
was, if we regard not his profession, but his person: who showed himself more
wavering and unstable then any other of the twelve Apostles, as one that
utterly denied his Master Christ three times in one day: Matt. 26.
and also before that did speak such carnal and worldly words unto him, that
Christ was feign to answer him, Thou art an offense unto me: and added
moreover, Matt. 16.
Get thee be hind me Satan. Wherefore I do leave it to the judgment of
every good Christian man, whether it be more agreeable to our faith, and safe
for the Church of God, to be founded upon Christ, or upon Peter: upon the
son of the living God, who^ Peter confessed, or upon a man, who vttterly
denied the son of the living God, saying, Non noui homine^ istum, and that
cum iuramento, Matt. 26.
I do not know this man, and bound it with an oath, as the Gospel does
testify.

It is certain that Christ builded his Church upon that rock or stone,
Iuellus in replicatione ad responsum Hardingi fol. 221. 222. 246. 262.
which was sure and steadfast: even upon the faith confessed by Peter, and not
upon Peter. And that by the judgment of the old fathers, as Hillarie
affirms in his second book De Trinitate. Haec est vna foelix fidei Petra,
quam Petrus ore suo est confessus. This is the only blessed rock of faith,
which Peter confessed by mouth. And Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 51. Super hanc
petram in hac fide and confessione aedificabo Ecclesiam. Upon this rock, upon
this faith and confession, will I build my Church. And Saint Augustine in his
13. sermon upon Matthew says, Non me aedificabo super te, sed aedificabo te
super me. I will not build my self of thee, but I will build thee upon me. And
this was the meaning of Christ. For after Peter had said, Tu es Christus
filius dei viui. Christ said not, Super te Petrum, upon thee Peter, but super
hanc petram, upon this rock, or stable stone, even thy confession of me to be
the son of the living God, I will build my Church, and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it. He said not, against Peter, but against his Church,
which he builded upon that rock of faith that Peter held. For Christ's words
are, Matt. 16.
Portae inferni non praeualebunt aduersus eam, in the feminine gender, against
it: which must needs have relation to Ecclesiam, His Church, and not to Peter:
for then he would have said, Non preualebit aduersus eum. Likewise he said
immediately, Tibi dabo claues regni coelorum: To thee will I give the keys of
the kingdom of heaven. Now it is plain that he gave those keys unto his
Church, and not to Peter's only person: though he said to him, but as to his
Apostle, the charge pertaining to al his Apostles, and all the ministers of his
Church, by like right, Quodcunque ligaueris super terram erit ligatum in
coelis, and quodcunque solueris super terram, erit solutum in coelis.
Whatsoever thou shall bind upon the earth, it shall be bound in heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall loose upon ye earth, it shall be loosed in heaven. For
otherwise those keys of loosing and binding had been lost clean, and the
authority of Christ's church had been overthrown for ever, if Peter only
should have possessed those keys, as parteining to himself alone, and not to
Christ's Church. For it follows in the same chapter, how Christ telling his
Apostles that he must go to Jerusalem, and there suffer many things by the
elders, scribes and princes of the priests, and be^lains, and the third day
rise again from death: Peter took him aside and rebuked him, saying, Let this
be far from thee, let not this happen to thee. Whereupon Christ turning him
self to Peter, said: vade post me Satana, scandalum es mihi: quia no^ sapis ea
quae dei sunt, sed ea qua^ sunt hominum: Get thee behind me, thou Satan, or
Devil: thou art an offense unto me: for thou do not savor of the things
that are of God, but the things that are of men. So that whatsoever Christ
said to him before if the same had not concerned the authority of his whole
church, but only Peter's person: the^ all the virtue of those sayings had been
clearly quenched, and taken from Peter, when Christ called him Satan, and bad
him come behind him. But, that the right of these words does belong unto the
whole Church, it is evident by the words of Christ that do follow in the
eighteen Chapter, spoken to the Church: Matt. 18.
Quaecunque ligaueritis in terra erunt ligata in coelo: Et quaecunque
solueritis in terra, erunt soluta in coelo. What soever ye bind in earth,
shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye loose in earth, shall be loosed in
heaven. Yea, to regard the substance of Christ's words touching that
authority of binding and loosing mentioned to Peter, Christ said not, tibi do
claues regni coelorum, Matt. 16.
I do give the keys of the kingdom of heaven to thee, but tibi dabo, I will
give to thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to loose and to bind. So
that Christ's words were spoken of the time to come, not of the time present:
to be given afterward, not as given presently. Whereof it does follow, that
none of the Apostles had authority of binding and loosing, of retaining and
remitting the sins of all estates of men, through all nations: until our
savior Christ had suffered his death, and had washed away our sins with his
blood, and had conquered death by rising from death. At the which time they
received the holy Ghost, as it shall appear in the second commission, and had
that performed, which was promised, when Christ said, John. 20.
I will give thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven. But in the mean season,
before that was performed: Christ perceiving by his divine prescience and
foreknowledge, that Peter should deny him thrice in one day, he said unto
him: Simon, Luke. 22.
Ecce Satanas expetiuit vos vt cribraret sicut triticum: ego autem oraui pro
te, vt non deficiat fides tua: and tu aliquando conuersus confirma fratres
tuos. Ipse vero dixit ei, Domine tecum paratus sum in carcerem and in mortem
ire. At ille dixit, dico tibi Petre, non cantabit hodie gallus. donec ter
abneges, nosse me. Simon, says the Lord to Peter: Behold Satan has desired
you, to syfte you like wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail
not: therefore when thou at length art converted, confirm and stablish thy
brethren. Then Peter said unto him, Lord I am ready to go with thee into
prison and unto death. But Christ said, Peter, I tell thee, the cock shall
not crow this day, until thou have thrice denied that thou know me. Which
words of Christ were fulfilled the same night, as soon as he was brought
before the high priest. For Peter being amongst them that stood by the fire,
when he was reported of by a maid, that he was one of those which were with
Christ: he answered, I do not know him. When again he was told by another
man, who stood by the maid, that he was of them: he answered, I do not know
him. Anon after, the third time, when another man said, verily this man was
with him, for he is also a Galilean: then Peter cursed and did swear, as S.
Matthew does witness, that he knew not Christ. And immediately the cock did
crow. Matt. 26.
And Christ looked back upon Peter, and Peter went forth, and did weep
bitterly. This I have recited so much the more at large: because there be
some, who would prove authority given to Peter by the former words of Christ:
which if they be well considered, are but a manifestation partly of Christ's
Godhead in that he did foreknow Peter would deny him, partly of his mercy
showed graciously to Peter, whose faith he did establish with his prayer, that
he should not despair, as Judas Iscariot did, who after he had sold Christ,
went and hanged himself. So, upon this very sentence of Christ, Ego rogaui
pro te Petre, vt not deficiat fides tua: Chrisostomus in Mat. Cap. 26. Hom. 83.
Saint Chrysostom does say, that Christ the more sharply to reprove Peter's
pride, (who did presume more of him self, then any other of the Apostles)
does signify before unto him, that his fall shall be worse then the fall of
the rest, and therefore needs greater help to raise him up again.
Wherefore that he might see and feel his own weakness: Christ suffered him
to fall, and told him of it before it happened: yet he preserved him wtall,
through his great care and favor, that he should not fall from him, though he
did deny him: wherewith he comforted him in saying, I have prayed for thee
Peter, that thy faith fail not. Now as saint Chrysostom does show, yt Christ
did thus manifest his divine knowledge and favor unto Peter, by foreshewing
him his fall, and promising that he would raise him: so likewise holy Beda
writing on the same words, says, that he who only knows what is in man,
Beda in Euangeliu^ Lucae cap. 22. lib. 6.
both as God, did foretell in what sort, at what time, how often Peter should
deny him: and as merciful, did promise him the help of his defense, least that
any of the faithful either unadvisedly should presume of his own standing, or
more unadvisedly should despair for his own falling. Wherefore to pass over
other things that might be said, hereby it is manifest that the words of
Christ spoken to Peter of his prayer for him, have no force at all to prove any
preeminence or superiority in Peter: but they are rather of great force
against him, and those that challenge to be his successors, since they do show
a notable fall of Peter, by occasion that he had too great a confidence in
himself, as it is evident by Christ's words.

Chap. 4.
That the second commission which Christ gave out to his Apostles, was given in
like sort as the first, not with any greater authority to Peter, then to any
of the rest.

THe second commission which our savior gave to all his Apostles, was given
to them after that he had suffered death upon the cross for all mankind, and
having redeemed them with his precious blood, was raised up again from death
unto life. This commission is declared by the Evangelist saint Mark in these
words: Mark. 16.
Nouissime autem recumbentibus illis vndecim apparuit, et exprobrauit
incredulitatem illorum and duritiem cordis, quia his, qui viderant eum
resurrexisse non crediderunt. Et dixit eis: euntes in mundum vniuersum
praedicate euangelium omni creaturae: qui crediderit and baptizatus fuerit,
saluus erit: qui vero non crediderit, condemnabitur. Last of all he appeared to
the eleven Apostles sitting at the table: and rebuked them for their unbelief
and hardness of their hearts, because they did not believe them which had seen
him, being risen from death. And he said unto them: Go you into all the world
and preach the gospel to every creature: He that shall believe and be baptized,
shall be saved: But who so will not believe, shall be damned: unto which
commission he added further promises, what signs should follow the^ who
believed: to wit, yt in his name they should cast out devils, they should
speak new languages, they should take away serpents, yea, if they did drink
poison, it should not hurt them, they should lay their hands upon diseased
persons, and they should recover. The meaning and manner of this commission
that Christ did give them, is declared farther by the Evangelist saint John,
in that he does say: Cum ergo sero esset die illo, John. 20.
vna sabbatorum, and fores essent clausae, vbi erant discipuli congregati
propter metum Iudaeorum: venit Jesus and stetit in medio, and dixt eis, pax
vobis. Et cu^ haec dixisset, ostendit eis manus and latus. Gauisi sunt ergo
discipuli viso domino. Dixit ergo eis iterum, pax vobis: sicut misit me pater,
and ego mitto vos. Hoc cum dixisset, insufflauit, and dixit eis: Accipite
spiritum sanctum: quorum remiseritis peccata, remittuntur eis: and quorum
retinueritis peccata, retenta sunt. The same day then at night, which was the
first day of the week, and when the doors were shut, where the disciples were
assembled for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst of the^,
and said unto the^, peace be unto you. And when he had said that, he showed
unto them his hands and his side, then were the disciples glad, when they had
seen the Lord. Then said Jesus again unto them, peace be unto you: as my
father sent me, so I also send you. And when he had said this, he breathed
upon them, and said unto the^: receive you the holy ghost. Whosoeuers sins
you shall forgive, they are forgiven them, and whosoeuers ye retein, they are
retained. By this later commission our savior Christ gave to all his Apostles
like power and equal authority, to go through the whole world, and to prech the
gospel of salvation to all creatures, of whom he said in general. He that
shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved: he that will not believe shall be
damned. He gave them equal authority and power to remit and retain the sins
of all, both Jews and Gentiles: which by their first commission they could
not, because they had not authority to preach unto any, but to the lost sheep
of the house of Israel, I say, this authority now given the Apostles, was
given in equal and like manner to them all: and not to one more then to all
the rest. Wherefore unless that Satan had mightily puffed up the bishops of
Rome, naming them selves Peter's successors, whom Christ once called Satan,
and I know not in what they be his successors, unless it be in that: it might
seem strange that any man pretending the name and faith of a Christian,
should so far abuse Christ's word and commission, as to claim such
authority, so far greater then his word and commission does extend unto. But
it is a true saying, who is so blind as he that will not see? Verily if the
Papists would read and see with an humble spirit, and obedient heart to the
almighty God, that which is written in his word, as I beseech the Lord they
may: then out of doubt they should find that Peter had no greater or larger
authority then other the Apostles had. Neither did he ever challenge such
authority above other the Apostles, as the Bishops of Rome have done above all
other bishops, under the false pretense, that they are Peter's successors,
because for sooth they are Bishops of Rome, and therein (as they say) do
succeed Saint Peter.

Chap. 5.
That Peter was never at Rome, as far as may be gatherd by the scriptures,
Therefore the Popes supremacy may not be laid on that foundation.

BUT to touch this by the way, for so much as they make so much a do about it,
by the scriptures they can not prove yt Peter was ever at Rome: much less that
he was Bishop of Rome. But this we can prove, that he was at Jerusalem, and in
many other places, governing and instructinge the congregation of Christ. Yea
above three years after saint Paul's conversion: Galat. 1.
we read that he went to Jerusalem to see Peter: and having been in sundry
countries, after other fourteen years he went up to Jerusalem again, and
talked with him. Peter afterward came to Antioche, where saint Paul also met
with him, as his words do witness to the Galatians. Galat. 2.
Cum autem venisset Petrus Antiochiam, in faciem ei restui, quia
reprehensibilis erat. Prius enim quam venirent quida^ (...) Iacobo, cu^
gentibus edebat: quu^ aute^ venissent, subtrahebat, and segregabat se etc: sed
cu^ vidissem quod non recte ambularent ad veritate^ euangelij, dixi Cephae
cora^ omnibus: si tu cu^ Iudaeus sis, gentiliter viuis, and non Iudaice,
quomodo gentes cogis Iudaizare? Therefore when Peter did come to Antioche,
says saint Paul, I withstood him to his face, because he was to be rebuked.
For before that some came from James, he did eat with the gentiles: when they
were come, he did withdraw him self. etc. But when I saw that they went not
the right way to the truth of the Gospel, I said to Cephas (that is Peter)
before them all: if thou being a Jew, live as a gentile, and not like a
Jew: why do thou cause the gentiles to live after the manner of Jews? Now
this rebuke of Paul (for that is worth the notinge also) Peter did patiently
bear and suffer at Paul's hands. Whereby it is manifest that Peter did not
claim the Popish supremacy, neither did saint Paul make more account of
Peter, then of other the Apostles, reproving him, because he had brought the
Jews and Barnabas into his dissimulation. And here (to pass over the frailty
of Peter in this his great offense) it is to be considered, because the
Bishops of Rome have claimed a succession from him, that if there ought to
have been such a succession as they imagine of Peter, rather then of other the
Apostles, the Bishops of Antioche then by likelihood should have claimed the
right of Peter's successors, rather then the bishops of Rome: since it does not
appear in any place of the holy scriptures, that ever Peter was at Rome: but
at Antioche it appears, and in sundry places of Asia, and other the East
parts of the world. Howbeit, I deny not, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 14.
but that some histories and Chronicles do make mention, that Peter was at
Rome. Which I will not say, yt they were made to say so, corrupted by popish
setters forth of the^: I can not affirm it: but this I can affirm and will
boldly say, that al, which those histories and Chronicles do writ of Peter's
being at Rome, is not agreeable with the word of God, and therefore is not of us
to be credited, seeing that it is contrary to the word of truth. And herein
all wise me^ may consider, that seeing Paul's journey from Jerusalem to Rome is
most plainly set forth in the scriptures, from place to place, from Island to
Island, from country, to country, and what he did either by land or by sea:
much more if Peter had traueiled from Antioche to Rome, and that his journey
had been of so great weight to our salvation, as the papists do pretend, by
grounding therevppon the supremacy and authority of the Bishops of Rome, it
is to be thought that Peter's journey should have been written and set forth
most expressly. Yea, of all likelihood it should have been extolled more then
the iourneis of famous Emperors: then Xerxes journey into Greece, with ten
hundredth thousand men: then Alexander the great his journey to conquer the
whole world: then Julius Cesars iourneyes in his conquest of Asia, France,
Spain, England, and many other nations. But if the Papists fancies be true:
belike saint Peter did fly in the skies above the ground, and neither
travailed by sea, nor by land. Certainly, this is evident, that the
foundation of the Romish supremacy is too weak to bear such weight, as they
would have it: seeing that it has no ground in all the scriptures, but only
in man's corrupt devises, for worldly vain glory. As in deed it is most
ungodly extolled, and advanced, by Albertus, Pighius, Eckius, Hosius, and such
other Romish clearkes, and Popish Sophisters: who do exalt the Bishop of Rome
to the celestial hierarchies: and make a doubt whether he be a mere man or no:
whether he have not as great power as our Savior Christ had: with other such
matters grounded on his supremacy, most vain, and blasphemous to the
dishonor of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, in whose word it has no ground.
For (to go forward with Peter's being at Rome, ye foundation of this supremacy
S. Paul being at Rome in the time of Nero the Emperor, did write his Epistle to
the Colossia^s, in the fourth Chapter whereof, sending greetings and salutations
from his friends that were then at Rome with him, he says to the Colossians.
Col. 4.
Salutat vos Aristarchus, and Marcus consobrinus Barnabae, and Jesus, qui
dicitur iustus. Hi soli sunt adiutores mei in regno Dei, qui mihi fuere
solatio. Salutat vos Epaphras, qui ex vobis est seruus Christi. Salutat vos
Lucas medicus charissimus, and Demas. Aristarchus does salute you, and Marcus,
Barnabas sisters son and Jesus which is called Iustus. These only are my
workfellowes to the kingdom of God, which have been a comfort to me. Epaphras
does salute you, which is one of you, the servant of Christ. Luke the beloved
physician, and Demas do salute you also, now if Peter had been at Rome in the
time of Nero with Paul: was not he worthy to have been named in these
salutations, as well as Aristarchus, Marcus, Jesus, Epaphras, Luke, and Demas?
would not he have been a fellowhelper to Paul: which saint Paul says none were,
but only those three, whom he names to them, and Peter is none of them. Yes
doubtless. Whereby it appears, he was not then at Rome. Again he writes
afterward from Rome unto Timothy. Festina ad me venire cito. 2. Tim. 4.
Demas enim me reliquit, diligen^ hoc seculum, and abijt Thessalonicam:
Crescens in Galatiam: Titus in Dalmatiam. Lucas est mecum solus. Marcum assume
and adduc tecum: est enim vtilis mihi in ministerio. Tychicum autem misi
Ephesum. Haste thee to come to me quickly. For Demas has forsaken me,
embracing this present world, and is gone to Thessalonica: Crescens into
Galatia: Titus to Dalmatia. Luke is only with me. Take Mark and bring him with
thee: for he is profitable to me in ye ministry. Tichicus I have sent to
Ephesus etc. Now if Peter had been at Rome with Paul, when he wrote this
Epistle to Timothy: then he would not have written, that there was none with
him but Luke only, and therefore required Timothy to bring Mark with him, then
would he not have added that which there does follow, that at his first
answering no man did assist him, but all did forsake him: which I think the
Papists will not say yt Peter would have done, if he at that time had been at
Rome with Paul, which that he was not at any time: it may be farther
coniectured by that which is written in the second to the Galathians: Galat. 2.
how James Peter and John made an agreement with Paul and Barnabas that they
should preach unto the Gentiles, as James, Peter and John unto the
circumcised, which are the Jews. And upon this agreement they did pledge
their faith, and gave their right hand of fellowshippe one to the other.
Whereby it may be gathered, that Peter did rather frequent those places where
the Jews were more dispersed, ^. Peter. 1.
as Po^tus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, Bithynia, to the which he writes also
his first Epistle, then the lands of Greece and Italy, with the city of Rome,
replenished with ye Gentiles, and having fewer Jews amongst the^. Al which
things laid together: it will appear to be very likely, ye Peter was never at
Rome, neither before ye time of Nero, nor in Neroes time with Paul. Which
proves the foundation of the Romish Bishops supremacy upon Peter's being at
Rome, to be a very weak and fickle foundation: as all the other grounds of
his supremacy are, with the rest of his religion.

Chap. 6.
That although Peter had been at Rome, yet could he not be the foundation of
the Church, which honor is proper unto Christ only. By the way, against the
sacrifice of the Mass, and the Popish transubstantiation.

BUT whether that saint Peter were at Rome or no, it makes no great matter. It
is sufficient, that it can not be proved by ye scriptures. But if it were
granted unto the papists: it makes nothing for the Popes supremacy. For
saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 3.
Fundamentum aliud nemo potest ponere, praeter id quod positu^ est, quod est
Christus Jesus. No man can lay any other foundation, then yt which is laid,
which is Christ Jesus. And saint Peter himself says in the second Chapter of
his first epistle, Deponentes igitur omnem malitiam, and omnem dolum, and
simulationes, 1. Pet. 2.
and inuidias, and omnes detractiones, sicut modo geniti infantes lac sermonis
sine dolo concupiscite, vt in eo crescatis in salutem: si tamen gustastis
quoniam dulcis est dominus. Ad quem accedentes, lapide^ viuum, ab hominibus
quide^ reprobatum, a deo autem electum ac honorificatu^: and ipsi, tanqua^
lapides viui, superaedificamini, domus spiritualis, sacerdotiu^ sanctu^,
offerre hostias spirituales acceptabiles deo per Iesum Christum, Laying away
therefore all malice, and al guile, and dissemblings, and enuies and all
bacbitinges, as new borne babes desire the sincere milk of Gods word, that
thereby you may grow unto salvation: if so be that you have tasted that the
Lord is sweet. Unto whom coming, as to a living stone, disallowed of men,
but chosen of God, and precious: upon him be ye builded, as living stones, a
spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable unto God through Jesus Christ.

Out of the which words of S. Paul and saint Peter, we have to learn two
notable things: one, that Christ our savior is the foundation, and the
living stone, which ye builders refused, but God accepted it: and honored it
the other, that the faithful must be laid on this foundation, and as living
stones, be builded upon that head and principal corner stone even Jesus
Christ, which the more effectually to declare unto us, saint Peter tells all
the faithful, that they, who are so builded, are made a spiritual house, and
a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through
Jesus Christ: spiritual sacrifices, and not carnal, or transubstantiated
sacrifices, as the Bishop of Rome, and his prelates do falsely feign
themselves to do. For (to go a little from my chief purpose to sift this
horrible heresy of popery) I could never find in all the holy sciptures, or
any history of the primitive Church, ye ever this kind of transubstantiated
sacrifice was meant or spoken of by Christ: but that his Church did always
receive and allow the sacrament of Christ's body and blood, in such spiritual
manner, as Saint Paul declares in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1.
Cor. 11
the eleventh Chapter. No: in all the heresies that trobled the primitive
Church which were ouerthrown by ye four first general councils, there is not
one word or question moved of it: but it was continually used as the mystery
and sacrament of Christ's body and blood. In which sort it continued in the
best parts of Christendom, in the best times, still: until at the length the
Bishop of Rome, called a council at Laterane within his own province of
Italy, in the which this decree was made, Con. Later anno. domini. 1215.
Christi corpus and sanguis, in sacramento altaris, sub speciebus panis and
viniveraciter continentur: transubstantiatis, pane in Corpus, and vino in
sanguinem, potestate diuina. These are the words of the first Canon of the
council holden at Rome, in Laterane under Pope Innocent the third, and called
the great Lateran council, kept the year of our Lord.1215. Of the which Canon
the words do sound in English, That the body and blood of Christ are
verily contained in the Sacrament of the altar under the forms of bread and
wine: the bread being transubstantiated, that is to say, the substance of it
turned into his body, and the wine into his blood, by the power of God. This
notable devise of transubstantiation could not be found out for the space of
twelve hundred and fourteen years after Christ: his Apostles Evangelists,
Disciples, Doctors, general councels, knew it not. They thought the words of
the sacrament to be spiritually meant, and to be spoken by way of a figure: as
S. Augustine, to cite one for many, does say expressly, that in these words,
Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, Augusti. de doctrina Christiana lib.
3. cap. 16.
and sanguinem eius biberitis, non habebitis vitam in vobis, Figura est,
praecipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum, and suauiter atque vtiliter
recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit.
Whereas Christ does say, Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall have no life in you: this is a figure, says S.
Augustine, or a manner of speech commanding us to be partakers of the passion
of Christ, and comfortably to lay up in our minds, that his flesh was
crucified and wounded for our sakes. Moreover, speaking farther upon the same
words, on the sixth Chapter of Saint John's Gospel: he shows what it is to
eat Christ's flesh and drink his blood. Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam,
August. in Johan. tract. 26.
and illum bibere potum: in Christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere.
This is therefore to eat that meat, and drink that drink: to dwell in
Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him. Ac per hoc, qui non manet in
Christo, and in quo non manet Christus: procul dubio nec manducat spiritualiter
carnem eius, nec bibit eius sanguinem, licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat
dentibus sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi: sed magis tantae rei
sacramentum ad iudicium sibi manducat and bibit, quia immundus praesumpsit
accedere ad Christi sacramenta, quae aliquis non digne sumpsit, nisi qui mundus
est. And therefore, says Augustine, he yt does not dwell in Christ, and in whom
Christ does not dwell: doubtless he neither eats spiritually the flesh of
Christ, nor drinks his blood, although he do carnally and visibly press with
his teeth the sacrament of Christ's body and blood: but rather he does eat
and drink the sacrament of so worthy a thing to his judgment and
condemnation, because he does presume, being unclean, to come to Christ's
sacraments, which no man can worthily receive, but he only, that is pure and
clean. By Christ's words therefore, being well weighed, as it may appear by
S. Augustines words upon them, it may well be gathered, that Christ did not
mean any transubstantiation, or changing the substance of the sacramental
bread into his natural body, and of the sacramental wine into his natural
blood: but a mystical and spiritual food to the soul, where of the wicked are
not partakers, who are yet partakers of the sacramental bread and wine, which
do signify ye body and blood of Christ: for our savior does say, John. 6.
that Whosoever does eat his flesh, and drink his blood: has everlasting
life. Wherefore it cannot be, yt the sacramental bread and wine should be ye
very natural body and blood of Christ: for as much as the wicked, who shall
not live for ever, are partakers of them, I mean of the bread and wine in the
sacrament, as well as the godly. For as Paul does write to ye Corinthians, 1.
Cor. 10.
Brethren I would not have you ignorant, how al our forefathers were under ye
cloud, and al passed through the sea, and were baptized unto Moses in the cloud
and in the sea: Et omnes eandem escam spirituale^ manducarunt, and omnes eunde^
potu^ spiritualem biberunt: bibebant autem de spirituali consequente eos Petra:
Petra autem erat Christus. And they did al eat the same spiritual meat, and
they did all drink the same spiritual drink: For they did drink of the
spiritual rock that followed them: and that rock was Christ. Wherein we see,
first, that the wicked among the Jews, with whom God was not pleased, did
enjoy the same sacraments of Christ, the cloud, the sea, the meat, the
drink, which the godly did: yet did they not enjoy ye same life by Christ,
which the godly did: for it follows in Saint Paul, that God was not pleased
with many of them, Which words are meant of the wicked. Secondly, we see that
the godly amongst the Jews did eat the same meat, and drink the same
drink, that the godly amongst the Corinthians did, to whom S. Paul does
write: yea that Paul him self, and the Apostles did. Now the Jews did it, In
spefuturi Christi, In the hope of Christ to come, for their redemption and
deliverance from their sins, and from death. whereof it ensues, that our
eating and drinking, in certa fiducia praeteriti Christi, in true belief that
Christ is come, and has redeemed us, and shed his blood for us: must be the
partaking of a meat spiritual, and a spiritual drink, no less then that
which Paul says, that their fathers did eat and drink. For he says
plainly. They did eat the same meat, and drunk the same drink, that flowed
out of the rock, and the rock is Christ, For, as the Jews did it in a figure
of Christ, by faith, in whom to come they were saved, as Christ does say of
Abraham, Abraham desired to see my day, John. 8.
he saw it and reioiced: so are we taught to do it, in remembrance of Christ
by faith, in whom being come, we are saved, whereupon our savior said to his
disciples, Luke. 22.
Do this in remembrance of me. Which Paul declares farther in the first to
the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11
the eleventh chapter, where, after that he had declared the manner of the Lords
supper, he adds to both the parts of it. Hoc facite ad mei re cordationem.
Quotie scunque enim manducabitis panem hunc, and calicem bibetis: morte^ domini
annuntiabitis, donec veniat. Do this in remembrance of me, says Christ: For
as often (says Paul, expounding the words of Christ) as ye shall eat this
bread and drink of this cup: ye shall show the death of the Lord until he
come. So then, if these things be well considered, which I have briefly
touched out of the words of Christ, declared by his holy evangelists and
Apostles: the godly I trust, shall easily perceive, that Pope Innocent the
third could by no authority of scriptures prove any transubstantiation in the
sacrament: although it were confirmed by never so great a council of men,
assembled at Rome, having in it, as they say, Archbyshops 70. Bishops 400.
Abbats 12. Priors conuentual 800. besides the Orators and Ambassadors of
Greece, of the Roman Empire, of the kings of Jerusalem, France, Spain,
England, Cyprus, and other kingdoms. Many: but all to little, to take upon
them to alter and change the ordinance and institution which our Savior Christ
had with his own words established, and set in his church, for the space of
above twelve hundred years together, before the contrary was decreed, though
some did dream of it. But Pope Innocent was sure to enact there what he would,
for that he had above the number of twelve hundred shaven crounes in his
council with him: so that neither Princes nor Orators of Princes might hinder
his prete^ses. The less it is to be meruelled at, that the bishop of Rome
would take upon him so proudly to be above al other bishops, yea the Emperors
themselves, and kings of this world: seeing that he took upon him to do more
then ever Christ did, that is, to make Christ our creator and redeemer of a
piece of bread, whenever he list, and to make that every one of his priests
and chaplens might do the same also: as them selves have a saying, Sacerdos est
creator creatoris sui, The priest does make his maker. And all by the authority
of this Lateran Council, not by Christ's scriptures. And all for the advancing
of his worldly glory, and extolling of his clergy throughout all Christian
kingdoms, which after came to pass, to the taking away of the goods and lives
of a great number of good true Christians: who would not believe such a new
devised faith of ye sacrament of Christ, set forth so lately, so fondly, so
ungodly, never before allowed as any point of our christian faith, for the
space of so many hundred years after Christ, as I have showed. For in the
former ages the godly had been taught, that Christ according to the presence
of his natural body was ascended into heaven: but by the benefits of his
spirit, and by the fruit of his passion, he is always present with the^ who
do believe in him. Whereof he gave them a most lively moniment, and pledge, in
the blessed sacrament of his body and blood: a moniment for us to remember his
death, and a pledge to us of everlasting life, with out transubstantion of the
bread and wine, or any alteration thereof at all, otherwise then of common
bread and wine, to make it by the words of Christ the sacramental bread and
wine, the signs of Christ's body and blood, he being by those creatures of
bread and wine represented to us, that we may thereby with the mouth of our
faith (yt I may so speak) receive spiritually ye very self same Christ, god
and man, that was borne of the virgin Mary, suffered death for our sins,
ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father almighty,
thence shall he come at the last day, to judge ye quick and the dead. And this
most heavenly manner of the spiritual receiving of Christ, is more agreeable to
our christian religion, then is the Romish dream of transubstantiation, which
does as much abhor from religion, as it does from reason. And therefore not
to be suffered in the Church of Christ: but utterly to be rooted out, for the
manifold absurdities, and gross errors, that spring of it. Thus much by the
way against the Popish heresy of transubstantiation: whereof, though not so
greatly perteining to the matter, that I have in hand, yet I thought good to
say somewhat, because I do know that the Pope of Rome has left this error
behind him, in the hearts of many simple men, whom God of his mercy lighte^,
that they may feel the knowledge and comfort of the truth.

Chap. 7.
That Christ's words to Peter after the second commission, when he said
thrice unto him, Feed my sheep, prove not any supremacy of him above his
brethren.

TO return therefore to my purpose, to the supremacy of the Pope, which I
have showed already how little ground it has, either on Christ's commissions,
or on Peter's being at Rome, or on the foundation of the Church, which is
Christ Jesus: I come to that which the Papists have so much in their mouths,
that Christ when he appeared last to his Apostles, did ask of Peter thrice,
whether he did love him more, then the other Apostles did. Dixit Simoni Petro
Jesus: John. 21.
Simon Iohannis diligis me plus his? Ait ille, etiam domine tu scis quia amo
te. dixit ei, pasce agnos meos etc. Jesus said to Simon Peter, Simon the son
of Iona, do thou love me more then these? (meaning the rest of his disciples
there present.) Peter answered and said, Lord thou know yt I do love thee.
Christ said unto him, feed my lambs. He said to him again the second
time: Simon the son of Iona love thou me? Peter answered, yea Lord, thou
know I love thee. Christ said unto him, feed my sheep. And when he asked
him the third time the same question: Peter being sorry he asked him so
often, and therefore answering him, Lord thou know all things, thou
know that I love thee: Jesus said unto him, feed my sheep. Upon the which
words, so often repeated, the Bishops of Rome feign would ground their
authority, that they have the universal cure and charge of all Christ's
flock: so much the more, because Christ demanded of Peter, whether he loved
him more then the other did. But they must be given to understand, that Christ
did ask Peter that question, in respect that he had just cause to love him
more then all the other: because he had sinned more grievously against Christ,
in denying him thrice, and he had forgiven him. Now reason does require, Luke.
7.
that he should love more, to whom more is forgiven: as as our savior does
teach. And upon this place Saint Cyril does note, Who does add also,
touching the three demaundes made by Christ to Peter, whether he loved him:
that as he had openly denied three times that he did know Christ: so he must
openly confess three times, that he did love Christ: to the intent, that he
might recover the honor of his Apostleship, which he had forsaken as it were,
by denying him. Cyril in Euangelium Johan. lib. 12. Cap. 64.
Quia cum alijs apostolatus nomine Petrus ab ipso Christo decoratus, ter in
tempore passionis negauit: iure nunc ab eo terna dilectionis confessio petitur,
vt terna negatio aequali dilectionis numero compensetur. Because that Peter
being advanced with others by Christ to the Apostleshippe, did thrice deny him
at the time of his passion: therefore he is justly now required to confess
thrice that he does love him, that his three denials may be recompensed with
equal number of love. Ita quod verbis commissum fuit, verbis curatur. So the
offense committed by words, is cured by words. Which judgment of S. Cyril is
in the same manner confirmed by saint Augustine. So that this saying of Christ
to Peter did not give any further, Augustinus in Euangel. Johan. Tract. 123.
or greater authority to him, then the rest of the Apostles before had. Which
beside the judgments of Cyril and Augustine, might be proved farther by
sundry other reasons, if it were not needelesse to spend more words about it.
Especially, since that I have already proved sufficiently, I trust, the equal
authority given by our savior to all the Apostles. Howbeit, that it may be
farther declared, that one of them should not challenge or desire authority
above the other: I will show in the next Chapter, how Christ did forbid them
utterly to claim or take unto them any such supremacy: commanding them to
follow his ensample of humbleness, in ministering as servants, one to another,
and not in mastership or dominion one to clime above another.

Chap. 8.
That Christ did not give a supremacy to one of them above another, but did
expressly forbid them all dominion and superiority.

IN the Gospel of the holy Evangelist saint Matthew the twenty chapter, it is
written, that our Savior by occasion of the ambitious request that was made
unto him, for the Zebedies, Mat. 20.
James and John, did call his disciples unto him, and said unto them: Scitis
quod principes gentium dominantur illis: and qui maiores sunt, potestatem
exercent in eas, non ita erit inter vos: sed quicunque voluerit inter vos mayor
fieri, sit vester minister: and qui voluerit inter vos primus esse, erit vester
seruus: sicut filius hominis non venit ministrari, sed ministrare. You know,
says Christ, that the princes of nations have dominion over them, and they
that be great, exercise power and authority upon them. It shall not be so
among you: but whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister: and
he that will be chief among you, let him be your servant: even as the son
of man came not to be served, but to serve others.

Thus our Savior, we see, has expressly forbidden his Apostles to have
superiority and dominion over their fellowseruants. Which as it is witnessed
by the Evangelist Saint Mathewe: Mark. 22.
so is it also by the rest of the Evangelists, Saint Mark in the tenth
Chapter, Saint Luke in in the two and twenty: our Savior in each of them
using his own examples, who was in the midst of them, and did behave him
self as a servant unto them, not like a Lord or king above them, that they
by him might learn modesty, to humble themselves one to an other

To the which intent, in the Evangelist Saint John, we have a notable story of
Christ's example in this point: how he did wash the feet of his Apostles,
and gave them ye like instruction upon it. John. 13.
Postqua^ lauit ergo pedes eorum, and accepit vestimenta sua: cum recubuisset
iterum, dixit eis: scitis quid fecerim vobis? vos vocatis me, Magister and
Domine, and been dicitis: sum etenim. si ergo ego laui pedes vestros, Dominus
and Magister: and vos debetis alter alterius lauare pedes. Exemplum enim dedi
vobis, vt quemadmodum ego feci vobis, ita and vos faciatis. Ame^, Amen dico
vobis, no^ est servus mayor domino suo, neque Apostolus mayor est eo qui misit
^llum. Si haec scitis, beati eritis, sifeceritis ea. So after that he had
washed their feet, and had taken his clothes: when he was set down again, he
said unto them: know you what I have done unto you? you call me, master and
Lord, and ye say well, for so I am. If I then your Lord and master, have
washed your feet: you also ought to wash one an others feet. For I have given
you an example, that you should do, even as I have done unto you. Verily,
verily I say unto you, the servant is not greater then his master, nor ye
Ambassador, greater then he that sent him. If you know these things: happy
shall you be, if you do them.

Thus we see that Christ did give express commandment to all his Apostles,
that they should fly ambition of having rule one over an other: that none of
them should challenge superiority and dominion over their brethren: whereto he
did give them a most notable example of his own humility, whch he willed
them to follow, acounting them happy, if they did as he willed them. And
these words of Christ a man would think were to be heard, credited, and
obeyed, if they were recited but by some one of the Evangelists: but now to
the intent they might the better be observed and kept most carefully of all the
Apostles, and so of all the ministers of the Church of Christ: the holy ghost
has provided that all the four Evangelists should recite and repeat them in
diverse words, and sundry times: all to one effect: to beat in hatred of
ambition into the minds of his disciples, and keep them at unity in that
equal authority which he had given to the^. Which the ancient Doctors also
of the Church do teach in like sort, to the same intent: as Saint Cyprian
saying of the Apostles, Cyprian de simplicitate praelatorum.
Hoc erant vtique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit Petrus, Pari consortio
praediti, and honoris and potestatis: The rest of the Apostles were the same
that Peter was, all endued with like fellowship both of honor and power. And
why should not Paul be chief as well as Peter? for Ambrose upon 2. Cor. 12.
has this saying Inter Petrum and Paulum quis cui praeponatur incertum est.
Between Peter and Paul, whether ought to be preferred before other, it is
uncertain. Hieronymus in epistola ad Euagrium.
As saint Ierom saying of all Bishops. Vbicunque fuerit Episcopus, sieve
Romae, sieve Eugubij, sieve Co^stantinopoli, sieve Rhegij, sieve Alexandriae, sieve
Tanis: eiusdem est meriti, ejusdem sacerdotij. Wheresoever there is a Bishop,
at Rome, or at Eugubium, at Constantinople, or at Rhegium, at Alexandria, or at
Tanis: he is of the same worthiness, of ye same office, and function in the
ministry. As many others, to be short, speaking against such ambition do say
the same in substance, that one of them in words has uttered: Chrysostom. in
opere imperfecto in Mat. Homil. 36.
Quicunque desiderat primatu^ in terra, inueniet confusionem in Coelo.
Whosoever desires primacy in earth, he shall find confusion in heaven. But
howsoever the fathers have spoken it: the Pope of Rome is not moved with it.
What merueile, since the words of Christ do not move him? Nay verily I think,
that if Christ him self should have come down from heaven, and have showed
him self to some that have been Bishops of Rome within these certain hundred
years: they would have used him, I fear me, as evil as ever the Jews did:
so far are they from yelding unto any thing that makes against their ambition.

Chap. 9.
That after Christ's ascension, Peter did not exercise a supremacy over his
brethren, neither did the Apostles yield any such unto him.

I Have showed hitherto, that Peter the Apostle, on whom the Popes of Rome do
ground their supremacy, had not by Christ's commission any greater power and
authority given him, then had the rest of his Apostles: Nay, he was forbidden,
as were the rest also, to exercise dominion and supremacy over others. Now I
will go forward, and show that as Peter had no such authority committed to
him of Christ: so he never challenged, nor used any such as may appear by those
things which the Apostles did after Christ's ascension, set down in the book
of the Acts of the Apostles. Wherein we do read, that the Apostles and
Disciples gathered together, Acts. 1.
first they did choose Matthias an Apostle, in the place of Judas Iscarioth:
not by saint Peter's appointment, but by lot. Afterward the multitude of the
Disciples chose seven deacons: whom they set before the Apostles, Acts. 6.
and they prayed, and laid their hands upon them. When the Gospel of Christ
was received in Samaria: Acts. 8.
the Apostles, who heard of it at Jerusalem, sent Peter and John unto hem, to
instruct them farther, and confirm them in the faith, with the gifts of the
holy Ghost. When Peter had preached the Gospel to the Gentiles, and was
accused of the brethren, because he went in to men uncircumcised, and did eat
with them: he gives an account of his fact unto the brethren, Acts. 11.
and so is acquitted as it were of them. All the which things done by Peter and
the Apostles, do show, that Peter used not any supremacy over them: but did
behave himself as their equal rather, taking no more upon him in elections,
then they did, going when they sent him to preach where they thought good,
content to give to them an account of his doeinges. Now we must remember it
appears by the scriptures, that Peter was of greater boldness, and
audacitie, then any of the twelve Apostles. When Christ asked of them, Matthew.
16.
who do you say that I am: Peter answered for them all. When Christ did show
unto them, that he must go to Jerusalem, and there be put to death: Matthew. 26.
Peter took him aside and did rebuke him for it. When there came a great
company with clubbes and swords in the night to take Christ, and carry him to
the high priests: Peter nothing fearing the number of the men, did stretche out
his hand, and draw his sword, and stroke the servant of the high priest,
and cut off his ear. By which and many such tokens saint Peter showed
himself to have such stoutnes and courage, that we may well conjecture, if he
had had any supremacy and authority above the rest of the Apostles, such as
the Papists give unto him: his stomache was better, then that he would have
lost it, and never have taken any part of it upon him. Haec ratio reperitur in
quaestionibus tubingensibus in titulo de primatu Romani pontificis.
Which makes me to think, that he had no supremacy, since that he did not
exercise any part of it, as his behavior in ye Acts of the Apostles does show.
And this, albeeit I have proved it by other of his deeds already: yet it may
be seen more clearly, by that which is written in the 15. of the Acts, where
the council is set forth that was held by the Apostles and Disciples at
Jerusalem. In the which council, although the books of councels set forth by
the Papists do report, that Peter was head, and as it were, the Judge, and
chief ruler of it: yet if a man do read the words of saint Luke in the Acts
of the Apostles, Acts. 15.
Peter should seem rather in that council to be one of the meanest, out of
doubt, not the chiefest. For it is the common and ancient order, that whereas
matter does come in question to be argued, the meanest uses to begin, and so
as they are of greater authority, for age, or degree, or knowledge, or such
respect, they do follow orderly, until that the chiefest speak last, and
take up the matter. Wherefore those books of councels, Summa conciliorum, Fr.
Barth. Carranzae.
and the abridgement of them, which do make Peter to be head of the counsel
holden at Jerusalem, which was holden under him, being the first Pope as they
fondly speak of him: they do say more of him, than they can prove out of the
acts of the Apostles: out of the which they must prove whatsoever they report
of this council, or else they forge it. For there it is written, that when
Paul and Barnabas had proposed the matter whereof the controversy was: Peter
did first begin to declare his mind of it, after great disputation. And when
Peter had said, then Barnabas and Paul spoke their minds also. When they
held their peace, James ended the matter, giving his sentence and judgment of
the controversy. The truth of all the which, yt it may be ye more manifest, I
will set down the very words of Saint Luke, as they are written in the Acts:
so far forth as they pertain to the declaring of this matter. Then came
down certain from Judea, and taught the brethren, saying: except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, Acts. 15.
ye can not be saved. And when there was great dissension and disputation by
Paul and Barnabas against them: they ordained that Paul and Barnabas, and
certain other of them, should go up to Jerusalem unto the Apostles and Elders,
about this question. And when they were come to Jerusalem, they were received
of the Church, and of the Apostles and Elders: and they declared what things
God had done by them. But, said they, certain of the sect of the Pharisees
which did believe, rose up, saying: that it was needful to circumcise them, and
command them to keep the law of Moses. Then the Apostles and Elders came
together to look to this matter. And when there had been great disputation,
Peter rose up, and said unto them. Ye men and brethren, ye know that a good
while ago, among us, God chose out me, that the Gentiles by my mouth should
hear the word of the Gospel, and believe. And God which knows the hearts,
bare them witness, in giving unto them the holy Ghost, even as he did to us:
and he put no difference between us and them, after that by faith he had
purified their hearts. Now therefore why tempt ye God, to lay a yoke on the
disciples necks, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear? But we
believe through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be saved, even as they
do. Then all the multitude kept silence, and heard Barnabas and Paul: which
told what signs and wonders God had done among the Gentiles by the^. And when
they held their peace: James answered, saying. Men and brethren, hearken unto
me. Simeon has declared, how God did first visit the Gentiles, to take of
them a people unto his name: And to this agree the words of the Prophets. Which
words James having rehearsed, does in this sort conclude and end the matter.
Wherefore my sentence is, that we trouble not them of the Gentiles, that are
turned to God: but that we write unto them, that they abstain them selves from
filthiness of idols, and fornication, and that that is strangled, and from
blood. Upon this sentence and judgment of James, it seemed good to the
Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send chosen men of their own
company to Antiochia with Paul and Barnabas: to wit, Judas, whose syrname was
Barsabas, and Silas, which were chief men among the brethren: and they wrote
letters by them after this manner. The Apostles and Elders and the brethren,
unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles, in Antiochia, and in Syria, and in
Cilicia, send greeting. For as much as we have heard, that certain which
departed from us, have troubled you with words, and cumbred your minds,
saying, ye must be circumcised, and keep the law: to whom we gave no such
commandment: it seemed therefore good to us, when we were come together with
one accord, to send chosen men unto you, with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
men that have given up their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. We
have therefore sent Judas and Silas, which shall also tell you the same things
by mouth. For it seemed good to the holy Ghost and to us, to lay no more
burden upon you, then these necessary things: that is, that ye abstain
from things offered to idols, and blood, and that that is strangled, and from
fornication: from which if ye keep your selves, ye shall do well. Fare ye
well. This Epistle containing the decree of the council, agrees fully with yt
which James before did speak, when he gave his judgment of the matter that was
in question. Saving that in the Epistle it is said, Visum est spiritui sancto
and nobis: It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to us. It is not said, Visum
est spiritui sancto and Petro, It seemed good to the holy Ghost, and to Peter:
but to the holy Ghost and to us, meaning the Apostles, the Elders, and the
brethren, the whole congregation of Christ at Jerusalem. Wherefore in the
council where Peter's supremacy should appear chiefly, there appears none at
all: and since that neither he claimed any, neither the rest did give him any,
it is to be thought he had not any. If any man think otherwise, he believes
not S. Peter, 1. Pet. 5.
who calls himself compresbyterum, a companion and fellow of the Elders of
the Church, and forbids them to play the Lords over Gods heritage. Which
overthrows his Supremacy, whom the Papists do call, Sanctissimum dominum
nostrum Papam, Our most holy lord the Pope. God give them grace to acknowledge
with us, him that is in deed our most holy Lord, our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Chap. 10.
That in ye primitive church of Christ, the Bishop of Romes supremacy was not
acknowledged, as it is proved by the four principal and first general
councels, which took order against it.

THat the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome has not any ground in the holy
Scriptures, neither in the commissions of our savior Jesus Christ, neither in
the practices of his holy Apostles: I hope it is manifest to such as are
desirous to search out the truth, by that which hitherto has been said. Now
if we go forward from Christ and his Apostles to the ages which ensued: we
shall easily perceive, that it was not received of ye primitive Church, nay, it
was repressed, when it began to take root, and spread abroad amongst them.
The which does appear by the four principal and first general councels:
wherein the Christian Bishops did assemble them selves together, to the rooting
out of heresies, and overthrowing of disorders, which began to bud in the
Church of Christ. The first of these councels, Histor. tripa. lib. 2.
was the council of Nice: at the which there were present three hundred and
eighteen Bishops, beside a great number of other learned men, called together
by ye good Emperor Constantine ye great, in the year of our Lord three
hundred twenty and seven, or there about, against the heresy of Arrius. But
to pass over other things handled in the council, touching the authority of
the Bishop of Rome, this decree was made, Con. Nicen. can. 6.
in the sixth Canon. Mos antiquus perduret in Aegypto, and Libya, and Pentapoli,
vt Alexandrinus Episcopus horu^ omnium habeat potestatem: quoniam quidem
Episcopo Romano parilis mos est. Similiter autem and apud Antiochiam
caeterasque prouincias, honor suus vnicuique seruetur Ecclesiae. Let the
ancient customs continue in Egypt, and Libya, and Pentapolis, that the Bishop
of Alexandria have the government over them all: For the Bishop of Rome has
the like order. Likewise at Antioch, and in other Provinces, let the due
preeminence and honor be reserved unto every Church. Which words do not give
any supremacy to the Bishop of Rome above all other Churches: but they do
limit him the bounds of his own jurisdiction, no less then they do others.
As it is more plainly declared by Ruffinus: who writing in his story the
things that were done at the council of Nice, does say, that it was decreed in
this Canon, Ruff. hist. ecclesiast. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Vt apud Alexandriam and in vrbe Romana vetusta consuetudo seruetur: vt vel
ille Aegypti, vel hic suburbicariarum ecclesiarum sollicitudinem gerat: That at
Alexandria, and the city of Rome, the ancient custom be kept: that the
Bishop of the one have care over Egypt, the other over the Churches that are
about the city of Rome. And thus much of the council of Nice, which was the
first. The second general council was holden at Constantinople: Histor.
tripertit. lib. 9.
where there were assembled a hundred and fifty Bishops, called together by
the Emperor Theodosius, about the year of the Lord three hundred four score
and five, for the suppressing of the heresy of Macedonius, In the which
council, touching the preeminence and authority of the Bishops, Council.
Constantinop. Canon. 2.
this decree was made. Episcopi qui super dioecesin sunt, and ecclesias quae
extra terminos eorum sunt, non accedant: neque confundant and permisceant
ecclesias. Sed secundum regulas constitutas, Alexandriae quidem Episcopi
gubernent ea solum quae sunt Aegypti: Episcopi orientis, solius orientis curam
gerant, seruatis honoribus primatus ecclesiae Antiochenae, qui in regulis
Nicenae Synodi continentur: sed and Asianae dioecesis Episcopi, ea quae sunt in
Asia tantu^modo gubernent: Ponti autem episcopi Ponticae tantum dioecesis
habeant curam: Thraciae vero, ipsius tantummodo Thraciae. Bishops that have the
charge of a diocese, let them not com unto the Churches which are without
their bounds, neither let them confound or mingle the Churches. But according
to the Canons and orders appointed, let the Bishops of Alexandria deal with
the government of Egypt only: the Bishops of the East only with ye East,
reserving ye privilege and preeminence of honor to ye Church of Antioche,
according to the rules of the council of Nice. In like sort the Bishops of
diocese in Asia, let them govern only Asia: and the Bishops of Pontus, the
diocese of Pontus: and the Bishops of Thracia, the diocese of Thracia. Now
as this decree was made by them in general, touching al Churches for the
government and rule of them, howsoever in places and order of dignity they set
one above another, as Rome first, Histor. tripertit. lib. 9. Cap. 13.
Constantinople next: so in the Epistle written from the most of them to the
Bishops of the West, neither do they submit all their doings to Damasus
Bishop of Rome: neither give they greater titles unto him, then to the rest,
but only name him first: neither come they to the council of Rome at his
request, whereof they give this reason one among others, that they have not the
consent of their fellowe-bishops in their provinces so to do. Whereby it is
manifest that at the time of this council of Constantinople, the provinces were
governed by their own Bishops: the Bishops in general by their councels and
assemblies: neither was there any one Patriarch set over them, (as the Bishop
of Rome would be, who therefore claymeth this supremacy) though there were many
patriarchs appointed in that council unto sundry provinces, as it is
declared in the Tripartit story. Historia tripartit. lib. 12.
The third general council was celebrated at Ephesus, about the year of our
Lord four hundred thirty three, by the commandment of the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, who called together two hundred Bishops into that
City, to quench the heresies of Nestorius. And in this assembly, by occasion
that was given them to speak of the authority of certain Bishops over others,
through complaint made by the Bishops of Cyprus against the Bishop of
Antioch, Council. Ephesin. Can. 8.
as usurping over them: first, they do forbid the Bishop of Antioche to
ordeine Bishops in Cyprus, giving the Bishops of Cyprus full authority to
ordeine their own Bishops themselves. Then do they decree the same point in
general of all other diocesses and provinces wheresoever: that no Bishop do
usurp and take upon him the government of another province, which was not
before, and from the beginning under him or his predecessors: that if any have
done so, and by force have brought a province in subjection to him self, he
shall restore it, least the Canons and orders of the fathers be broken, and
under color of holy function in the government of the Church, Potentiae
tumor, The swelling ambition of bearing rule, of dignity, do privily creep
in: and so at unawares by little and little we lose that liberty which our
Lord Jesus Christ the redeemer of all men, has purchased unto us with his
own precious blood. Which discourse at length is shut up in the council with
these very words: Placuit igitur sanctae and aecumenicae Synodo, vt singulis
prouincijs pura and inuiolata, quae iam inde ab initio habent sua iura
seruentur: vt vnusquisque metropolita, secundum priscum and and solitum morem,
rerum faciendarum aequabiliter facultatem obtineat, propriumqueius firmum
possideat. Quod si quis superbia contumaci definitis obuiam ierit: hunc
abrogatum iri placuit toti sanctae and oecumenicae Synodo. It has therefore
seemed good to all this general council, that every province should keep
wholly, without any breach or empairing at all, their ancient rightes and
liberties, which they have had from the beginning: that every Metropolitan,
according to the old and accustomed manner, do freely enjoy the like and
equal power of doing things belonging to them: and each keep surely and
safely his own right. If any puffed up with pride do go against these
determinations: it has pleased all this holy and general council, that he
shall be deprived. By the which decree of the council of Ephesus, it is most
manifest that the Bishop of Rome may not meddle within ye province of any
other: which yet the Bishops of Rome did, endeavoring still to clyme up by
little and little over other Bishops, till they might ouerlooke them all.
Council. Carthagin. 6.
As it does appear by the council of Carthage, whereat Saint Augustine was
present, and by sundry others. But this ambition was repressed, both by those
prouincial councels, and by the general of Ephesus, which but now I spoke of:
according to the judgment whereof, the Bishop of Rome should be deprived,
because he does meddle with the provinces of others. Euagrius lib. 2. Hist.
Ecclesiast. Summa conciliorum.
The fourth general council was holden of Chalcedon a City of Bithinia:
where there met six hundred and thirty bishops, being called together by the
Emperor Marcianus, against the heresy of Eutyches.

And here, although there be more great and manifest printes and tokens of an
aspiring mind in the Bishop of Romes deputies, whom he did send unto that
council: notwithstanding the fathers of the council did allow no lesser
privilege and preeminence of honor to the Bishop of Constantinople, then to
the Bishop of Rome. Concilium Chalcedon. Can. 28.
Howbeit this decree which I have heard say, and the learned do know it, is in
the Greek copies of the council of Chalcedon, the eight and twentieth Canon
in the latin Book called Summa conciliorum, An abridgement of councels, is
wholly left out: for what cause, a wise man may easily conjecture. Yet the
Friar, who did set forth this abridgement of councels, setting forth again the
council of Chalcedon (after the Canons of it) in an other sort, out of a new
translation, Concilium Chalced. action. 16.
as he does say: does show in this second copy of the council, in the
sixteenth action, how the Bishop of Romes deputies, hearing of that decree,
wherein the fathers allowed the like authority and dignity to the Bishop of
Constantinople, as to the Bishop of Rome, did whine and mutter at it. In so
much that one of them stood forth, and said, that the Sea of Rome, the Sea
apostolic (as he calls it) must not in their presence be so humbled and
oppressed. Notwithstanding, for all the mislyking and grudging of the Bishop
of Romes deputies, who would not consent unto it: the council did alter no
word of their determination, but did conclude the point, as they before agreed
of it. Thus I have showed that in the four principal and first general
counsels, the supremacy of the bishop of Rome, which he does claim over
all Bishops, was never allowed: nay, by those councels he was restrained,
though not so straightly as he deserved, yet within his own Province, no less
then other Metropolitanes and patriarks as they called them. Whereby it may
appear, how falsely Master Fecknam did avouch and affirm in the Parliament
house, at the beginning of the reign of our Sovereign Lady and gracious
Queen Elizabeth, Anno primo Reg. Elizabethae.
when the Popes supremacy was entreted of, that to renounce the authority of
the sea of Rome, was to condemn the judgment of these four notable councels,
the council of Nice, of Constantinople, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon: for as much
as they acknowledged, said M. Feckenam, the Bishop of Rome to be their
chief heads and judges, and were obedient unto them. The which his report
how notably it is untrue: the indifferent reader, I trust, may perceive in
part by that which I have said: and shall perceive a great deal better, if
he peruse the councels them selves, and the stories ecclesiastical which do
entreat of them.

Chap. 11.
How Boniface the third above Six hundred years after Christ, did first get
the title of universal Bishop, and the preeminence of supremacy by the grant
of Phocas a wicked Emperor.

WHen as ye Church was planted by our savior Christ after his ascentio^: all
the Apostles, and after the Apostles all Bishops were equal. At the first
general council, some Bishops of the chief Cities did lift their heads
above their brethren: yet were they still equal amongst themselves. At the
councels which followed, the Bishops of Rome, and of Constantinople, Rome
that had been, Constantinople that was the seat of the Emperor, by reason of
their princely and Imperial Cities, were counted chief among the rest: Yet
equal one with an other, chiefly at the council of Chalcedon, as I have
showed. But ambition never rests, till it do clime above all. The Bishop
of Rome got the supremacy at the last: but the Patriarch of Constantinople
was busy first with it. For in the time of Mauricius the Emperor, John the
Patriarch of Constantinople did challenge to himself the title of universal
Bishop: calling for that purpose a council of the Grecians, Platina de vitis
Pontific. Romans in Gregorio primo.
and maintayning himself in it, by the authority of the Emperor: who as he
willed other Bishops to make that account of him, and accordingly to obey
him: so namely he required it at the hands of Gregory the first, Bishop of
Rome, to whom he wrote purposely touching this matter. Gregorius lib episto. 4.
cap. 76. and lib. 6. cap. 194.
But Gregory having received the Emperors letters, wrote back again unto him,
that the name and title of universal Bishop, which John did take upon him, is
a new, proud, vain, foolish, presumptuous, and blasphemous name: that
whosoever does either call him self so, or desire to be called, he in this his
pride is a forerunner of Antichrist. Wherefore he makes this humble request
unto the Emperor, that he will repress this proud attempt of John: who by
the swelling puff of vain glory does lift up his neck against the Lord
almighty, and the ordinances of the Fathers. As for my self, says he, I
trust in the Lord that John shall not bow my neck unto him, no not with
swords. Which as he writes boldly unto to the Emperor: so does he write
also to the Patriarch John him self, Epistolarum lib. 4. cap. 82.
exhorting him to abstain from the usurping of so foolish and arrogant a
name. And what says he, will thou answer at the day of judgment to Christ
the head of the universal Church: who go about to set all his members
under thee, by this name and title of universal Bishop. But in conclusion,
what soever Gregory could say, either to the Emperor, or to the Patriark, ye
Emperor being inflamed with wrath and anger against Gregory, for refusing to
yield to the Patriarks pride, did call his soldiers out of Italy who before did
defend it against the Lombardes, Platina in vita Gregorii primi.
and exhorted the Lombardes to set upon the Romans, and to besege the city
of Rome, which Agilulfus the king of Lombardes did: and continued his siege a
whole year against the city, putting it to great distress. But they defended
so well the^ selves against him and all his power: that at the last he was
feign to raise his siege, returning home to Millan with great dishonor,
through the gracious providence of Almighty God. So Gregory withstoode John:
not suffering the title of universal Bishop to be given him. Gregor. Epist.
lib. 7. cap. 30.
Neither would he him self accept it, when Eulogius the Bishop of
Alexandria in his leters did give it to him, whom he requesteth not to give him
ye proud name and title: which he would have to be denied no less to him then
to others. But that which the figtree, the vine, and olive did refuse: the
bramble took upon him, as it is written in the Judges. Judge. 9.
That which Gregory refused, and willed all godly Bishops to refuse:
Boniface the third, the successor of Gregory in the sea of Rome, Platina in
vita Bonifac. 3.
not only took it, but also sought it. For after that Mauricius the Emperor
was traitorously murdered by Phocas: Boniface being puffed up with as great
pride as ever was John the Patriark or greater, never ceased from making suite
unto Phocas, that he might be proclaimed universal Bishop, the general
Vicar of Christ on earth, until he did obtain it, which was about the year
of our Lord six hundred and five. Cent. 7. fol. ^29.
And this is the first birth of the Popes supremacy and universal dignity:
which came not from our Savior Christ, but from the Emperor Phocas a traitor
and murderer of his Lord and master. Who, as he murdered his master, the
Emperor Mauricius, even that Mauricius who would have given the supremacy to
John the Patriarch of Constantinople: so he himself, who gave it to Boniface
Bishop of Rome, was after murdered by his Leiutenantes, Heracleonas and
Heraclius. A just judgment of God, for his great iniquities: amongst the which
this was not ye least, yt he did foster the ambition of the Bishop of Rome,
promoting him to the supremacy: out of the which there issued afterward so
great calamities to the Church of God.

Chap. 12.
How the Popes having gotten the supremacy over al Bishops did clime higher and
higher, until they had it also over Princes and Emperors.

AFter that the Bishop of Rome had obtained ye title of preeminence over all
other Bishops and Churches by the grant of Phocas: the successors of
Boniface, to whom the grant was made, were very busy still, having gotten an
inch, to make it an ell: and get in their whole bodies, where they had gotten
in their heads: I mean, to increase and augment the authority, whereof the
title they had purchased. Wherein they traveled so painfully, and did speed
so well, that they set themselves at length in the possession of that
supremacy, which they claim at this day: whereby they did not only set
themselves above Bishops, but also by crafty means they crept clean out of
the Emperors jurisdiction, and by little and little raised up them selves
above all the Emperors, and princes of the earth. So that in process of time,
when they had grown from Bishops to be Popes, they grew from Popes to be
princes, nay above Princes: yea according to S. Paul's prophecy of Antichrist,
2 Thessalonians. 2.
they did sit as God in the Temple of God. For to consider the degrees and
points of their exaltation, and change of their state, how they crept from
their humility to the throne of their supremacy, and settled themselves in
it: first whereas before they were subject to the Emperors, and could not be
made Bishops of Rome without their consent, and allowing of the election: they
got their election into their own hands, so that they needed not the
Emperors consent, yea they made Emperors, the stoutest of them at the length
to be subject unto them, and glad to have them their good Lords. Platina,
their own man, in the story that he writes of the Popes lives, is a
sufficient witness of it: for in the life of Pelagius the second, having showed
how the clergy did choose him Bishop of Rome, he says, Platin. de viti^
pontificum Romanorum in Pelagio^.
that at that time the Cleargies election of the bishop was nothing worth,
unless that the Emperor had allowed his election. But this was before that
Boniface had gotten the title of supremacy. Afterward, as the same Platina
does show, though for a while the Emperor had still to deal with their
elections, yet they often grudged at it, Platina in Paschali. 1. Adrian. 3.
Leone 9. Gregorio. 7.
and sometimes did it without him, and said they ought so to do, and at the
last made a law that the Pope should be chosen by the clergy of Rome, and the
Emperors authority should have nothing to do in it. Moreover the Bishops of
Rome before that time, as all other bishops, were subject and obedient to
their Emperors and Princes. They were called to general councels, by the
writtes and commandments of Emperors, and they obeyed: as before I showed
of the four principal councels summoned by Constantinus Theodosius, and
Martianus. Neither only did they obey, when they were summoned to councels:
but in all other things they did behave them selves, as it becomes subjects
to their sovereign Lords. Matt. 22.
As our savior Christ had taught them: who both did pay tribute him self unto
Caesar, and commanded his Disciples to give to Caesar, yt which is Cesars, and
was obedient unto the Emperors Laws even unto death, Matt. 26.
and never took upon him to disobey so much as the Emperors ministers, or
officers whatsoever. As they had learned of Peter: who says to all the
faithful, 1. Pet. 2.
Subditi estote omni humanae creaturae propter Deum: sieve Regi, quasi
praecellenti; sieve ducibus, tanquam ab eo missis, ad vindictam malorum laudem,
vero bonorum: Be you subject and obedient to all ordinance of man, for the
Lords sake: whether it be unto ye King as unto the superior, or unto the
governors as unto them that are sent of him, for the punishment of evil doers,
and for the praise of them that do well. Romans 13.
As saint Paul did warn the Romans, and in the Romans all Christians: Let
every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God: and the powers that be, are ordained of God. Who so ever therefore
resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves judgment. These lessons of Christ, of Peter, of
Paul, the ancient bishops of Rome did show by their example, they thought them
to pertain not only to the laity, but also to the clergy not only to the
poorest, but also to the richest Bishops. They thought the same which
Chrysostom does write upon Saint Paul, that obedience to Princes is commanded
to all estates: Omnis anima potestatibus supereminentibus sit subdita:
Chrisostom. in Epist. ad Roma. homilia. 23.
etiamsi Apostolus sis, si Euangelista, si propheta, sieve quisquis tandem
fueris. Neque enim pietate^ subuertit ista subiectio. Let every soul be
subject to the higher powers: though thou be an Apostle, says Chrysostom,
though an Evangelist, though a prophet: for godliness is not empaired by this
obedience and subjection. They thought that Constantine did the duty of a
godly Emperor, who when a council of Bishops assembled at Tyrus had wrongfully
and unjustly condemned Athanasius: he commanded them all to come to him
speedily at Constantinople, that you may prove, says he, Historia tripartit.
lib. 3. Cap. 7.
the soundness and vprightnes of your sentence and judgment, Coram me quem
proprium esse Dei ministrum, neque vos negabitis, Before me whom your selves
can not deny to be the true and right servant of God. But after that the
successors of Boniface had felt the savor of the supremacy: neither our
savior Christ's example, nor his Apostles authority, nor the judgment of the
fathers, nor the practice of the godly bishops could keep the Pope within his
bounds, in subjection to the Emperor: but he exempted first himself from his
power, afterward all the clergy, and lastly brought the Emperor in subjection
to him self, taking the two swords upon him, the spiritual and the temporal.

Then ceased the Popes to call the Emperors their Lords, Greg. Episto. lib. 4.
cap. 76. and passim.
as Gregory the first did call them, after his godly predecessors: and they
began to call them their sons, and their children, as now they use to
write unto them. Then did they make decrees, that the civil magistrate should
have naught to deal with any of the clergy: Novel. constitut. Justinian.
where as before, Justinian the Emperor did govern and rule the highest of
them, as his laws do show, the which are yet extant. Then did they count them
selves the only Vicars of God on earth: not acknowledging that in Princes,
which Eleutherius did in Lucius the ancient king of England: whom he willed
as Gods Vicar within his own kingdom to draw him laws out of the scriptures,
there by to rule his own subjects. Then did they forbid, that bishoprics
and spiritual liuinges should be taken at the hands of lay me^, no not of
Emperors: they made them selves Lords of them, and therefore did condemn both
such as gave them otherwise, and such as received them. To be short, they grew
to such outrage of presumption, of rebellion, of riot, of tyranny, of
extortio^, of lust, and all enormities: that a man might know the tree by the
fruits, and the wise must need abhor that supremacy, out of the which such
villainies and abominations did spring into the world.

Chap. 13.
What fruits did spring out of the supremacy, wherein the wicked mischiefs
and abominatio^s of the Popes lives and dealinges are, touched by their own
writers.

THese fruits of the supremacy of the Roman Bishops, would be considered
further in their lives and doings: which if I should endeavor to run them
over all, such as pertain unto this purpose: I should never make an end.
Wherefore I will touch but only certain of the chiefest, as it were for a
taste: noting out of them, as near as I can, the very natural fruits of the
Romish supremacy. Amongst ye which first there comes in place their
contention and ambition in procuring of the Popedom, for the which there has been commonly such corruption, such bribery, such debate, such imprisoning,
murdering and poisoning, and all evil means used betwixt them: that in
Platina, their own secretary and writer of their lives, it is a common note
in very many of them, that they were made Popes, some by Mars, some by money,
some by favor of friends, some by power of noble men, some by sorcerie and
magike, some by like policies of the Devil. Platina in Iohanne 10.
Pontifices ipsi a Petri vestigijs discesserant, says Platina. The Bishops
of Rome were now departed from Peter's steps. Which complainte he does make
upon occasion of their hatred, conceived by one of them against another,
through their ambition. For John the ix. was vexed by Martine the second: so
that being imprisoned he was feign to escape by flight: Martine the second,
made Pope through evil means, did restore Formosus, whom John had depryued.
Afterward Formosus getting the rome by bryberie, came in by perjury unto it,
and lived in it accordingly. Steven the sixth that succeeded him, did abrogate
and repeal all the acts of Formosus, whose body he dug also out of his
grave, cut off his two fingers, wherewith he hallowed Priests, and cast them
into the river. After Steven came Romanus, Theodorus, and John the tenth, who
did repeal the acts of Steven, and restored Formosus acts to full authority
again. Which villainous dealing of them one against an other, enforces Platina
him self, Platina in Formos. 1. Stephan. 6. Romano. 1. Benedicto. 4.
Christophero 1. etc.
though otherwise favoring the Popes, to break out into these complaints:
that the virtue and honesty of the Bishops of Rome now was decayed: that they
did aspire and attain unto the office by ambition and briberie: that hereof
did spring their hatred one against an other, when they were put beside it:
that of this hatred there a rose a common custom, which was almost kept
always afterward, that what the former Bishops had done and decreed, their
successors would either wholly or in part take away: that these petie Popes (for
so he does call them) did think of nothing else, but how they might deface
the name and dignity of their predecessors, by repealing of their acts, that
when the Church did wax wanton with honor and wealth, there being no prince in
Rome to repress men's wickedness, the loose licentiousness of sin did bring
forth these beasts, who through ambition and briberie did invade the sea of
Peter: finally, that these Bishops had but short lives, because God did quickly
take them out of the earth, as it were certain monsters. And these are the
testimonies that Platina does give of this trim succession of the Roman
Bishops, following one an other, when yet their power was lesser, and their
supremacy not grown so high. If I should go forward to speak of their
behavior, who came after these men, and did succeed them in that see: as
namely of the cruelty of Sergius the third, Platina in vitis horum pontificum.
who did behead the carcass of Pope Formosus, long after he was dead: of the
beastliness of John the thirteenth, a man even from his youth given over to
filthy lusts, and all dishonestie of life: of the sacrilege of Boniface the
seventh, who being driven of the citizens out of Rome, did rob Saint Peter's
Church of jewels, and making money of them, returned to buy the Popedom: of
John the sixteenth, who to enrich his kinsemen, spared neither heaven nor
earth, regarding neither Gods honor, nor the Churches commodity: of Siluester
the second, who gave him self unto the devil, that he would help him to be
Pope, upon condition that he should have him wholly after his death: of Benet
the ninth, Siluester the third, Gregory the sixth, of whom the first sold, the
other bought the dignity, and strove together for it, three most ougly
monsters as Platina does call them, and to pass over the rest, of Alexander
the vi. in our own days, who wasted and spoiled all Italy most miserably to
make his bastard Borgia Caesar a Prince: and having at the length certain of
the richest Cardinals at supper, did mind to poison them to have their riches
for his bastard, Onuphrius in vita Alexandri sexti.
but him self was poisoned through the error of his butler, who mistakinge
the flagon gave the good wine to the Cardinals, and to the Pope the poison: If
further I should speak of all their strange and horrible scismes and
contentions, when two or three were made Popes at one time, and raised their
thrones at once in diverse places, of the which kind themselves do number
thirty scismes, some of them lasting for fifty years together, as namely
that for which the council of Constance was assembled by Sigismund the
Emperor, because the state of Christendom was troubled then with three Popes,
all chosen by Cardinals. The first Pope in Italy, the second Pope in France,
the third Pope in Spain, and none would yield to other: ye very rehearsal of
these and the like points, would I fear be tedious, and I could say no more
of them, the^ that which Platina does say often, O quantum degenerarunt isti
Pontifices a suis maioribus: Alas how greatly do these Bishops degenerate
from their auncesters. Or rather that which the Apostle does write to the
Romans, he spoke it of the Gentiles, it was fulfilled in the Popes: Because
they knew God, Romans 1.
and did not glorify him as God, but became vain in their own imaginations,
and turned the glory of the incorruptible GOD into the similitude of the image
of a corruptible man: therefore God gave them up to their hearts lusts, unto
uncleanness, unto vile affections, unto reprobate minds. Wherefore, to leave
the rest which might be said touching these fruits of the Romish supremacy,
to the further search and consideration of the godly reader: only this I can
not choose, but I must expressly note, as the chiefest pearl of their
supremacy, that after they had gotten the lofty title of it by the grant of
Phocas, of Emperors subjects, they became the Lords of Emperors, commanding
what they list, deposing whom they list, as though they were the sovereign
kings of all the earth. First Constantine the Pope did only resist Philippicus
the Emperor, refusing to pluck down images as he commanded him. Then
Gregory the second, when Leo the Emperor gave him the same charge, did take
away from him his Empire in Italy: and Gregory the third did both deprive him
of the Empire, and of the fellowship of the faithful. But in this point
Gregory the seventh, who was named Hildebrand, before he was Pope did far
pass all his predecessors: for whereas before that time the Emperor had
authorite to give byshopriks and other spiritual livings, through all his
dominions: Gregory the seventh took authority upon him to forbid the
Emperor to give any such liuinges, threatening him withal, that if he did
give them, he would condemn both him, and whosoever should receive them.
Which commandment of the Pope for as much as Henry the Emperor missliked,
thinking it unjust, and would not therefore obey it: Gregory the Pope
excommunicated him, and deprived him of his Empire, assoyling all his subjects
of their allegeances unto him, and charging them withal that they should not
obey him. Whereupon a part of his Empire did rebel, and great wars were
raised against him by the Saxons: which, and other discommodities yt did ensue
I will not stand upon. Only I do note the presumption of these Priests who
both rebel them selves against their Lords and Emperors and stir up others
to rebellion, under the color of their supremacy. Whereof we need not to
seek for the proof in Gregory ye seventh, who did so abuse the good Emperor
Henry, we have had experience of it at home within our own realm, which Pius
the fifth did raise to rebellion against our gracious Queen Elizabeth: whom
the Lord defend for ever, as he did then defend her: when Pope did curse
her, he did bless her. But to knit up this point of the fruits of the Popes
supremacy, this is the sum of all, that they do seek their own dominion,
the honor, the wealth, the pleasures of this world: they will rather spoil
Princes and Emperors all of their right, then any part of their preeminence or
commodities shall be empaired. Upon this ground to satisfy their ambition,
their coueteousnesse, their lusts, beside dominions in Italy, which with
Italian policies by the discord of kings and Emperors they have gotten into
their hands: they have endeavored to take away, as I have showed in Hildebrand
and might at large in sundry others, which I omit for breueties sake, they
have don I say whatsoever they could to take away from Emperors, Kings,
noblemen, gentlemen, and all the temporalitie, as they did term it, their
liberties of patronages, donations and presentations of al spiritual
promotions, in all kingdoms and countries, reserving to themselves either
alone, or especially full power, and authority to give bishoprics, and
Abbayes, and Prebendes, and personages, and other such livings. And al to
maintain their inordinate ambition, their excess of riot, their imperial
pomp, their fleshly sensuality, which are the natural children of the Romish
supremacy, the daughter of coueteousnes and pride, the mother of mischiefs
and all abominations.

Chap. 14.
How the Princes of England made many laws and statutes, against the Popish
supremacy long before the time of King Henry the eight, who did root it out
wholly.

THus having; hitherto showed and declared, how the supremacy, and Papacy of
Rome, being not planted by Christ and his Apostles, was rooted first in ye
Church by Boniface the third, and afterward spread abroad farther and farther
by his successors, so that it grew and brought forth the poisoned fruits,
which I have rehearsed: Now it does remain, that I proceed to show how it
has been rooted out of the Church of England by godly princes of famous
memory: whose examples some princes have, I wish all princes of the earth
would follow. And herein I shall evidently discover and refute their error,
who being counted men of good knowledge and judgment, have borne me in hand,
that the power and authority of the Pope of Rome was never banished out of
this our country, until that King Henry the eight did expel it, in the
xxvj. year of his reign, in the year of our Lord a thousand five hundred
thirty and four. For it is certain, and shall be clearly proved, that many
years before that King Henry the eight was borne, or King Henry's Fathers
Father, the kings of this Realm have made laws and statutes, against the
Bishop of Rome his authority and jurisdiction, which he did wrongfully claim
and vsurp within their dominions, and therefore they did justly remove it and
expel it. To the which purpose it must be first considered, that under the
color of the decrees above mentioned, the Popes did take upon them to prefer
strangers unto the rooms of Archbishops and bishops throughout the Realm of
England, many years together: and to place whom they list Abbots, and Priors
in any religious houses, when so ever that the places were void: neither only
to present unto all manner of religious houses, but also to Prebends,
Prouostries, Deanries, Parsonages, and such like. Which things as they were
done to the great impeachment of the kings dignity and crown imperial of the
Realm: so did they tend also to the disinheritance after a sort, of his
majesty, of his cou^sellours, of the nobility, of other his subjects, which
had by inheritance the gifts of such livings: and to the great loss of the
whole country, by decay of hospitality, and conueying of our treasures out of
the Realm, through the means of strangers, who were preferred to these
liuinges and spiritual promotions. For redress of which faults, the nobles
and commons of this Realm, at the Parleament holden at Carlisle in xxv. Anno.
Domini. 1296.
year of the reign of King Edward the first did present and exhibit a bill
into the Parleament, of all the inconveniences and injuries offered to the
kings majesty, the nobles, and commons by the Bishop of Rome. Whereupon the
Parleament took order, and enacted, that from thence forth the Bishop of Romes
authority should take no place within this Realm in any such matters: if he
dealt in any, they should be void and of none effect. Which act made against
the Bishop of Rome, because there was no penalty set upon such as did
maintain or suffer his doings to prevail against the order taken: therefore
not long after the death of this good king Edward the first, Edward the second
his son, being king, a man of no such courage as his father was, neither
having leisure thorough his great troubles with the Earl Mortimer and the
Queen his wife to look to such matters, the Bishop of Rome did spring again
to do what he would. The substance of this Act, made by king Edward the first,
is not recited in the statutes of the xxv. year of his reign: because it is
wholly mentioned in the first part of the statute made the xxv. year of King
Edward the third. At the which time, in a Parleament holden at Westminster, the
same petition and Act made at Carlisle was returned, Anno Domini 1350. cap. 1.
and more ample order taken withal against the Bishop of Rome. For it was
provided there and enacted, that whosoever did fetch from Rome, or take any
such provisions to disturb any presentation or election made in this Realm,
or the persons that were in possession of any spiritual promotions: that the
prouisors and disturbers, their procurators, executors, notaries, and
attournies, should be attached, and laid in prison, without bail, or
mainprise: there to remain until both they had answered the king such fine and
ransom as should be taxed at his pleasure: and also had agreed with the party
wronged: neither should they be delivered until they had put in sufficient
sureties never to attempt any such thing afterward. Cap. 1.
Again in the xxvij. year of his reign in the Parleament holden at
Westminster, the same statute was enlarged, and the penalty made, that the
offenders therein if they came not to answer at their day in proper person,
and were found culpable, they should forfaite all their lands, and goods,
their body should remain in prison, and out of the kings protection. It
appears farther in the xxx. year that an exco^mengment, as they do term
it, was certified by the Pope: which was disallowed by the Justices, and the
bringer thereof should have been hanged and drawn, if the Chancelour of
England had not prayed to the king for him. In the xxxviij. year, the like
act was made, for such as procured any citations or processes from the court
of Rome: that their procurers and attourneyes should have such punishments and
forfaitures as are before mentioned. Now in the time of king Richard the
second, who did next succeed him, there was a statute made the thirteenth year
of his reign, Anno Domini. 1363. Cap. 1.
in the Parleament at Westminster, against prouisors of benefices, with this
penalty: that they should be out of the kings protection, and forfeit the
benefice. But in the sixteenth year of his reign, Cap. 15.
the same king made more full and strait laws against the Bishop of Rome:
whereby he banished his whole authority out of this realm, enacting, that no
process from Rome should be allowed: Yea further, Cap. 5.
that if any subject of this realm should receive, or fetch from Rome, or set
forth any manner Citations, Presentations, Fulminations, Bulls, or any other
things against the kings regaltie and crown: he being convict thereof, should
loose and forfet all his lands and goods to the king, and his body to be at
the kings pleasure, and out of his protection, and in the cause of praemunire.
The same punishment also appointed for him, who so ever should sue any appeal
to Rome. King Henry the fourth which succeeded Richard, in the second year of
his reign, in the parliament holden at Westminster, An. Do. 1401. Capit. 3.4.
did likewise make a law, that no spiritual or religious person, secular or
regular, should take any manner of promotio^ or living spiritual, or offices in
any spiritual houses, by any provisions of Licenses or Bulls from Rome, under
the pain contained in the praemunire, as in the first and fourth Chapter of
that statute is declared. Again in his sixth year, at the parleament holde^ at
Couentrie, Capit. 1.
there was a law made to ease Archbishops and Bishops of their great
exactions, taken by the Pope and his officers of his chamber, for their first
fruits. Again in his seventh year, an other law was made touching the
Licenses and Pardons granted from Rome to the incumbents of any benefices,
that whether they were granted, or to be granted, they should be utterly
void, and of none effect. Again in his ninth year, because the Archbishoppes
and Bishops of this realm, Capit. 8.
were after their elections greatly troubled by the Bishop of Rome, it was
enacted that the elections of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors, and other
spiritual persons, should be free from all manner of interruptions and
encumbrances of the Bishop of Rome. An. Do. 1407
It were tedious to go forward in the like sort with the Princes that
followed: but by this taste the wise may easily perceive, how no law could
bridle the unruly usurpation of the Pope of Rome, but almost under the reign
of every Prince, for the space of two or three hundred years, they were
compelled to renew old, and make new provisions and acts of Parliament
against him: Notwithstanding all the which, his dealings were so outrageous,
and gathered eftsoons new strength: that they could never be thoroughly
repressed, until that God did raise up our noble Prince of famous memory King
Henry the eight, who perceiving and understanding, as well by his own
judgment and knowledge, as also by the learned Clergy of his realm, how
the Bishops of Rome have of long time fallen away from the sound and pure
religion of Christ, by their corrupt doctrine and abominable pride: extolling
them selves, not only above all Bishops, but also above all Emperors, Kings,
and Princes of the earth: disobeying the authority of rulers and magistrates,
whom the Lord set over them, whom Christ did obey, whom the Apostles were
subject to: speaking lies through hypocrysie, as they of whom S. Paul does
prophecy, 1. Tim. 4.
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with giving of thanks, of them who believe and know the
truth: and to come to the chiefest point, devising blind, erroneous, profane
and ungodly means of obtaining salvation, by gadding in pilgrimage, by
oblations to images, by kissing of relics, by numbering of Pater nosters and
Aue Mary's upon beads, by going barefoote and barelegged, by creeping to
crosses, by their pardons a poena and culpa, with a number of peevish toys and
superstitious ceremonies, to the blemishing of true faith, the anchorhold of
all Christians, grounded on assured hope of salvation, by the death and passion
of our savior Christ, which is empaired by Popery: the the Noble Prince
therefore, King Henry the eight, seeing and considering these detestable
enormities, and wicked usurpation of the Pope of Rome, did utterly banish his
counterfeit authority out of this realm of England, with the appurtenances of
it. Which having him self begun in part to do, he had it confirmed with the
consent of the whole realm, by statute and law made in the eight and twenty
year of his reign, at a Parleament holden at Westminster, An. Do. 1536.
Capit. 10.
to the great comfort of all his faithful subjects, to the reviving of the
dignity of his imperial crown, and most of all to the true honor and glory
of the Almighty. After this noble King, there succeeded the godly worthy
Prince his son, King Edward the sixth, who not only confirmed that law
against the Bishop of Rome, but further proceeded in the establishment of true
religion. And of late again (albeit) some interruption grew in the time of
Queen Marie, Our most virtuous and gracious Sovereign, Queen ELIZABETH,
following the godly steps of her noble father and brother, had it inacted in
her first parleament, that the authority of the Bishop of Rome, and of al
other foreign power, and potentates, spiritual and temporal, should utterly
be driven away, and removed out of all her majesty's territories and dominions:
and that upon such penalties unto all her subjects, that to uphold,
maintain, or set forth any such foreign authority wtin this realm, it is in
some points and degrees high treason: so that they lose and forfaite their
lives, lands, and goods, who are guilty of it. A statute that may seem
severe, and is perhaps accounted of some ouerrigorous: but they who mark it
wisely cannot choose, but see how sharp tools were necessary to root out
this weed, which many godly Princes before King Henry the eight did endeavor
to nip of by sundry good laws, but it budded still again, and brought forth
such blossoms, or rather fruits, of rebellion, ambition, coueteousnes,
hypocrisy, and wicked superstition, as it was to be feared would have
poisoned the whole land, had not our gracious prince used such sharp
instruments to root it out utterly.

Chap. 15.
A short repetition of the points proved, witha conclusion of the whole. And
an exhortation to the people of England to embrace this truth, with all the
heavenly doctrine of Christ's religion.

WHerefore I do wish even from the very botome of my heart, that every
faithful subject, and right Christian man would weigh both this point, and all the rest, which I have said, to satisfy his conscience in this matter of the
supremacy: least they build upon sand, not on the rock, Jesus Christ. Let
us consider yt our savior did not grant it to any of his Apostles: nay he did
expressly forbid such ouerruling and dominion amongst them. Let us
remember, that as it was not given by him to Saint Peter: so neither did Saint
Peter practice it, nor the Apostles attribute it unto him. Though it had been
given to Peter amongst the rest: yet what reason is it that the Bishop of
Rome should be his heir in it? sith we read not in the scriptures that Peter
ever was at Rome: which we should have redd doubtless, if it had been of so great
weight. Hereunto we must add, that in the primitive Church this preemine^ce
was not acknowleged, either to, or by the Bishops of Rome. The godly
Bishops of that City, who many of them were martyrs, did not take it upon
them. The four first principal and general councels assembled out of all
Christendom, did not yield it unto them. What have we then to do with
Boniface the third, to whom the title of supremacy was granted first by
wicked Phocas? What have we to do with Boniface his successors: who have sat
in the chair of pestilenc and have made their scepter a scepter of iniquity?
shall we rather follow them, then Christ, then Peter, then ye Apostles, then
general councels, then godly Bishops of Rome? Shall we not be wise, and
learn to make a difference between the first Bishops that were in ye City,
free from such ambition: and between the later, who swarued from their stepes?
For as they did follow Christ and his Apostles in preachinge and teaching the
holy word of God, in ministering the sacraments in plain and humble manner: in
ordering well the flock of Christ by good and wholesome discipline: so these
of the other side, after that they had obtained ye supremacy of the Emperor,
they increased the seeds of error and superstition, which before were cast,
and fell away more and more from Christ's example and doctrine, making them
selves a new priesthood, and framing it after the manner of the priesthood
amongst the Jews, both by changing the ministration of the Lords supper
into a sacrifice propitiatory, and an oblation for the sins of the living
and of the dead, though they were not partakers of it: and also by devising to
themselves such gaye and disguised vestures of cloth of gold and silver, of
velvet and such other stuff, so that not Aaron was apparailed more gorgeously
the^ they. But this was the least fault: yet out of doubt a fault. For our
savior Christ did not abrogate the ceremonies of the law of Moses, to bring
in others like unto them. But other things were greater, and most of all to be
condemned in these Byshopps of the supremacy: yt they devised new ways and
means for me^ to obtain forgiveness of their sins and everlasting life, such
as neither Christ our savior did ordeine, neither did they advance the glory
of Christ, our only savior. For they devised that men might be saved by
their own works, and by praying to images, and by going a pilgrimage, and by
setting up of candles before the pictures of saints, and by purchasing of
Pardons from the Bishop of Rome, specially, if they were pardons called a Poena
and culpa, and by trentals, and diriges, and by Masses of Requiem, and of Scala
coeli, and by their tapers of wax, and by their sacring belles, and clackes,
and by their pascall, and by their pax, by their sensinges and solemnities, by
their devout creeping to crosses and wearing of cowles of Moonkes, and such
other a thousand trumperies, holy cream, holy oil, holy bows, holy ashes,
holy bread, holy water, to keep them from evil spirits, and I know not
what. Thus they led the people from their faith, and trust in the blood and
death of our savior Jesus Christ, to put their faith and trust in the Popes
indulge^ces, and in such other blind illusions: to the great danger of their
souls, and the dishonor of the Lord. Neither contented with this corruption
of doctrine, they brought in a greater confusion of discipline: calling away
the elections of Bishops, and handling of Church matters, unto the court of
Rome: where the Market was, for spiritual promotions, for deciding of
controversies, for bying out of sins, for keeping of concubines, for cleansing
of purgatory, for engrosing of livings, for non residence upon them, and for
what not? All was at Rome, and might be had from Rome for money. The Lords
vineyard did lie waste. The Church was become a den of thieves. Wherefore,
good Christian brethren and countrymen, sith the light of the Gospel has
opened these things unto us: let no man deceive us under color of antiquity,
or by saying, thus and thus our forefathers have thought many hundred years
past, and therefore it is good. For if you will have respect to antiquity: the^
do, I beseech you, as I have here done: begin at our savior Christ's time,
and so come down to ours, as it were by steps, and you shall see that there
is as great difference betwixt the primitive Church of Christ for five or six
hundred years, and these latter times of darkness which followed ye light, as
is almost betwixt white and black in color, or God and the devil in
goodness. For the Bishops of Rome in these latter ages have been so clean
contrary in all respects to Christ, that the Prophecy of saint Paul to the
Thessalonia^s does seem to be fulfilled in them: 2 Thessalonians. 2.
in that he does say, there should be a departing first from the faith, and
then the man of sin should be disclosed, even the child of perdition, which
is an adversary to God, and exalts him self against ye most highest. Which
words, what Antichrist can they describe more lively, then the Pope of Rome?
For to passover his falling from the faith, and his corruption of doctrine
which I have already noted, as Christ was most humble and meek: so the Popes
are most hautie and proud. As Christ was most simple and poor: so the Popes
are most subtle and full of treasures. John. 18.
As Christ said his kingdom was not of this world: so the Popes do lift them
selves above the Princes of this world. As Christ went lowly upon the ground:
so the Popes must be carried aloft on men's shoulders for fear of touching the
ground. As Christ in apparel, behavior, and conversation, applied himself
to common men: so the Popes in these things do resemble rather the majesty
of Emperors. They may be well compared to the Pharisees whom Christ did liken
to painted tumbes, Matt. 23.
which appear beautiful in the vttersides, but are within, full of dead men's
bones and all filthiness. Such are the Bishops of Rome, most rich in robes of
cloth of Gold, their very shoes set with precious stones: but within, their
souls most filthy, with riot, covetousness, ambition, and other worldly
vices, as their lives do show, which are set forth unto the world by Platina
and others, men that knew them well, and were conversant about them.
Wherefore, since it is manifest that under color of holiness pretending to be
Christ's Vicars, they are Christ's adversaries, even his greatest adversaries,
with drawing his people from their special trust in him to their own errors
and wicked superstitions: therefore now, good Christian brethren, let us
follow the counsel of the Scriptures. John. 12.
Dum lucem habemus, ambulemus in ea: While we have the light, let us walk in
the light, even in the light of the Prophets and Apostles. Whereby Christ does
teach us the falsehode of Antichrist, that we may fly from him, and from all
his works of darkness: that we may detest his unjust supremacy, and
erroneous doctrine, and fantastical ceremonies, and all the dregs of
Babylon. Matt. 11.
Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis and onerati estis, and ego reficiam vos,
says our Savior Christ. Come unto me all ye that are weary and laden, and I
will refreshe you. I will refreshe you, says our Savior: he calls most
comfortably unto him self, all, which are trouble and afflicted in mind,
thorough the consideration of the grieuousnesse of their sins, which deserve
eternal death, and are ready to cast them into desperation: and he does
promise them, that he will ease them, without suing to Rome for pardons, or
having Masses, or trentals, or diriges, or other such foolish fancies of men.
But he wills them to come unto himself, Matt. 1.
who was called Jesus, that is to say, a Savior, by the commandment of God,
because that he should save his people from their sins: of whom saint John does
say, 1. John. 2.
Si quis peccauerit: aduocatum habemus apud patrem, Iesum Christum iustum: and
ipse est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris: non pro nostris autem tantum, sed
etiam pro totius mundi. If any man, sin, says John the Evangelist, we have
an advocate or Mediator with God the Father, Jesus Christ the just: and he is
the propitiation, the pacifier of God, obteining mercy for our sins, yet not
for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole world. Wherefore since the
Pope does teach us to have other mediators and advocates to the Father, even
the saints, whom himself and his Cardinals have canonized, and does lead men
so many ways, as though they might be saved by them, where as our Savior
Christ is the only way, John. 8.
the truth and the life: let us leave this false priest, and his bulls, and his
pardons, and the rest of his trumperies, and let us think well of our godly
princes, who have cut out the roots of his supremacy, whence all the poison
does flow. For the staying of the which, least it should be received into
the bowels of the Realm, and corrupt the whole body: many godly Princes
heretofore began that work, by making sundry laws and statutes, which in
our days King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, and our gracious Queen
Elizabeth have brought to good end, through the great mercy of God. That which
our Savior said, is fulfilled herein: Math. 15.
Omnis plantatio quam pater meus coelestis non plantauit, eradicabitur: Every
plant which is not planted by my heavenly father, shall be pulled up by the
root. The light of Christ's Gospel has openly disclosed to us that man of
sin, and child of perdition, which takes on him to sit in the temple of
GOD, as God. It is manifest that his supremacy, with all his errors builded
on it, are plants which were not planted by God our heavenly father. God will
therefore root them out, according to his promise: upon the which promise, in
part fulfilled already, we are to make our daily prayers, that he will more and
more fulfill it: that he will root out all, speedily, and thoroughly, not only
out of our Church of England, but out of all peoples consciences: that the
servants of God may be joined altogether in one Christian faith, setting their
whole confidence in Jesus Christ alone, the son of the living GOD, who
suffered cruel death, and shed his precious blood for the ransom of all our
sins, as many as believe in him, that he might join us to him self, and
present us to his father, making us partakers of his own glory with him. Which
the Lord grant us of his infinite mercy, through our mediator and savior
Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.

