THE EXALTATION of the kingdom and Priesthood of Christ.

In certain Sermons upon the 110. Psalm: Preached in the Cathedral Church
and city of WORCESTER, in the time of Christmasse: anno Domini: 1596.

By ROB. ABBOT, doctor of Divinity, sometime fellow of Baliol College in
Oxford.

LONDINI, Impensis G. Bishop. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in Christ the L. Bishop of WORCESTER, my very
good Lord.
My good Lord, it is now full two years since upon a purpose to reuiewe some
part of those exercises which I performed in the city of Worcester, I
extracted these few Sermons to serve for introduction to the rest. Upon
dispatch whereof applying my self not long after to another matter of greater
weight, and being thereby as by other occasions hindered from any convenient
leisure to deal by my self for the publishing of these discourses, they have
sithence lien a sleep, till of late opportunity serving, I found the means
to tender them to his hands which has thus brought them into open light. Since
which time being by your Lordship motioned to do that which I had thus begun
to do, and having your opinion that therein I should do a service beneficial
and profitable to the Church, I was the more comforted in that I had begun,
and presumed the rather as before I had intented to commend unto your Lordships
good favor the first fruits of these my reuiewed meditations. And theerein I
account your Lordship to have some special interest, both in regard of the
place where they were performed being your own Cathedral Church, as also of
my self; who having found that Honorable respect at your Lordships hands
since your first coming to that place, cannot but hold my self always bound
to yield a due acknowledgement and confession thereof. Which I could not tell
better how to do then by a gift of ink and paper, which yet does rather crave
another favor for the accepting of it, then yield any recompense of the
former. But I hope this my labor shall not be unfruitful unto them who at
the first were hearers of these Sermons. Who if they reaped any benefit or
comfort at the first by hearing, may now renew the same by reading, and more
firmly imprint in mind what they then conceived might serve for their
edification and furtherance toward God. And although I doubt not but if their
regard in hearing were answerable to my care in speaking, they still retain
the taste of those wholesome words that were delivered unto them, yet to give
them the more full and perfect apprehension thereof, I will endeavor as
opportunity may serve to present unto their eyes the things which did once
affect their ears, and to make others also partakers of the same. if at least
these small beginnings do find that comfortable entertainment both with them
and others, as may give encouragement to the rest to follow after. Wherein I
can promise to my self no more then the condition of these times will
affoorde, in which their reigns a nice and wanton humor which delights to
be tickled with the entising words of humane wisdom, and more respects
how finely we speak to please the care, then how faithfully to touch the
heart. But for my part as in preaching, so in writing, my care has always
been rather to edify the conscience of the godly, then to feed the fancy
of the curious, and not to delude men with empty words, but only by
convenient words to impresse and enforce the matter that I have had in hand.
And more then this the Reader may not expect either in this Treatise or any
other that hereafter happily may come from me. Which I know shall be pleasing
to your Lordship, whose travels have always entirely tended to the saving of
souls by implanting them with true faith and instructions of godly life, and
by seeking passionately and effectually to enter into the hearts of them to whom
you have spoken. Wherein as God has blessed your labors in other places, so I
doubt not but he will also in the place where now you are, as I heartily wish
and pray for, as willing to express mine affection to that city wherein I
have bestowed the greatest service of my life, and wherein I assure my self
that a few names there are at least, I hope many that shall be my crown and
rejoicing at the day of the Lord Jesus. Of which joy I envy not that any man
should be partaker with me, but rather desire to hear of a successor in my
place, by whose good means they may be yet further increased and stablished in
the grace of God. Which how necessary a care it is, I think there is no man
but sees, that inwardly waigheth and takes to heart the state of our days
wherein we are so settled upon the lees of those corruptions which are usually
bredde by long prosperity and peace, as that much work it is, not only to
waken them that are asleeepe, but also to keep men from sleeping, when they
are once awake. The due consideration whereof if it were admitted would
perhaps stir up the devotion of them whom it concerns to be mindful of
their own good. Which I know many of them are, and God I hope by your
Lordships good means will move the rest. With which hope I recommend these
remembrances to your Lordships favorable acceptance, beseeching God so to
bless your endeavors and courses as that they may yield glory unto God, and
profit to his church, and comfort to your own soul at the coming of Jesus
Christ. Amen.

Your Lordships in all love and duty, ROB. ABBOT.

The first Sermon upon Christmas day.
Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footestoole.


1. Tim. 3.16.
GReat is the mystery of godliness, says Saint Paul; God made manifest in the
flesh, etc. God in the flesh, man to be God; one and the same to be both God
and man, it is Bernaer. in vigil. natal. dom. ser. 3.
a wonder of the world, nay more then a world of woonders. God higher then
the heavens; man of the slime and dust of the earth. God incorruptible and
immortal; man nothing but mortality and corruption. God infinite and
incomprehensible; 1. King. 8.27.
the heavens and heavens of heavens are not able to contain him; man a
handful of worms meat; a few spannes are sufficient to describe and measure
him. What comparison is there at all betwixt the heavenly majesty of God, and
the baseness of vile flesh? And yet the Ioh. 1.1.14.
word which was God, became flesh and dwelt among us, etc. A mystery
unspeakable, the secret of Christian faith, the foundation of Christian hope;
the inducement of Christian love, both toward him who being God became man for
our sakes, and toward other men for his sake.

2 The revealing of this mystery to the world we celebrate this day, which by
our solemn observation is answerable to that day when as the angel brought
that gracious and blessed tidings from heaven, Luc. 2.10.
Behold I bring you glad tidings of great joy that shall be to all people, that
this day there is borne unto you in the city of David a Savior, which is
Christ the Lord.

This Psalm written of Christour Lord, and not appliable to any other.
Of this Savior, Christ the Lord, was this Psalm written by way of Prophecy,
which for the performance of this solemnity I have chosen to entreat of, which
although the Jews of later times have gone about to wrest to another meaning,
yet is so approved and undoubted a prophecy of Christ, that the Pharisees
durst not dense it, when Math. 22.^^.4^.
being apposed and demanded by our Samour, how it should be seeing Christ is
the son of David, that David notwithstanding should call him Lord, saying,
The Lord said unto my Lord, they could not answer him a word, whereas the
answer had been very easy and ready if they could have denied this Psalm to
be meant of Christ. But they knew it could not be otherwise understood, and it
was commonly taken amongst them to be a prophecy of their Messiah, according
to the very evidence of the text it self, which cannot be fitted to any
other, but only to Christ our Savior the son of God. For whereas some of
them sithence have construed all these things as spoken in the name of the
people of Judah concerning David their king, the text it self refuses that
construction, when in those words, sit thou at my right hand, it mentions an
honor done to him of whom it speaks, greater then can be fitted to the
angels, and therefore much less to be applied unto David. Again, that which
is spoken in the fourth verse of the Priesthood, cannot be understood of David
who was indeed a king, but never had any thing spoken as touching the
Priesthood to appertain unto him, and of whom it cannot be conceived how it
should be said; Thou art a priest for ever, etc. Yea there is nothing here
spoken whereof we may see in David any more but some little shadow in
comparison of that that has come to pass in Jesus Christ.

The division and parts of this Psa^me.
3 Understanding it therefore of him to whom only it can properly belong, we
may see many notable lessons contained herein; of the kingdom and priesthood
of Christ: of his mighty power and success in the gathering and governing of
his Church: of the condition and quality of his people: of his dreadful
reuengement and wrath to be brought upon all them that resist his kingdom and
government. We may for orders sake divide the whole Psalm into three parts: the
one concerning the kingdom of Christ in the three first verses: the other
concerning his priesthood in the fourth verse: the third concerning his power
and victory and triumph over his enemies, Three things to be observed in the
kingdom of Christ.
from the fourth verse to the end. Again in the first concerning the kingdom
of Christ three points may observed. First the inuesting of him into his
kingdom; in the first verse. In the second verse the means and manner how this
kingdom is erected and established. In the third verse the quality and
continual supply of the subjects of this kingdom.

4. The inuesting of Christ into this glorious kingdom is by the word of his
heavenly father. The Lord said unto my Lord. Wherein is uttered the
everlasting decree and purpose of God for the exaltation of Jesus Christ to
this excellent glory to sit at the right hand of God. Gods saying is the
manifesting of his everlasting purpose.
For whatsoever God does, or will do he has before said it with himself in
his secret and unsearchable counsel before the foundations of the world were
laid. Now we are here to distinguish him that says from him to whom it is
said, the one termed the Lord; The Lord, God the father: my Lord, God the
son.
the other my Lord; to import by the one, that is, the Lord, God the father: by
the other, that is, my Lord, the son Jesus Christ, who according to the Romans
1.3.
flesh was made of the seed of David, and in that respect was the son of
David, but yet called by David himself my Lord, that we may understand that he
is somewhat more then that that he was borne of David. For by being David's
son, he was but only man, but somewhat there is further for which David
speaking of him calls him Lord, teaching us thereby to acknowledge him to be
the son of God. But when speaking of God the Father, My Lord, why in,
special manner spoken of Christ.
he calls him the Lord, and speaking of God the Son, he calls him my
Lord, as thereby to import some more special and nearer bond and respect
betwixt the son and us, he does it not to bar us from calling God the
father our Lord also, but thereby gives us occasion to consider that all that
communion and fellowship which we have with God the father, thereby we are his
people, and he is the Lord our God, arises from the son, and stands in the
son, so that no otherwise can we call God our Lord and our God, but as with
Thomas we can first say unto Jesus Christ, Ioh. 20.28.
Thou art my Lord and my God. For whosoever is excluded from the son, is
excluded also from the father. 1. Ioh. 2.23.
Whosoever denies the son, says Saint John, the same has not the father.
And the son himself tells us; Ioh. 14.6. God no otherwise good and
merciful unto us but in his son Jesus Christ.
I am the way, the truth, and the life. No man comes unto the father but by
me. God is good and gracious, full of mercy and compassion, full of bounty and
kindness, but the fountain of all this goodness is stopped and shut up
against us, but as it is opened unto us in the son of God. Whereby we may
conceive how little good they have reaped by their speculations concerning God
that have lived without the knowledge and faith of Jesus Christ. They have
carried great credit and reputation of wisdom and learning in the world, and
have been accounted divine men, and indeed have uttered many excellent and
worthy sentences concerning the divine nature, his wisdom and power, his
justice and mercy, and our duty and devotion toward him. But they spoke only
as it were by hearesay, and those sentences were but only weak and
languishing imaginations, the authors whereof sought rather to gain glory
unto themselves by speaking of God, then to glorify God of whom they spoke.
Albeit howsoever they spoke them, and how far soever they apprehended what
they spoke, yet what comfort of conscience received they thereby? what peace
toward God? what persuasion of Gods love toward them? what assurance of the
forgiveness of sins? what were they the nearer unto everlasting life? surely
nothing at al, because they were without Christ, who only is the ladder by
which life descends from God to us, and we ascend to live with God. The
necessity of the knowledge of Christ.
And hereby we may see how necessary a thing it is for us to understand the
mystery of Jesus Christ, not thinking it sufficient, as many do, historically
to know, and formally of custom to celebrate the memory of his birth and
death, and resurrection, and ascending into heaven, but searching out the
fruits and effects thereof; enquiring after that grace and salvation which he
has brought unto us thereby; that so we may know what cause we have of this
solemn rejoicing, and our rejoicing may be not only according to the flesh
and outward man, but much more inwardly in spirit and conscience, whilst that
being assured that Christ is our Lord, we find in him comfort of peace toward
God and of the forgiveness of our sins, and certain hope of the favor and
love of God toward us both in life and in death by that mediation and
atonement that he has wrought.

Christ's demeaning and abasing of himself to make atonement for us.
5 Which atonement that he might work, he would become of the son of God,
the son of David: both ways a kings son; according to his Godhead the
son of the great king of heaven and earth: according to his manhood the
son of king David: but yet both in his birth and life and death, far demeaned
beneath all kingly state, the tabernacle of David being now fallen down, and
only the ruins thereof remaining: the branches and arms of that goodly tree
being now cut off, and only the root or stump left as it were in a dry and
barren ground. Marie his mother of the house of David is married to Joseph, of
the house of David also, but of no better state but a poor carpenter, and of
so small estimation, that in the city of David, for his wife, yea being with
child, great with child, yea traueling with child and child bearing, he
could find no better entertainment but that the mother must be chambered in
a stable, and the child cradeled in a cratch or manger, as if they had been
to base to receive that common courtesy that in such a case is vouchsafed to
the meanest, and other men's horses were to be thought worthy of as good place
as they.

The profitable learning of Christ begins at his humiliation and weakness.
6 Now here are we to begin in the learning of Christ, if we will learn him
fruitefully and to our comfort. If we begin at his majesty, it will confound
us: if we first look to the brightness of his glory, it will blind our
eyes, his terrors shall make us afraid, and we shall not dare to come unto
him. And therefore some whilst they have immediately fastened their eyes upon
the highness and majesty of Christ sitting at the right hand of God, have
been discouraged and driven away from him, and whereas he is our only mediator
to bring us unto God, have devised and set up other mediators to bring them
unto him. This was the error of Popery which embraced the story of Christ's
incarnation and death, but never taught the use thereof; and left men in an
opinion as if Christ according to the manner of earthly princes, were of that
austeritie and stateliness, that they might not presume directly to come unto
him, but must use the solicitation and intercession of other saints that were
near about him. But from this error we shall be free, if we begin with Christ
where we ought to do. We must acquaint our selves with him in his weakness,
and then he shall not seem dreadful to us in his strength: we must be
conversant with him in his humility, and that shall minister unto us boldness
to go unto him in his glory. If we scorn to sit with him in the stable, and
to learn of him in the manger; if we neglect the comfort that we should
receive by his humbling and abasing of himself for our sakes, the beams of
his glorious light sitting now in the majesty of the godhead, shall seem unto
us as flames of fire ready to consume us if we approach unto him. As therefore
we know how we our selves are borne, little and weak, and so grow from
infancy to childehood, and from childehood to ripe age and full strength, even
so must Christ have his beginning and proceeding in us. We must embrace him
swadled in the manger, and grow up with him even from his cradle and
childehood, and continue the decourse of his whole life, and see therein how,
as Hilary says; Hilar. de Tri. lib. 2.
Omnes naturae nostrae contumelias transcurrit; He ran through all the
contumelies and disgraces of our nature. We must behold him Esa 53.2.
without form or beauty, Psalm. 22.6.
a worm and no man, the scorn of men and contempt of the people, poor and
despised, in meaner state then the Math. 8.20.
foxes that have their holes, and the birds of the air that have their nests,
whereas he had not where to rest his head, Esa. 53.3.
a man full of sorrows, having great experience of infirmities, worn and spent
with watching, fasting, and traueling; continually bearing the reproaches and
gainsayings of proud men, bought and sold by treachery and falsehood,
calumniously and slanderously accused, condemned, spitted at, crowned with
thorns in mockery and derision, nailed to a cross, accounted with thieves
and murderers, pierced with a spear, imprisoned in the grave. The beholding
of these things shall prepare and fortify our sight, that with eagles eres
without dazeling we may look upon this Mal. 4.2.
sun of righteousness, now shining in his strength. For we thus conceive
that Christ having undergone all these things for our sakes, and being ours in
his birth, and in his life, and in his death, is ours also now that he is
raised again from the dead, and Romans 8.34.
that he sits at the right hand of God to make intercession for us, and
therefore that Heb. 4.14.
having so great an high priest for us entered into heaven, and ibid. 9.24.
appearing in the sight of God for us, even Jesus the son of God, we may
with boldness go unto the throne of grace, to receive mercy and to find
grace to help in time of need. And thus shall we be enabled to bear 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
the brightness of his coming, and Luc. 21.28.
to lift up our heads for joy that our redemption and full deliverance is at
hand, when other men shall be at their wits end with perplexity and fear, and
shall say Apoc. 6.16.
unto the mountains and rocks, fall upon us and hide us from the presence of
him that sits upon the throne, etc. Now then let Marcion the heretic object
that those infirmities and weaknesses, those afflictions and indignities that
we have spoken of, are matters not beseeming or befitting the glory of God,
and and we will answer with Tertullian, Tertul. cont. Marcio. lib. 2.
Totum Dei mei penes vos dedecus sacramentum est humanae salutis. All that you
account the reproach and disgrace of our God, is the sacrament or mystery of
man's salvation. It is for man's behoof whatsoever he undertook unworthy of
himself. Hilar. de Trinis. lib. 2.
Humilitas eius nostra nobilitas est, contumelia eius honor noster est, says
Hilarie. The humbling of him is the ennobling of us; his reproach is our honor.
This is the foundation whereupon we build our selves to heaven: in this
humiliation and weakness of Jesus Christ are contained the infinite riches of
grace and life.

What was the occasion of Christ's abasing and bumbling of himself.
7 But what was it in man that caused the son of God to take upon him this
disgraced and despised state? It was namely the sin of man. Woonderest thou
that such indignity should befall unto the son of God? Remember thy self,
humble thy self before the Lord and say: It was my sin that caused the Lord
of glory to take upon him reproach and shame. There could not be found in
heaven or earth any other expiation of my sin, but that the son of God must
demean himself to suffer things unworthy of God to make atonement betwixt
God and me. And when thou art come so far, go on yet and say: Shall I cherish
sin in me that brought all this wrong upon the son of God? Shall I think
lightly of that iniquity and uncleanness, which was so great with God that
nothing could satisfy for it, but the blood of his only begotten son? Shall
I bestow my life and days in vanity and unrighteousness, which I understand
was so deerly bought to he hallowed unto God? Thus, I say, we should bethink
our selves, and with such meditations busy our selves this solemn tune, which
now we see, specially in the greatest houses, not without great sin, wholly in
a manner destinated to excess of vanity and folly, of wild and unbridled
behavior, as if we rather kept the profane and licentious festiualls of
Bacchus and Apollo, then a wholly remembrance of Jesus Christ.

8 Hitherto we have seen the humbling of David's Lord: now let us see his
exaltation and glory. The exaltation of Christ to sit at the right hand of God.
For unto him thus humbled, God the father is brought in saying; sit thou at my
right hand, etc. Whereby is signified the lifting up of the man Christ to the
participation and fellowship of the majesty and glory of God, and to all height
of dignity, power, primacy over all creatures both in heaven and earth. The
sequel of humiliation and glory both in Christ and and us.
In which consequence of humility and glory in the person of Jesus Christ we
see what our way must be to that heavenly glory and bliss which we desire. For
we must be made Romans 8.29.
like unto the image of the son of God, not only in the end, but also in the
means and way that leads thereunto. We must be humbled with him, that with
him we may be exalted: we must 2. Tim. 2.11.12.
suffer with him, that we may reign with him: we must die with him that we may
live with him: we must Heb. 13.13.
with him be partakers of reproach that with him we may be partakers of glory:
we must with him bear the cross and crown of thorns, that with him we may
wear the crown of everlasting life. If we refuse his company in the one, he
will exclude us from being partners with him in the other. As it is said of
Christ the head. Luc. 24.26.
These things ought Christ to suffer and so to enter into his glory: so it is
said of us that are the body; Act. 14.22.
By many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God. As Christ was
Heb. 2.10.
consecrated the prince of our salvation through afflictions; so our 2. Cor.
1.6.
salvation is wrought in enduring the sufferings of like afflictions. But there
is comfort of these tribulations and sufferings, for that they contain the
hope and assurance of so blessed reward, inasmuch as therein Romans 5.2.3.
we rejoice under the hope of the glory of God. And therefore as Christ Heb.
12.2.
for the joy that was set before him endured the cross and despised the shame,
so must we, looking unto him as the author and finisher of our faith, with
willing minds, when the Lord will, bear the 2. Cor. 4.17.
momentary and light affliction of this time, as which brings an excellent
and an eternal weight of glory, whilst we look not upon the temporal things
which are seen, but upon the things eternal which are not seen.

9 The reward of glory that is here assigned unto Jesus Christ having now gone
through all his sufferings, and accomplished the work and service of our
redemption is to sit at the right hand of God. The fulfilling whereof Saint
Mark declares, telling us that after his resurrection having spoken unto his
disciples Mar. 16.19.
he was received into heaven and sat at the right hand of God. Which is an
honor peculiar unto the son of God. The highest angels are not high enough
to be partakers of this glory: for Heb. 1.13.
to which of all the angels has he said at any time, sit thou at my right
hand, etc. Now this phrase of speech borrowed from humane and civil use, What
is signified by Christ's sitting at the right hand of God.
attributes unto Jesus Christ an excellency both of majesty and power.
Majesty imported first in the very term of sitting. Which is not used is
properly to determine any certain position or gesture of body, but
figuratively to note an eminency of dignity and honor. For to persons of
majesty and honor it belongs to sit, when others stand that are of
inferior place. And thus is it oftentimes used in the Scripture, as touching
God himself, and namely, of many places to allege one, Dan. 7. where it is
said, that Dan. 7.9.10.
the thrones being set up the Ancient of days did sit: thousand thousa^ds
ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him. Thus the honor
which Jesus Christ shall do unto his saints, we find expressed also by this
term of sitting: Apoc. 3.21.
To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne, etc. But
Christ is not said only to sit, but to sit at the right of God, which is never
affirmed of the saints. Now the right hand according to use of nature,
signifies power and strength: according to civil use it imports
pre-eminence and honor. The right parts naturally are the nimbler and
stronger; the right hand then the left. And therefore more commonly and more
fitly, we use the right parts then the left, and find them pliable and able to
many matters, to which the left do us little steed or none at all; and we
hold it a preposterous and unorderly perverting of natures course, and an
unsightly thing when by evil custom a man has his left hand more easy and
ready for his use then his right hand is. And this strength of the right hand
the holy Ghost has relation unto, when to set forth the special power of God
exercised in any glorious work, it expresses the same as performed by his
Psalm. 98.1. and 118.15.16.
right hand, as in infinite places of Scripture we may observe. In civil use
it is a matter of honor to be set at the right hand. He that sits at the
princes right hand, is deemed to be next in honor to the Prince. And in this
regard 1. King. 2.19.
Solomon sitting on his throne, caused a seat to be brought for his mother
coming unto him, and set her at his right hand. And unto this alludeth that
speech concerning the spouse Psalm. 45. Psalm. 45.9.
At thy right hand did stand the Queen in a vesture of gold, etc. Whereby is
imported the singular honor that Christ does unto his spouse the church.
Whether way soever we understand the right hand, Christ sits at the right
hand of God in all most full brightness of the glory of God, and in all
sovereignty of power and dominion over all creatures both in heaven and earth:
so that the godhead in the man Jesus Christ rules and governs all things;
administreth, guides, and mainteineth the church purchased by his blood, and
to be short executes all judgment by his hand. Whereupon it is said, John. 5.
Ioh. 5.27.
The father has given him power to execute judgment in that he is the son
of man, and Act. 17. Act. 17.31.
He will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has appointed.
The man Jesus Christ says: John 17. Ioh. 17.5.
Glorify me O father with thine own self, with that glory which I had with
thee before the world was. The man Jesus Christ says Math. 28. Math. 28.18.
All power is given unto me both in heaven and earth. Of Jesus Christ
concerning his manhood it is said, Ephesians. 1.20.21.
Ephesians. 1. God has set him at his right hand in heavenly places far above
all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is
named not in this world only, but also in that that is to come, and has made
all things subject under his feet, etc. And again, Phil. 2. Phil. 2.9.
God has highly exalted him, and has given him a name above every name, that
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow both of things in heaven and things
in earth and things under the earth, etc. Behold this is our Savior. It is not
without cause that we put our trust in him, who is able to do all things for
us, because Math. 11.27. John 3.35. What comfort we have by Christ's sitting in
heaven in our flesh.
all things are committed unto him. And thus has God exalted and honored our
nature and flesh in the person of Jesus Christ, that we may not doubt now but
that there is a way prepared for us into heaven, seeing that our flesh is
sitting at the right hand of God. Let it not dismay us, that our flesh is here
subject to the cross and tribulation, that it is afflicted with hunger and
thirst, worn out with travel and labor, dried up with weeping and tears,
vexed with sickness and pain, fainted with heat, deadded with cold, tortured
and slain with fire and sword, cast into the pit and consumed to dust and
ashes. Jesus Christ in this flesh of ours endured hunger and thirst; was
humbled and afflicted with fasting and weeping, was exercised with sorrow and
pain; he was buffeted with fistes, scourged with rods, pricked with thorns,
pierced with nails, wounded with spear, appaled by death, shut up in the
grave; and yet the same flesh now sits in heaven at the right hand of the
majesty of God. And in what condition? Tertul. de resurrect. carnis.
Pignus totius summae illuc quandoque redigendae. As a pledge, says
Tertullian, to assure that the whole remainder of our flesh shall one day be
brought thither. Whereupon he notably infers: Fear not flesh and blood,
ye hane in Christ taken possession of heaven and of the kingdom of God: or if
any deny heaven to you, let them deny Christ himself to be in heaven. O
son of God, the everlasting brightness of the glory of God, what was there in
corruptible flesh that should move thee to have that respect unto it, that
thou should thus lift up the dust of the earth, and exalt it above the
highest heavens? what could flesh profit thee or do thee good, that thou
should vouchsafe unto it so great a blessing? But this was his mercy and
love toward us, when there was nothing in us that might deserve his love, that
we might learn to honor him that has so highly honored us, and might
understand that these bodies of ours redeemed with his most precious blood,
and called to the hope of so great glory, are of more sacred and precious
account then that they should be prostituted unto sin, and made brothell
houses of filthiness and uncleanness, and abused to be made the iustruments for
the performing of our unlawful and sinful desires. It should be always a
strong reason to move us to the sober and holy usage of our bodies, to
remember that Christ in our flesh sits in heaven, and our bodies are
appointed to sit with him: for how shall we think them to be meet for
heaven, if we by wilful sin disgrace them, and make them viler then the
earth? The majesty of Christ sitting at the right hand of God an assurance of
safety both to the Church in general, and to all the members thereof.


10 Now this height, and majesty and power of Jesus Christ serves also to give
us comfort and assurance of safety in all dangers, both of the church in
general, and in special of our selves. In the shakings of the world; in the
totterings and staggerings of empires and kingdoms in the mutations and
alterations of states and common wealths; in the midst of the whirlewindes
and storms and tempests of troubles, at the sight whereof the world stands
amazed, and under the burden whereof it groneth, yet Christ still sits at
the right hand of God, and in all things interposeth his hand and by his divine
providence and wisdom so governs all things, that howsoever things seem to
go by hap and at all adventure, without the steadfast guiding of any directing
hand, yet indeed there is not so much as the moving of a foot, or the stroke
of a hand, or the falling of a hear, which is not disposed by his hand to
certain ends, and those profitable and necessary for the glory of his name,
and for the salvation of his elect. And therefore be not afraid for that thou
see Psalm. 2.2.
the kings of the earth standing up and the rulers aduising and laying their
counsels as sure foundations against the Lord and against his Christ. They
cannot prevail against the right hand of God. The ship of Christ may be tossed
with waves but it can never be drowned. The bush wherein the Lord is may burn,
but it cannot be consumed: the house of the Lord being builded upon the rock,
may be assailed with the winds, but it cannot be overthrown: the vineyard of
the Lord may be hewed and cut, but it can never be displanted. Jesus Christ
sitting at the right hand of God, he has planted it, and Esa. 27.3.
he keeps it night and day that it may grow for ever. And this is the
comfort and establishment of every faithful soul, that he lives under the
band and protection of him that sits at the right hand of God. Fear not
thou believing man. Sin tempts, the devil rages, the world hates, the
wicked persecuteth thee: but fight valiantly against all with most assured
trust of victory and conquest, because thou fightest under the banner of him
that sits at the right hand of God. He is thy Savior; he is thy Redeemer:
he has power to preserve thee, and will never suffer thee to be cast away.
But thou wicked man, thou enemy of religion, and of the Gospel, thou that
laughest and mockest at the service of Jesus Christ; thou that grindest thy
teeth, and gnawest thy tongue for anger to see the success of the Church, and
the growth of true religion, do thou I say, tremble and quake for fear. For at
whom do thou spurn? whom do thou fight against, but him that sits at
the right hand of God? Thou beatest thy self against the rock, and must
needs be broken in pieces: thou kickest against the pricks, and hurtest thy
self. Thou can not prosper, thou can not prevail. Christ shall have the
victory: the triumph shall be Christ's: he sits at the right hand of God
until all his enemies be made his footestoole.

11 Where the particle (until) notes not any periode or point of time when
Christ shall cease to sit at the right hand of God, for he Luc. 1.33.
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall
be no end) but it determines a time and day when all the foes of Christ shall
certainly be brought to utter and everlasting confusion thencefoorth never to
rile or to stir again. Now they are Christ's foes and enemies, Enemies of
Christ how vnd^rstood.
as S. Austen says, August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 12. cap. 3.
Resistendi voluntate, non potestate nocendi: For their will in resisting and
rebelling against him, not for any power or ableness they have to hurt him.
And they are his enemies not only by dealing against him in himself, but also
by practicing evil against those that are his, for he has made us one with
himself: he has taken upon him our person and our cause. August. in Psalm.
Caput and corpus vnus est Christus, says S. Austen. The head and the body
together make one Christ. And therefore our enemies are his enemies; they that
persecute us are persecutors of him, they that hate us, are reputed to hate
him; so that the afflictions of the Saints and faithful are called by the holy
Ghost Phil. 3.10. Col. 1.24.
Christ's afflictions, 2. Cor. 1.5. 1. Pet. 4.13.
the sufferings of Christ, Gal. 6.17.
the marks of the Lord Jesus, Heb. 11.26. and 13.13.
the reproach of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.10.
the dying of Christ. Christ in himself dyed but once, and Romans 6.9.
being raised from the dead dies no more; death has no more dominion over
him. But yet he is said after a sort to die again in them who for his sake are
put to death. This is the fellowship that we have with Christ, who by faith are
joined unto him: to our comfort, for that howsoever our cause be neglected with
men, yet with God it shall not go without regard, because it is the cause of
Christ; and to the terror of our enemies, for that by dealing against us, they
fight against Christ, and procure unto themselves the wrath of so great and so
strong an enemy.

Enemies corporal and spiritual.
12 These enemies are either corporal or spiritual, for that spiritual enemies
are here also to be understood appears by the application that the Apostle
makes of this place. 1. Cor. 15. where citing the same, he reckons death for
one of those enemies that are to be destroyed, saying 1. Cor. 15.26.
the last enemy that shall be destroyed, is death. But whether corporal or
spiritual enemies, all shall be subdued unto Christ, all shall be brought in
subjection unto him. Which the Prophet here imports by this that they shall
be made his footestoole. Whereby is imported an extreme and utter abasing, What
is meant by being made the footestoole of Christ.
and bringing down of all the power and pride and glory of them that are
adversaries to the kingdom of Christ, an abridging and breaking of every arm
that is lifted up against him. Treading under foot in the holy Scriptures
signifies full and perfect victory and conquest and that with all ignominy
and reproach. When the Prophet under the figure of Babylon will signify the
utter confusion of the enemies of Gods Church, he says; Esa. 26.6.
The feet shall tread it down; even the feet of the poor and the steps
of the needy. When Iosuah had discomfited the five Kings of the Canaanites and
had caused them out of the caves where they had hid themselves to be brought
unto him, he called all the men of Israel and said unto the Iosu. 10.24.
chief of the men of war, Come, set your feet upon the necks of these
kings; whereby he gave token of victory not only atchiued against these, but
to be achieved against the rest of those wicked nations, according to the
words of encouragement which he adds for declaration of this sign; Be strong
and of good courage, for thus will the Lord do to all the enemies against whom
ye fight. When our Savior Christ would signify the utter desolation and
overthrow of Jerusalem, he says, Luc. 21.24.
Jerusalem shall be trodden under foot of the Gentiles until the time of the
Gentiles be fulfilled. Thus therefore when it is said that Christ shall make
his enemies his footestoole, and so tread them under foot, we understand
thereby that he shall conquer them and cast them down, shall disarme them of
all their power, expose them to infamy and shame, set them forth to derision
and scorn, and in a word shall bring upon them utter confusion, that they
shall be no more able to rise against him, then the footestoole is to rise
against him that treads upon it.

13 Now the full accomplishment hereof appears not until the day come that
Jesus Christ shall come to judge both quick and dead, but yet even since the
time that he took possession of the right hand of God, he has not ceased to
give unto his Church some experience and taste of this glorious power, in
fighting against them that have fought against him, striking the Scepter of
Princes in pieces, and casting their crowns to the ground, bowing down their
backs and making them spectacles of infamy and confusion that have shed the
blood of his saints, and magnified themselves against his church. What should
I here discourse unto you of the Herodes, and Pilates, Neroes, Deoclesians,
Maximines and other tyrants and persecutors of Christ and his Church; upon whom
the revenging hand of Jesus Christ has so apparently and pregnantly showed it
self, that the world could not but give glory unto God and say, Exodus 8.19.
It is the finger of God; Psalm. 118.23. The enemies of Christ ouerruled to
serve for the use and good of him and his.
this is the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes.

14 To leave this to his proper place in the end of this Psalm, what shall I
say moreover that howsoever satan bend himself and practice his malice against
the kingdom of Christ; and his instruments even some at the mouth for very mad
rage and fury against the church, intending the utter extirpation of the name
of it, and therefore infinitely butchering and killing both men and women, old
and young, high and low that do take in their mouths the testimony of Jesus
Christ, yet Christ always has his hook in their nostrells, and sits at
the stern of their malice, limiting their power, ouerruling their purposes,
ordering all their courses in such sort that they can do nothing but what he
sees to be expedient and profitable for his? A footestoole for ease and help.
And as the footestoole serves for the ease and help of him that uses it,
until being past use it is hewed in pieces to be cast into the fire, even so
the enemies of Christ and his kingdom, though they conceive not so themselves,
nor appear so unto us, yet are forced to serve for the benefit and good of
gods elect, until God having done by their hand what he thinks good, they be
cut off by the sword of his judgment and cast into everlasting fire.
Valerianus the emperor of Rome a most bitter and deadly enemy to the faith of
Christ, using all most barbarous and savage cruelty toward them that professed
the same, by the just judgment of him whom in his members he thus persecuted,
was overcome and taken in battle by Sapores the King of Persia, who pulled out
his eyes and bound him in chains, and led him about with him as a prisoner,
and when he was to ride, used him for a footestoole, and trod upon his back,
to take advantage to get the more easily to his horse; and in the end caused
his skin to be flaied off, and his body to be sprinkled with salt, and so
made him die the same cruel death wherewith he had before martyred many
innocent and righteous persons only for the profession of Christian faith.
Behold here as in a glass, how Christ makes his enemies subject and
servant unto him: from the beginning he tells us Ioh. 16 33.
I have overcome the world; 12.31.
the prince of this world is cast forth: and Saint Paul says: Col. 2.15.
He has spoiled principalities and powers, and has made a show of them
openly, and has triumphed over them by his cross. The enemies then are
overcome already, and all the power that is against us, is but as the
struggling and striving of a conquered adversary; which though he be
overcome, is suffered for a while to live for the use and advantage that is to
be made of him. He has pulled out their eyes; they see not their own ways:
their Esa. 37.28.
going out and coming in are directed by his hand. He has chained them up;
they cannot stir further then he gives them the liberty of the chain; he
has broken their arms; they strike and cannot kill: he has stricken out their
teeth; they bite and cannot hurt; and whilst they mind nothing but the
fulfilling of their own malicious and wicked designements, they are made will
they, nill they, by the secret and most mighty hand of Christ to serve for the
setting forth of his majesty and power and providence; for the furthering of
the piety and faith of his elect in this world, and their salvation and glory
in the world to come. Even satan himself the captain of these rebels and
enemies of Jesus Christ is made his vassal and slave, and lies at his foot
as a dog fast tied, not to stir but at his pleasure. And because the victory of
Christ is ours also in him, Romans 16.20.
the God of peace treads satan under our feet. He is made an instrument to
further our salvation. 2. Cor. 12.7.
The buffetings of satan's messenger are used to keep us from being exalted by
pride, least by pride we should fall away from God. Ambros. de pae^^en. lib. 1.
cap. 13.
By the commandment of Christ, says Saint Ambrose, the devil is made the
keeper of him whom he thinks to make a pray. Even against his will he
secondeth and serves the will of the God of heaven. He is deluded, and in his
biting wounds himself, and armeth against himself him whom he thought to
weaken and overcome. He causes vexation to the body but to the preservation of
the soul. Thus this viper hangs at our hands and yet wounds us not; we put
our hand into the hole of this aspe, and he stingeth us not: we drink of his
deadly poison and it hurts us not; nay of his poison is made a spiritual
triacle and preservative against poison. Now if the case be thus with satan
himself the head, much more shall it be so with his members. They are trodden
under the feet of Christ, and cannot be hurtful unto us. Whilst they lade us
with reproaches, they honor us: whilst they afflict and vex us, they put
palms into our hands, and crowns upon our heads, and garments of
righteousness upon our backs, and the night of their persecutions makes the
stars of Christian virtues, and of the graces of God to shine the cleerer in
us, to the glory and praise of God. So it is with the rest. Sin it self is
the drawing on of righteousness; the world is the subject and matter of our
victory and glory; the curse an occasion of blessing; the Gal. 3.24.
Law a schoole-maister to Christ; death the gate of life; the grave the
putting off of mortality and corruption. To be short, Esa. 11.9.
There shall be nothing to hurt or to destroy in all the mountain of the
Lords holiness: Ioh. 10.28.
nothing to pull the sheep of Christ out of his hands: but Romans 8.28.
all things work together for good, and for the best to them that love God.
And why so? Because all the enemies of Christ, that is to say, all our enemies
are become his footestoole, and in him a footestoole unto us. And thus shall
Christ's enemies serve for his use and for the use of his Church, until the
day come that that which is here prophesied shall be perfectly fulfilled,
when all the enemies of Christ, now already overcome, shall be utterly
destroyed and abolished; when there shall be none to tempt us, none to trouble
us; when sin shall be quite done away; when Revel. 20.10.14.
the devil and the beast, and the false prophet and death and hell shall be
cast into the lake of fire, that burns for ever; when Reu. 7.16.17. and 20.4.
God shall wipe away all tears from the eyes of his: when they shall hunger
no more, thirst no more; when the sun and heat shall no more light upon
them, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, nor any more
pain, but 1. Cor. 15.28.
God shall be all in all.

15 To conclude, Psalm. 74.3.
God will for ever destroy every enemy that does evil to his sanctuary, all
tyrants and persecutors and oppugners of his Church. Howsoever they seem to
have power in their hands even at their own will, yet Christ sits above
them at the right hand of God; they shall be made his footestoole, confusion
shall be their portion, as in all ages God has showed, and will show unto the
end, and specially in the end, as remains further to be spoken at the end
of this Psalm. God the father grant unto us for his well-beloved son Jesus
Christ his sake, the grace of his holy spirit, whereby through the knowledge
of his holy word we may framed to the obedience of his holy will, that we may
serve him faithfully and truly according to his commandment the whole course
of this life, that when it shall please him to take us out of this mortal
life, we may be made partakers of that eternal life and blessedness which he
has promised in the world to come through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. To
God the father, God the son, and God the holy Ghost, be all honor, glory,
praise, dominion, might, majesty, and power, both now and for evermore: Amen.

The second Sermon the same day in the afternoon.
Verse 2. The Lord shall send the rod (or scepter) of thy power out of Sion: be
thou a ruler (or bear thou rule) in the midst of thine enemies.


IN the former Sermon we have seen the son of David installed and enthroned
to the seat and majesty of his kingdom. In this second verse is set forth
the means whereby, and the manner how this kingdom is founded and established.
Four things to be observed in the second verse.
First therefore we are to observe from hence what it is whereby the subjects
of this kingdom are gathered unto Jesus Christ, and governed under him, which
is, the rod or scepter of his power. Secondly from whence this scepter
proceeds: the Lord shall send it. Thirdly whence it has his gooing forth:
out of Sion. Fourthly what success and work it has: he thereby bears rule
in the midst of his enemies.

2 Now we see Christ here brought in imperial manner, bearing his scepter in
his hand: for the scepter is one of the ensigns of princely majesty. The
scepter an ensign of princely majesty.
Monarchs and kings are wont to wear in their hand a rod or scepter in token
of sovereign and royal authority, and thereby to import, that they in
respect of whom they are kings, are under their power, and subject to their
stroke. Thus therefore Jesus Christ whom God has exalted and lifted up to be
the Monarch and Lord of the whole world, and has assigned unto him all power
both in heaven and earth, is said to have his scepter, whereby he does
exercise and declare his power for the building up and governing of his Church.
Which scepter is called in the Psalm, Psalm. 45.6.
the scepter of his kingdom, whereby namely he exercises and administreth his
kingdom. And that we may understand what this scepter is, it is called also
Esa. 11.4.
the scepter or rod of his mouth, which in the same place and elsewhere is
termed also ibib. and 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
the breath of his lips; the breath of his mouth. Now what is it that
proceeds from the mouth and is formed with the breath but only the word? The
word of Christ therefore is the Scepter of his kingdom. The Scepter of Christ
is his word. The word of of Christ why called the Scepter of his power.
And it is here called the Scepter of his power, because therein appears his
might and power working great and wonderful things beyond the opinion and
expectation of the world. Which we may observe both in the course and passage
that this word has had through the world, and in the special effects and
works that it has wrought and does work in this passage.

The power of Christ appearing in the passage of his word through the world.
3 We see how in the beginning it went forth as the Sun: no power could hinder
the going of it. It was put into the mouths not of Philosophers and Orators,
but poor fishermen, and tentmakers, and toulegatherers, and by their hand,
being men of no commendation to the world, subdued more nations to the kingdom
of Christ, then sword and battle could ever bring in subjection unto the great
Empire of Rome. The world did strive against it, and it overcame the world: the
Scepters of Princes struck at it to beat it down, and Princes scepters gave
it way whether they would or not. They bound the preachers of it, but it self
was as the wind which cannot be bound nor stayed from his course. Neither
policy, nor strength could hinder it but that it overthrew their customs,
cast down their idols, stopped the mouths of their oracles, and wrested from
their devils a confession of the power of God, and so went on with victory and
triumph till it had set up the kingdom of Christ in the utmost coasts and
borders of the earth. And have not our own eyes, men and brethren, seen the
experience hereof in these latter times, when Emperors and Princes and Popes
and Prelates and the multitude of the world labored to put out the the light of
the Gospel beginning again to shine amidst the darkness of Popery and by all
their labor could avail nothing? They had countenance and counsel and
strength: they persecuted the professers of the Gospel with horrible
persecutions; they dulled their swords with slaughter, and daunced their horses
in blood; but nothing would serve their turn: the dint of their swords entered
not so deep into men's bodies, as the word of Christ did into their souls,
raising up still a new offspring unto Christ to vpbraid their folly and madness
in raging and fighting against God.

The diverse effect of the word of Christ.
4 But the power of this word appears further in the several effects that it
works both 2. Cor. 2.15.
in them that are saved, and in them that perish, being to the one the savor
of death unto death, to the other the savor of life unto life, as the Apostle
speaks, for we must know that the Scepter and kingdom of Christ has under
the imperial stroke thereof two sorts of men: the one loiall and loving
subjects; the other traitorous and wilful rebels. The power of the word of
Christ as touching reprobates and wicked men.
To the one it is a Scepter of gould to govern them: but it is a Scepter of
iron to destroy the other, for of rebels and wicked men the Prophet says:
Psalm. 2.9.
Thou shall smite them with a rod or Scepter of iron and shall break them in
pieces like a potters vessel. The word of Christ is indeed unto them as Ier.
24.29.
a hammer to break them in pieces, as Ier. 5.14.
a fire to burn and consume them: as Revel. 19.15.
a sword to kill them and cut them off: as Ier. 25.15.
a potion of wrath to poison them, and as a mighty tempestuous wind sent
forth in anger from the Lord renteth and overthrows the tall and mighty
trees, and turns them up by the roots, so the word that proceeds out of
the mouth of God undermines the foundations of the wicked, and casts their
houses down upon their heads, and after it is once gone forth, never cease,
as a canker fretting and eating upon them, until it have quite consumed them
to nothing. Yea and in the mean while howsoever words seem to be but wind,
yet this wind of the Lord oftentimes, we see, astonisheth the hearts of such
reprobates and castawaies, appaleth their faces, conuinceth and frighteth their
consciences, confounds their understanding, and as an arrow in their sides
galleth and vexes them; they seek to pull it out and it will not be, but as a
fury it follows them, and tormenteth them; and as the sheep tangled in the
briars, the more they stir, the faster they are tied, and the deadly poison,
which they have conceived, they strengthen more and more to their own
destruction. To be short, as the sentence of the judge is the death of the
malefactor upon whom it is pronounced: so the word of God is the death of the
wicked man, it binds him fast with the cords of judgment, it kindles a fire
round about him which Esa. 30.33.
the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone causes to burn for ever.
This is the Scepter of Christ, this is the power of his word: Let us not resist
it, let us not despise it, least the judgment thereof fall upon us, as the
stone of a mighty rock to grind us to dust and powder. Let us not deceive
our selves. Our pomp and our pride will not bear us out against the hand of
him that sits at the right hand of God. We are but flesh, the edge of his
sword will easily pearce us: we are but dust and ashes; the breath of his
displeasure will easily blow us away, and we shall come to naught. If the
sweetness of earthly things have so enchanted and bewitched our taste that we
find no sweetness in the comforts of the word of life, if we set more by
Number. 11.5.
the Leekes and Garlike of Egypt, then by angels food, the heavenly Manna: he
will fill our mouths with gravel and sand; and gall and wormwood, that is,
bitterness and sorrow shall be our end.

The mighty power of Christ in his word for the saving of his elect.
5 Again the power of this scepter and word of Christ appears no less for
the saving of his elect. The Apostle calls Romans 1.16.
the Gospel, the power of God unto salvation, and the 1. Cor. 1.21.24.
preaching of the cross of Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God
to save them that believe. Hereby he calls us, conuerteth us, quickneth us,
feeds us, comfort us, stablisheth us, and guides us to himself. Hereby
he dissipateth and scatters the mistes of ignorance and error, enlighteneth
the blind eyes, subdueth proud and rebellious affections, softeneth the stony
and vnpearceable hardness of men's hearts, changes lions and woolues and bears
and tigers into meek and harmless lambs and dooues; works in man another
nature, another disposition, another will, another heart, even then when his
heart seems to be vnmooueably settled against God. Thus therefore we read:
Heb. 4.12.
The word of God is lively and mighty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword, and enters through even unto the dividing a sunder of the soul
and the spirit, and of the joints and the marow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart, so that 1. Cor. 14.24.
when ye prophecy says Saint Paul, and there come in one that believes not,
or one unlearned, he is rebuked of all, and is judged of all, and so the
secrets of his heart are made manifest, and he falls down and worshippeth
God, and says; God is in you indeed. Thus the hearts of the two disciples
Luc. 24.32.
burnt within them, whilst Jesus opens unto them the Scriptures: the
officers sent by the Pharisees to apprehend Christ, whilst they hear his
preaching, are turned to another mind and give glory unto him, and say, Ioh.
7.46.
Never man spoke like this man: the Jews at the hearing of Peter's sermon, are
Act. 2.37.
pricked in their hearts, and say unto the Apostles, Men and brethren what
shall we do? they were so affected with this word that they Act. 2.45.
soulde their possessions and goods, and forsook all, that they might give
themselves wholly unto Jesus Christ. So mightily has it prevailed and ouerruled
the minds of men against nature and reason, and learning, and wisdom, and
custom, and whatsoever else is strong to hold men in the liking of those
things which they have once received and followed, as that they have been
content to renounce the devotions which their forefathers had so long embraced;
to cast away the gods which themselves had devoutly served; to stop their
ears against the contrary motives and persuasions of father and mother; to
harden their hearts against the kneelings and weepings, and embracinges of wife
and children; to forgo their friends and countenance, their honors and
inheritances, yea and their lives also rather then loose that peace and joy of
heart which the same word of Christ had ministered unto them. Yea how strange
is it, and how greatly does it commend the power of this word, to see
weakness hereby prevailing against strength? simplicity against policy? to
see the Lamb standing without fear before the lion; the seely turtle before
the devouring kite; women and children and weakelings, before the great
monarchs and potentates of the world, not fearing their threatening words, nor
dreading their tormenting hands, but boldly uttering Revel. 12.15.
the word of their testimony, in despite of all their fury, and never
yielding to shrink from it by any thing that could be devised against them?
The word of God in their hearts gave them courage and resolution and strength
to go through fire and water, to bear all adventures of wind and weather,
and howsoever they seemed to be beaten against the rocks, yet they escaped
shipwreck, and arrived safe at the haven of their desire. If we have felt the
work hereof in our selves, we cannot but acknowledge it to be a divine power;
we can not but confess and say: Psalm 76.10. vulg. edit.
Haec est mutatio dexterae excelsi^ this change is wrought by the right hand of
the most highest. For to deny our own wisdom, to cross our own desires, to
tread nature and affection underfoot, to say unto our pleasures and delights,
we know you not, nor will have any thing to do with you; to be profit and
gain farewell, that we may follow the commandment of the Lord: to work these
things in us, argues a hand that is mightier over us then we are over our
selves, and sets forth the glorious and superexcellent power of the word
of Christ.

The hardness of our hearts in that we are not moved with the word.
6 Now the greater the power of this word is approved and commended to be, the
greater must needs be the hardness of our hearts when we are not at all moved
therewith: when we hear it and yet our hearts remain dead and cold and
without feeling of those things that are spoken, as though they did not belong
unto us. But great is our sin, and a threefold condemnation we purchase unto
our selves when purposely and maliciously we strengthen our hearts against it,
and wilfully put back the hand of God from us by the refusing of his word, as
if we would say unto the Lord. Away from us; we will make no trial of thy
power to work in us: we will die in our sins, and will not behold the light
of life. Far be it from us thus to do: yea rather let us offer our selves to
the power and work of this scepter and rod of Christ, and it shall be unto us as
the rod of Moses to work wonderful things, both for us, and against them
that are against us.

The due receiving and honoring of the word of Christ is the token that we
acknowledge him our king.
7 And here we are to observe a certain and infallible token whereby we may
know where the kingdom of Christ is, and where it is not; where he reigns as
king, and where he reigns not. For where the scepter of the word of Christ is
admitted, and men stoop and yield due obeisance unto it, there it is certain
that Christ reigns and is acknowledged for a king. But where his word is
excluded or dishonored, there howsoever men profess his name in word, yet
indeed they say, Luc. 19.14.
We will not have this man to be our king or to reign over us. Will a mortal
prince be persuaded that we take him for our king, when we presumptuously
cross and thwart his words, and refuse to be governed by his laws? Will he
not rather think that we dally with him and deride him? Will he not hold us,
and that justly, for traitorous and dissembling rebels? And shall the Lord
account any otherwise of us, when by our own words we give check unto his
words, and set up laws of our own against his laws, and refuse to be guided
at his will? The Papacy is not the kingdom of Christ.
Whence we gather that undoubtedly the Papacy is not the kingdom of Christ,
that Christ is not therein faithfully holden for Lord and king. For they have
cast the scepter of Christ to the ground, and have trodden it under their feet,
and have given greater authority to their own laws then to his word, and Mat.
15.6.
by their tradition have made the commandment of God of none effect. All their
devotion what is it but men's devise? what else but a perverting and deprauing
of those things which were instituted and ordained by Jesus Christ? Christ by
his word teaches us one thing: they by their tradition and devise teach us
quite the contrary. Christ teaches us that Heb. 13.4.
marriage is honorable amongst all men, but fornicatours and adulterers God will
judge: they teach us that marriage is damnable in some men, and that it is more
tolerable for them to be fornicatours then to be married men. Christ teaches us
1. Ioh. 5.2^.
to keep our selves fram idols: they teach us to worship them. Christ says
of the cup of the Sacrament, Mat. 26.27.
drink ye all of this: they say all shall not drink of it, but only the
Priest. Christ teaches us not Gal. 6.14.
to rejoice but only in his cross: they teach us to rejoice and to seek
remission of sins in the cross of Peter and of Paul, and in the crosses of
all the saints. Many more examples might be alleged very pregnant to this
purpose, wherein we may observe a repugnancie and direct opposition betwixt
Christianity and Popery unless wilfully we blind our eyes and refuse to see.
Now thanks be unto God which has delivered us from the tyranny of that Scepter
of Antichrist, and has broken from our necks the yoke of his superstitions,
and has caused the fresh and reviving wind of his word freely to blow upon
us, and hereby has given us assured token of his most gracious and lovely
presence, and of the kingdom of Christ amongst us. Let us now walk in the
light that he has given us, and willingly yield our selves to be governed by
his Scepter, lest if we despise his word, and bring forth no fruit of the
labor that he has bestowed upon us, we bring upon our selves that sentence
which Christ pronounced of the Jews. Mat. 21.43.
The kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given to a nation
that shall bring forth the fruits thereof. The word is directed and sent unto
us from the Lord.


8 It follows concerning the Scepter of Christ's power, that the Lord does send
it forth. For the word of Christ neither goes forth nor prospers by the
will or power of man, but the Lord it is that sends it, and it is the Lord
that gives success unto it. The ministry of the word one of the richest
gifts of God.
For seeing the ministry of the word is one of the greatest and richest gifts
that God bestows upon men, the treasury of grace, the power of eternal
life, the chariot of Gods spirit, the pipe or channel whereby this spirit
runs into our hearts, the bellows whereby this fire is blown up and kindled
in us, the fuel and matter whereupon it feeds, the very air whereby we
take the breath of spiritual and heavenly life, we cannot think that the
going and course thereof is casual and uncertain, but that it is directed by
the special providence of Almighty God: that his hand disposes the rising
and shining of this star; that he appoints and orders the drops of this
heavenly dew to fall there and then, where and when it seems good unto
himself; that it is he which Mat. 9.38.
sends or thrusts forth laborers to labor in this harvest. And therefore
in the preaching of the word we are so always to look upon men, and to
consider their coming and their gifts as that withal we behold the Lord
sending forth or holding out in them the Scepter of his power, that we may
acknowledge his mercy whereby he vouchsafes to give us so undoubted token of
his favor, and good will toward us, and when we hear the word, may duly
reverence and regard the same, as knowing that therein is contained a message
directed unto us from the Lord. And if at any time we be deprived and fail of
the use and comfort of this benefit, we must beg of him to supply our defect
in this behalf, and to give unto our hunger-bitten souls this bread of life,
least it fall out that for want thereof we famish and pine away.

The error of men not feeling the want of the word of life.
9 Wherein we may behold the marvelous blindness wherewith Satan the prince of
this world, has covered the hearts of worldlings, and unbelieving men, who are
so far from finding any want in the extreme penury and want of this
heavenly food, as that they either hold it a burden and trouble to have it,
and therefore are so far from craving it of the Lord, as that they desire and
seek means to be disburdened and eased of it, loving like beetles and owls
to sit in obscurity and darkness, that their evil deeds may not be crossed
or reproved by the light. We may worthily lament the error and fearful
estate of these men, and beseech God to open their eyes that they may see their
own nakedness and shame, in that they thus put life away from them, and
wickedly rejoice in those things that are their own confusion. But the number
of these despisers is so great amongst us, that justly we may fear least God
for our unthankfulness take away from us this jewel and pearl which like swine
we trample under ourfeete, delighting more in our draffe and and grains, and
in the sinful courses of the delights and pleasures of this life, then we do
in the delicious and sweet taste of the word of life, wherewith our souls
should be nourished and strengthend to live for ever.

The Gospel begun to be preached in Sion and Jerusalem.
10 The Prophet further shows whence this scepter of Christ should be sent
forth, that is, out of Sion. Whereunto agrees that which is written by the
prophet Esaias: Esa. 2.3.
The law shall go out of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And
there the Apostles received the holy Ghost, and those heavenly gifts, whereby
they were prepared and fitted for that great work of the conversion of the
Gentiles: there they first blew up the trumpet, the sound whereof went
afterward throughout the whole world. Thus to do they were forewarned by
Christ himself, telling them that repentance and remission of sins should
be preached in his name among all nations, Luc. 24.47.
beginning at Jerusalem. Now under Sion and Jerusalem we are respectively to
understand the whole nation of the Jews, to whom the Apostles were willed
first of all to preach the Gospel of salvation. To which purpose the Apostle
Paul says to the unbelieving Jews of Antioche in Pisidia; Act. 13.46.
It was necessary that the word of God should be first spoken to you: but
because ye put it from you, etc. behold we turn to the Gentiles.

11 Thus God ordained that the seed of Abraham, to whom the promises were
first made, The unbelief of the Jews the occasion of transferring the Gospel
to the Gentiles.
should first have the offer of them, that the elect remnant of them might be
saved, and the obstinacy of the rest might be an occasion to transfer the
Gospel to the Gentiles, that out of them might be gathered unto Abraham a
seed, to obtain the blessing that was promised in his seed unto all the
nations of the earth. And so it has come to pass, that Romans 11.30.
by their unbelief we, even all the Gentiles, have received mercy: their 11.
fall has been our rising; the casting off of them Romans 11.15.
reconciling of us; their 17.
cutting off, the implanting and engraffing of us to be partakers of the root
and fatness of the olive tree. We see them that were Math. 20.16.
the first, become now the last. We see the Judge. 6.37. August. cont. Pelag.
and Celest. lib. 2. ca. 25.
fleece that was wette when all the earth was dry, become dry now when all the
earth is wette: we see the Luc. 15.28. August. quast. Euangelic. lib. 2. q. 33.
elder brother sit murmuring without the door, and refusing to come in, for
anger that his yoonger unthrifty brother, though repenting and humbling
himself to his father, is received home. We see Math. 22.9. Luc. 14.21.24.
the poor and the maimed, and the halt and the blind sitting at the table,
whence they that were the guests first of all and solemnly bidden, are rejected
as unworthy. God has fast locked them up in unbelief and hardness of heart,
they have eyes and cannot see; cares and cannot hear; the spirit of slumber
and darkness is upon them, and they see not the comfortable light of God that
shines unto us.

The Jews example our warning to be thankful unto God.
12 This is the mercy of God toward us, and his judgment upon them, that by
their example we may learn wisdom, thankefully to use the mercy of God and
the opportunity of his grace, least if we do otherwise, we bring upon our
selves that heavy judgment that we see has lighted upon them. Their fall,
as it is our rising, so it is our warning, to walk worthy of that honor
whereunto God has called us; and wheresoever we see them dispersed and
scattered through the world, we may behold it as it were written in their
foreheads, with the beams of the sun. Behold in us the judgment of God:
fear to sin against him: let our example be your assurance, that for
unbelief and unthankfulness, God will likewise be revenged upon you.

13 The other part of this verse sets forth the notable effect of the
mighty scepter of Christ, that thereby his kingdom shall be builded, and he
shall be are rule even in the midst of all his enemies, Another kingdom
opposite and adversary to the kingdom of Christ.
For the kingdom of Christ has another kingdom adverse and opposite unto it:
it has enemies that seek to hinder both the founding and the standing of it.
The prince and captain of all these enemies is the devil. He has his under
captains and soldiers, whose hand and help he uses against the kingdom of
Jesus Christ. They sometimes oppugn it by force: sometimes undermine it by
fraud, sometimes by reproach and slander, disgrace and defame it. For some are
open and professed enemies; other guileful and masked by pocrites: some hate
the very name of Christ, other under pretense of his name do fight against
him, and practice the subversion and overthrow of his kingdom. Of one of
these we have had example in the empire of Rome: of the other in the church of
Rome. Which both have cruelly persecuted the church of Christ, and with all
their might have endeavored the utter ruin and confusion thereof. The first
empire of Rome was a professed enemy, seeking to abandon out of the world the
very name of Christ and Christians. The Church of Rome under pretense of the
name of Christ oppugneth the faith and church of Christ.
The later church of Rome has played the wily fox, and being indeed a
devouring woolfe, yet has put on sheep clothing, that with greater
authority and less suspicion she might make havoc and spoil of the sheep
of Christ: as indeed she has done, both spiritually of them that have bin
obedient unto her, and bodily of them that have resisted her. But we see the
bishop of Rome pretending himself to be Christ's vicar, the head of the
church, the successor of Peter to whom Christ committed the sovereign care,
and supreme government of his church. And in these titles he is soothed and
flattered by his folowers, who under him call themselves the catholic church,
the spouse of Christ, as if there were none that honored him more then they.
When indeed, as traitors do make proclamations in the name of the prince to
levy power against the prince: even so, they by pretense of the name of
Christ, do gather power unto themselves to fight against Christ, knowing that
amongst Christians they could not prevail but only by this pretense. And thus
deceitfully heretics and false teachers in all ages have dealt; shadowing
themselves under the name of Christian profession, when they have sought
nothing else but to corrupt the integrity of Christian faith. To be short, no
means has satan left unattempted, both by himself and his, that might break
off the course of the Gospel, and hinder the growth of the church of Christ.

The Church of Christ though mightily oppugned by enemies, yet continuing and
growing in the midst of them.
14 But howsoever the waves have seemed to toss this ship, yet could they never
sink it: howsoever the devil and the world have conspired together to destroy
the seed of Christ, yet they could not hurt it: their purposes vanished into
the wind: the more they have oppugned the church, the more it has grown; yea
those things whereby they have sought to work the destruction of it, have been
as a whetstone to sharpen the faith of the disciples of Christ, to stir up
their devotion and diligence, to frame them to patience and holiness, and the
ashes of one has been as a most fruitful seed whereof many more have sprung,
and never has Christ wanted a people over whom he has borne rule in the
midst, and in despite of all his enemies. The enemies have seen it, and it
has been as thorns in their eyes: they have gnashed at it with their teeth,
and it has made them even mad to see that by no means they could prevail
in that they went about. Thus the church of Christ began, thus it has grown
and has continued until this day, and unto the end, Math. 16.18.
the gates of hell shall never prevail against it. God the father grant unto
us, etc.

The third Sermon, upon New years day.
Verse 3. Thy people shall be a people of great devotion (or willingness) in
the day of thine army, in the excellent beauty of holiness: thy youth shall
be as the dew unto thee from the womb of the morning.


WE have heard how the kingdom of Christ is always oppugned with enemies, and
that it never wants the opposition and encounter of an adversary power.
Which yet cannot hinder but that Jesus Christ sits at the right hand of God
as king and conqueror, prevailing against al, and none prevailing against him,
and still maintaining and governing his kingdom, until he have in the end
fully and finally subdued and destroyed all power that refuses to how and to
yield obedience unto him. Until the full accomplishment of which victory and
conquest he cease not both in himself and in his members to war and fight
against his enemies, and continually to maintain both field and garrison
against them. Jesus Christ by the preaching of the Gospel gathers his army
against his enemies.
The prophet therefore in this third verse describes him leuying and
assembling his soldiers and men of war and preparing them to go forth to
battle against the enemy. To which purpose that serves which he says, In
the day of thine army, meaning thereby the day and time when Jesus Christ
shall call and gather unto him his people as an army to fight for him. Which is
no other but that which the holy ghost elsewhere calls 2. Cor. 6.2.
the accepted time, the day of salvation, even the day and time of the
preaching of the gospel, whereby the Lords trumpet is sounded, and the Esa.
11.10.
standard of Christ crucified is lifted up that nations and people may assemble
themselves unto him. For as princes and captains by striking up the drum and
blowing the trumpet, and by ancients and banners displaied do muster their
men, and levy their soldiers, and prepare them and lead them forth to
battle; even so Jesus Christ Isu. 5.14.
the captain of the Lords host by blowing up the trumpet of his word and
gospel, whereby he is set up for a sign unto us, and Gal. 3.1.
described before our eyes as crucified amongst us, calls and assembleth his
church and traineth his soldiers, and warns them, leads them, comfort
them to fight his battles against the enemies of his kingdom. And thus does
he supply his army from time to time, and as some are taken away puts other
in their place, until he have obtained an everlasting victory, and utterly
confounded the power of all his enemies. And this is, men and brethren, the end
of our preaching and service in the gospel, that by the sound of this trumpet
we may gather amongst you an army unto Jesus Christ, and may train you and
arm you and lead you forth to the battle of the Lord. Now therefore in the
former part of this verse there are three things of us to be observed. Three
things to be observed in the former part of the verse.
First, what our calling or condition is in the service of Jesus Christ; we are
his army. Secondly with what affection the subjects of Christ go forth to
fight for him: with great devotion or willingness. Thirdly how they are
attired and armed for this battle; in the excellent beauty of holiness.

A christian life a continual warfare.
2 First then we are to remember that a Christian life is a continual warfare,
and that there are enemies against whom we are still to lie in camp and to
maintain fight, and with all watchfulness and circumspection to look unto
our selves and to fortify and strengthen our fortresses and holds that we be
neither surprised by their craft, nor surcharged by their power. Satan the
chiefest enemy of Christ's kingdom.
Satan the devil the chief of these enemies Job. 1.7.
compasses the earth to and fro, and 1. Pet. 5.8.
goes about like a roaring lion still seeking whom he may devour. A mighty
and dangerous adversary, great in power, wily in practice, bold in attempt,
fierce in charge, instant and importunate in fight, weerisome in continuance,
manifold in all his actions, a very Proteus turning and winding himself into
all fashions, and forms and shapes, sometimes a fearful Dragon, sometimes a
flattering Mermaide, and any thing to serve his turn. An expert and beaten
soldier knowing all stratagemes and policies of war. A skillful and cunning
fisher, knowing all manner of baits for all kinds and for all seasons, having
as Cyprian says, Cypr. de exhortat. martyrij.
by long experience and practice learned all means and ways to cozen and
deceive us, applying himself to the several ages of men, to their estates and
degrees, their places and callings, their humors and affections, omitting no
occasions, no oportunities that he can any way apprehend to subvert and
overthrow us.

The world a special instrument whereby Satan fights against us.
3 A special instrument that he uses to this purpose is the world, with the
tentations whereof we are so environed and beset, on every side, and find them
still so lying in our way, that we may seem to walk amongst briars and
thorns; nay, amongst adders and serpents, the biting and stinging whereof it
may seem impossible to escape. Seldom or never are we free, but that he
assaieth us either by the men of this world, or by the things of this world, to
hold us back from doing good, and to draw us on to the committing of evil. He
seeks to win us to evil by the evil examples of the world, that whilst
we are ashamed to go alone to heaven, we may with the multitude go that Mat.
7.13.
broad and easy way that leads unto destruction. He discourageth us from
goodness by the offense and displeasure sometimes of friends, sometimes of great
men; that whilst we love men more then God, we may by pleasing of men fall
away from God. He tries us by the reproaches and slanders, the mocks and
taunts, the twitings and vpbraydings of the world, that the irkesomenes thereof
entering into our souls like arrows into our bones, may make us weary of
following virtue and godliness, whereby we become subject unto such disgrace. He
raises trouble and persecution, that the danger of life and goods, the fear
and dread of fire and sword, of imprisonment and banishment may drive us away
from our rejoicing in the cross of Christ.

The things of this world strong temptations.
4 Now by the things of this world he strongly tempts us, and uses the
allurements of profit and gain, of pleasure and delight, of preferment and
glory of the world, as three mighty engines wherewith universally he oppugneth
the whole nature of man, and as with bullets of ^ron battereth and beats
down the castles and towers that seem invincible, and strikes the very
Revel. 9.1.
stars from heaven to earth, extinguishing in men the light of the spirit
that has most clearly shined; quenching the zeal that has most fervently
burned: prevailing with men to pull down in themselves that which God has
builded up, to make sale of Faith and shipwreck of conscience, and to become
runnegates and apostataes, yea and sometimes persecutors of the Gospel which
they themselves have professed. The motive whereof the devil saw to be so
strong, as that thereby he would needs try the strength of our Savior Christ;
Mat. 4.8. Luc. 4.6.
showing him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them, and saying?
If thou will fall down before me and worship me, they shall be all thine. And
surely hereby he wins many to fall down before him and to worship him by
sin and unrighteousness and wilful breaking of the commandments of God. For
the compassing of their unjust and sinful desires of the things of this world,
yielding themselves at his will to become vassals and slaves to covetousness,
extortion, usury, falsehood; to whore dome and filthiness; to gluttony and
drunkenness; to ambition, flattery, hypocrisy, envy, and all manner lewd and
evil works; content to admit a wound in the conscience for a penny in the
purse, and for the pleasure of the body to destroy the soul, and for the
kingdom and glory of this world, to loose the glorious kingdom of Jesus
Christ.

Satan strong against us by the lust and concupiscence of our own hearts.
5 We see how dangerous an enemy we have to deal withal, but yet the danger
is much the greater, for that in our own bosoms we carry a fire to burn our
selves; a false Tarpeia, conspiring with the enemy to betray her own father;
a treacherous Dalilah flattering her own husband to bereave him of all his
strength, and to deliver him bound into the hands of them that seek his life.
I mean the corruption of our own nature, the frowardness and ungraciousness
of our own hearts, the venom and poison that we bring with us and nourish in
us even from our mothers womb, which as a troubled fountain or rather as a
raging sea is still casting up mire and dirt, and sending forth the motions
and lusts of sin, which are evermore ready to open the gates to the enemy to
let him in upon us, by the seeing of the eye, by the hearing of the ear, by
the tasting of the tongue, and by all the parts and powers both of our bodies
and of our souls. For what are all these but gates, and doors, and windows,
whereby sin and death, if we prevent it not, do enter in upon us and take
fast hold of us?

6 Thus we harbor with in our selves August. cont. I^l. Pelag. lib. 2.
exercitum quendam cupiditatum, as Saint Austen says, An army of sinful
affections within us still occasioning us to fight.
a very army of vicious and sinful affections, which yield us continual
matter and occasion of fighting from our beginning to our end, against the
wantonness and wilfulness of youth, against the crookedness of old age; in
prosperity against presumption and carnal security, in adversity against
impatiencie and despair: in high estate against disdain, in low estate
against envy: in abundance against excess, in want against unlawful shifts:
in the following of virtue against vain glory, in the hatred of vice against
curiosity and rashness in judging and censuring other men: in religion against
schism, heresy, infidelity; in civil conversation against wrathfulnesse,
unfaithfulness, unmercifulness, selfeloue, and all injustice: against evil
works in the profession of true faith, against misbeleefe in the practice of
good works. Temptations of sin still succeeding one another.
Yea and as they say of the heads of Hydra the Serpent, that one being cut off,
there grew up more for it, and as the waves of the sea one still follow in the
neck of another, even so it is with the temptations of sin, the ending of
one is the beginning of another, and one victory is the drawing on of another
fight. Cypr. de mortal.
If covetousness be overthrown, says Saint Cyprian, then arises wanton
lust: if lust be repressed, then ambition comes in place: if ambition be
rejected, then anger provoke pride swells, envy fretteth, etc. So ^e is it
which the same Father elsewhere says, Idem de duplicimartyrio.
Although there be not always Neroes, Diocletians, and Maximines raging
against the Church, yet never does the devil cease to busy and trouble them
that have professed the warfare of Christ. And Saint Hierome Hierony. epis. ad
Heliodorum
Erras si vnquam putas Christianum persecutionem non pati; and tunc maxim
oppugnaris quum te oppugnarinescis, Thou art deceived if thou think a
Christian man at any time free from suffering persecution and then is a man
most of all oppugned, when he does not know himself to be oppugned.

7 Now being thus beset with enemies on every side, nay carrying within our
selves enmity against our selves, we see a necessity of fighting, we see a
reason why we are called the army of the Lord. Let us therefore be as we are
called; let us every man take sword in hand and Judge. 5.23.
go forth to help the Lord against the mighty, against Revel. 12.9.17.
the Dragon and the Angels thus making war against the woman's seed. If in
the midst of so many, so dangerous, so deadly enemies we sit still and sleep
and refuse to fight, what do we but betraie our selves and the quarrel and
cause of him that has chosen us to be his soldiers? No servant of Christ
that is not his soldier.
And surely if we do not fight, we are none of his: if thou be no soldier,
thou art no servant of Jesus Christ, because to be his servant, is to be a
soldier. And therefore thou be not skilled in this spiritual battle; if thou
be not daily if exercised Iam. 4.7.
to resist the devil, and to Heb. 12.4.
fight against sin; if there be not in thee a daily controuling of thine own
ways, a checking of thine own heart; a resisting of thine own desires, a
subduing of thine own affections, that thou may 2. Cor. 10.5.
bring every thought to the obedience of Christ; if all be at peace within
thee, and thou find no division, no contradiction betwixt the flesh and the
spirit, betwixt the old and the new man, betwixt that which thou art of thy
self, and that which thou art of God, what do thou in the Lords tents? to
what end do thou profess the service of Christ? Go out of the camp, if
thou will not fight, and keep not a standing there idly and in vain.

Many say they are Christ's, who yet are not so, because they fight not for him.
8 Let us consider this in our hearts: for many there are that say they are
Christ's, and take his name in their mouths, who yet never drew sword nor gave
stroke in Christ's behalf, who defy the devil with their mouths, but wrestle
not against his works: who have renounced the world, and yet live in league
with the world, and continue deeply entangled in the corruptions thereof:
whose lust is their law and they make their own carnal desire the rule and
measure of all their doings. These men deceive themselves. They would feign
live with Christ in heaven, but yet they would 2. Cor. 5.15.
live to themselves here upon the earth: they would be blessed in the world to
come, but yet would not be crossed in the pleasures of this world. But this
cannot be. He that has called us unto eternal life, has told us that we must
Luc. 13.24.
strive to enter in at the straight gate that leads unto it. He that has set
before us 1. Cor. 9.25.26.
an incorruptible crown, has withal warned us that we must 2. Tim 2.5.
fight for it. And as Saint Ambrose says: Ambros. in psa. 118. ser. 18.
Non decet redimitos floribus corona, sed puluerulentos, etc. The crown is not
for carpet knights, that love to be beset and garlanded with posies and
flowers, but for them that are beraied with wrestling and tumbling in the dust,
and victory is not the honor of nicelings and wantons, but of them that have
sweat and labored for it. If therefore we desire the reward of victory, and
the crown that is promised to them only that overcome, let us, as I have
said, address our selves unto the fight, and apply both our hearts and our
hands to the pulling down of the kingdom of Satan, and to the maintenance and
advancement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ.

We are to fight for Christ by doing the duties of our several callings.
9 Now because as in earthly armies there are men of diverse sorts and places,
generals, captains, lieutenants, sergeants, coronels, common soldiers, etc.
So in the warfare of Christ there are likewise diverse callings and conditions
of men, we are every one to consider the standing and place whereunto we are
assigned of the Lord, and faithfully to employ our selves therein for his
advantage, that we may still be getting ground of the enemy against whom we
fight. Princes and Magistrates by well managing the sword of civil authority;
by establishing and executing good laws for Christ's behoof and for the
setting forth of the glory of God. Ministers by using carefully and wisely the
sword of the spirit, the word of God, for the cutting down of sin and
unrighteousness, and to breed in men's hearts the fear of God and the love of
his commandments. Parents and masters by well governing themselves and their
households, restraining their children and servants from all looseness and
lewd behavior, and training them up with all care to virtuous and godly life.
In a word let every man esteem with himself what the duty of his calling
requires of him, and therein bestow himself faithfully for the Lord. Let us
all be evermore practicing and enuring our selves to fight in the Lords
behalf; against the devil by faith; against the world by patience and
temperance; against the lusts of the flesh by daily meditation and exercise of
repentance; against them all by prayer and by the word of God.

An encouragement to fight in that Christ is our captain under whom we fight.
10 And to this fight we are encouraged the more because we are his army:
because we have such a captain under whom we fight. One that is of most
puissant and victorious power and might, and has all things subject to his
will; that sends us not forth to battle alone, but goes himself with us:
who having borne the brunt and heat of the battle himself, has made the
fight more tolerable and easy for us: who himself gives us arms and
strength to fight, and commands his Luc. 2.13.
multitude of heavenly soldiers, his blessed angels to fight for us. So that
we may boldly comfort our selves and say, 1. Ioh. 4.4.
Greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the world: and 2. King. 6.16.
they that are with us are more, then they that are against us, yea, they that
are against us, are ouerruled by his mighty hand, to be for us even in those
things that they entend against us. And to be short, though we be weak, yet
he is strong, and will suffer none Ioh. 10.28.
to pluck us out of his hand, but the end shall be, with rejoicing and triumph
to sing aloude, 1. Cor. 15.57.
Thanks be unto God which has given us the victory through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

The soldiers of Christ voluntary men, willingly offering themselves to the
Lords service.
11 It follows to declare what affection the people of Christ do bear in the
undertaking of this warfare. In earthly kingdoms men are oftentimes holden in
subjection against their will. They do duty to their princes for fear,
rather then of any devotion or good affection toward them. In their hearts they
murmr and repine, and think it a heavy burden to do them service. And
therefore if they find opportunity, they withdraw themselves from the yoke
under which they are holden. So likewise to earthly battles men usually go by
constraint, and against their own mind. They seek by what means they can to
be freed from such service, and to rest in quietness at home. But the servants
and soldiers of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, are noted to be of another
disposition. They shall be, says he, a people of great devotion or
willingness. If we will translate it precisely according to the Hebrew words,
we must say, a people of devotions, because the word is used in the plural
number. But to express the force thereof, I rather choose to read, a people
of great devotion. For nothing else does the prophet import hereby, but a
singular freeness and willingness of heart, wherewith the people of Christ
shall dedicate and give themselves unto him to be bestowed and used at his
will. And to this purpose the word is used in other places of holy Scripture.
As namely in the law of Moses, by this word are noted the Leuit. 22.18. and
23.38.
free offerings which men without any certain imposition of law offered
voluntarily, and of their own accord. By the original of this word Moses
spoke unto the people for the buying of stuff for the making of the tabernacle
and furniture thereof, and of the garments of the high Priest; 2 Exodus 35.5.
If there be any man whose heart makes him willing thereunto, let him bring
his offering to the Lord, etc. And by the same verb, though in another
conjugation Deborah speaks of them who of their own free accord went forth
to battle against Sisera and his company, Judge. 5.2.9.
Praise ye the Lord for the auenging of Israel, for the people that offered
themselves willingly. My heart is set on them that were willing among the
people. Even such are the people of Christ here said to be to the battle
that we have spoken of, to wit, voluntary men, freely and willingly offering
and deuoting themselves to do him service and to fight for him.

The scepter of Christ works in the inner man.
12 Thus the scepter of Christ goes beyond the scepters of worldly princes,
which can prevail no further but only with the outward man, whereas the
scepter of Christ works in the heart and in the inner man, renewing the mind
and framing the will to the following of Christ and to the obedience of his
will. Prosp. de vocat. gent. lib. 2. cap 9.
Virtus nolentium nulla est, says Prosper. Men are not accounted virtuous for
those things they do against their wills. It is the will that commends the
good actions of men, Willingness commends good actions, and furthereth them;
unwillingness hinders and disgraceth them.
and then are we approved with God when with cheerfulness of heart we give
ourselves unto him. And hereby it is that we do effectually and to the purpose
those things that we do. There is nothing so easy of it self, but it is hard
to him that goes about it with an unwilling mind. Want of will makes men
evermore to be putting off cases, and casting off doubts, and making of
delays, and complaining of pains, and alleging of expense; and whither he
will not, he cannot a while: still a bear is in the way, Prou. 26.13.
a lion is in the street. But where the heart is affected, and the will
deeply and thoroughly possessed with a thing, it is the clearing of all cases,
and the controwling of all doubts, and a spur against delays: pains seems
pleasure; and expense seems gain, and those things that are lions and bears
to other men, are but ghosts and shadows to devotion and good will. And as
Saint Ambrose says, Ambros. in epist. ad Romans cap. 11.
Hoc sequitur vnumquemque quod conatur ex cord: that grows upon a man and
goes well forward, which he endeuoreth from the heart: whereas coldness and
carelessness in the worker, causes always crookedness and vntowardlinesse in
the work.

13 Now therefore the people of Christ, that uprightly and without halting they
may serve him, are discribed to be a people of zealous and willing mind;
Devotion and Zeal the token of our true affection unto Christ.
of such resolution toward him as that neither regard of profit, nor fear of
peril, nor difficulty of proceeding do hold them back from going forward
whither he calls and commands them. Wherefore this devotion and zeal we
must require in our selves, if we will be thought to bear to him that
affection that we ought to do. If we be willinglesse, and without devotion in
his service, and follow him in such sort as if we were loath to take to much
pains or to go to far, we must take heed least he say of us as he said of
the Laodiceans; Revel. 3.15.
I would thou were either hot or cold; but because thou art neither hot nor
cold, but lukewarm, I will spue thee out of my mouth. And surely this is the
sin of these times wherein we live; wherein there is much professing of the
name of Christ, and little love to Christ himself. We have the gospel more in
our mouths then in our hearts. Religion is made to serve men's purposes, when
they themselves have little purpose of religion. Policy has ouermaistred
piety, and the world more prevails then the word, and godliness is sold for
gain, and their appears in us so little heart toward Christ, that we may
justly persuade our selves that the blind conscience of former ages, shall
accuse and condemn the careless learning of our age. They changed devotion
into superstition, but we have changed it into presumption and wilfulness.
The fruits of their devotion we have turned to sacrilege and theft; and
whilst we condemn them for misbeliefe, we condemn our selves by wicked
life. We measure our religion by men's liking, and whilst we are loath to go to
far, we are far to short of that we should be. Whilst we avoid to be
accounted foolishly precise, we continue licentiously and grossly profane. We
hear the word of Christ; but where is our zeal in hearing of it? How easily
are we withholden from it by every trifling excuse, and can like better in time
of holy exercise to sit at cards by a warm fire, then to sit with God in a
cold church? If we serve him in the forenoone, it is well: it is too much to
serve him again in the afternoon. If we do him devotion in the church, it is
more then needs to do him any at home. And thus we abridge Christ of his
worship, and stint him at our pleasure. Our willingness is but when we will, and
our devotion is but panges and fittes, and lasts no longer, then stands
with the following of our own delights. And if any thing happily at any time
do move us, yet is it but as a flash of lightning which suddenly appears,
and by and by vanishes away, as if it had never been. And to be short, far
are we of from that zeal of the honor of Christ, that study and care of
godly life, and eschewing of the corruptions of the world, that should make a
difference betwixt the servants of Christ, and the children of this world.

14 But where is in the mean time that great devotion that the prophet
speaks of, and how shall we persuade our selves that those things are
verified and fulfilled in us, which are thus foretold of the people of Jesus
Christ? Which if we cannot, how shall we persuade our selves that we are his?
Let us therefore leave our lame and halting religion, and Heb. 12.13.
make straight steps unto our feet, that we may walk uprightly with the Lord,
and Act. 11.23.
with purpose of heart cleave steadfastly unto him. Let not men hear more in our
words, then they see in our deeds, but if we will profess our selves to be
his, let it appear in our true piety and devotion toward him. He requires of
us to be Romans 12.11.
fervent in spirit, Tit. 2.14.
zealous of good works, Gal. 4.18.
earnest in good things, not only receiving the truth, but also 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.
the love of the truth, that we may be saved. It is to small purpose that we
have the truth, if we love it not, and if we love it, love will breed
devotion, and devotion will yield all duty unto the God of truth.

The soldiers of Christ attired and armed with the goodly beauty of holine^.
15 Now volentary men freely and of their own accord offering themselves to the
service of their princes and captains, are wont to set forth and show
themselves in all gallantnesse and bravery that their person and condition will
admit. Apparel, armor, horse, and other furniture, are provided in the best
sort they may, and every one strives by this means to commend himself, and
to win the greatest favor in his captains eyes. To the emulation and
following of this affection the prophet here calls us, and as earthly
soldiers study in this sort to gratify the desires and to please the eyes
of their earthly princes and captains, so he teaches us how we are inwardly
and spiritually to garnish and deck ourselves, that we may be gracious in the
sight of our heavenly captain in the day of the mustring of his army. And to
this purpose he names an armor or attire which has little grace or glory
with the world, but with singular grace commends us unto the eyes of God.
This is that which he calls the excellent beauty of holiness. Where I read,
excellent beauty, to express the force and importance of the plural number.
For in the Hebrew it is not beauty, but beauties, as to signify that
holiness contains in it all true beauty, and is the sum of all those
ornaments and graces wherewith the people of Christ are to deck themselves
that they may be goodly and glorious in his sight. So that whereas we are all
naturally desirous to be fair and beautiful, the prophet here instructs us
what beauty it is that is most of all to be desired; and wherewith above all
other we should specially seek to grace our selves. For as for outward grace
and beauty, either in the feature of the body it self, or in things applied
to add comeliness unto it, what is it in it self but a fading flower?
corrupted by sickness, withered by years, and confounded by death. And if
withal the soul be a harbor of vicious and evil affections, a sink of
sin and uncleanness, what is all this goodly beauty, but as varnish upon
rotten wood, and as a fair painted visour upon a foul wrinkled and deformed
face?

16 The beauty therefore which the prophet here commends is that wherein we
are approved with the Lord, who accepts us not for any outward glory but for
the virtue and good quality of the heart. It is holiness that draws the eyes
of God unto us, and whereby we are lovely and pleasing in his fight above other
men. Holiness consistath in two things.
Now holiness consists partly in the putting of and eschewing the corrupt
manners and conuersatlon of the world: and partly in putting on those affections
and conditions of virtue and grace, whereby we carry the image and semblance of
our captain Jesus Christ. The things that were holy in the law were severed
from all profane and common use; no unclean thing might be suffered to touch
them, that so they might remain pure and undefiled to the uses of the Lord.
Even so we whom Christ Ioh. 15.19.
has chosen and Gal. 1.4.
given himself to deliver us from this present evil world, that he might make
us 2. Tim. 2.21.
vessels of honor, sanctified, and meet for the uses of the Lord, should
Iam. 1.27.
keep our selves unspotted of the world, by 2. Pet. 1.4.
flying the corruption that reigns therein by lust, and abhorring those
polluted and unclean courses, in the loathsome filthiness whereof the world
walloweth and tumbleth it self, to the great offense and displeasure of
almighty God. And surely so long as the contagion and filth of the world
cleaves fast unto us, and we frame our selves to the fashion and behavior
thereof, there can be nothing so loathsome and hateful unto us, as we our
selves are loathsome unto God. And therefore God himself in this sort advises
us, 2. Cor. 6.17.
Come out from among them, and separate your selves, and touch no unclean
thing, and I will receive you, and I will be a father unto you, and you shall
be my sons and daughters, says the Lord. Whereupon the apostle thus
exhorts in the beginning of the next chapter, 2. Cor. 7.1.
seeing then we have these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all fithines
of the flesh and of the spirit, and grow up to full holiness in the fear of
God. In which words he expresses both those parts of holiness which I mentioned
before: calling the one, the clensing of our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit: the other, the growing up to full holiness, or the
fulfilling and perfiting of our sanctification in the fear of God. Which
fulfilling of our sanctification stands in clothing from day to day both
inwardly our conscience, and outwardly our conversation with piety and the
fear of God, thereby to 1. Pet. 2.9.
set forth the virtues of him that has called us out of darkness into his
marvelous light. And this the Apostle Saint Paul calls Romans 13.14. Gal. 5.16.
the putting on of the Lord Jesus Christ, teaching us thereby not only to
attire our selves by faith with his merits and righteousness, that thereby we
may be justified in the sight of God, but also by holiness to express in our
life the example that he has laid before us, that by our good works and
godly life it may appear that we have Christ dwelling and ruling in our hearts.
Which the same Apostle elsewhere more particularly describes saying; Col. 3.12.
put on, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, tender mercy, kindness,
humbleness of mind, meekenes, long suffering, etc. And again, 1 Thessalonians 5.8.
Let us which are of the day be sober, putting on the brestplate of faith and
love, and the hope of salvation for an helmet.

17 These and such like are the ornaments whereby the church of Christ is to
him that loves her Cant. 5.9. Holiness our attire when we come to the place of
the Lords assembly.
goodly as the morning, fair as the moon, pure as the sun: and to her
enemy terrible as an army with displaied ensigns. Thus attired and armed we
should come and present our selves in this place of the assembly of the
Lords army: not in hautines and presumption, not in vain and wanton
apparel, not in the care of decking our selves to the eyes of the world, (the
folly whereof in this generation now long ago stinketh in the nostrels of
the Lord:) but in humbleness and lowliness of mind, in meekness and
quietness of spirit, in innocence and simplicity of heart, in a sacred fear
and reverence of that high majesty before which we present our selves. If we
come not thus prepared, we are but spots and blots in the Lords assembly, and
we are to fear the same exception to be taken against us, as was taken against
him that came to the wedding supper without a wedding garment: Math. 22.12.
friend, how co^mest thou in hither not having on a wedding garment? For what
is the wedding garment but even the beauty of holiness which the prophet
here commends as the attire of the Lords army. That therefore our coming
may be grateful to the Lord, and without danger to our selves, let us have
this sentence of the prophet in our minds, and remember always to appear
before the Lord in the beauty of holiness, in true devotion, humbleness of
mind, obedience, love 1. Tim. 1.5.
out of a pure heart, and a good conscience and faith unfeigned: so the Lord
seeing in us the shadow and picture of his beauty, shall take delight and
pleasure in us, whereas otherwise by hypocrisy and sin, our being here is
but abomination before him.

18 Now follows the latter part of this verse: Thy youth shall be as the dew
unto thee from the womb of the morning. Where the words being very obscure in
the Hebrew text are diversely translated. Upon searching and comparing of diverse
judgments, I have set down that which I take to be most fit. And very
answerable heereunto is that which is written by the prophet Micah: Micah. 5.7.
The remnant of Jacob shall be among many people, as the dew from the Lord,
and as the little mistling drops upon the grass, which do not wait for
man, nor hope in the sons of Adam. By which words the prophet foretells
the mighty increase of the church amongst the Gentiles, whose multitude shall
be as the small dew, and little drops that fall from heaven without number, and
that this shall come to pass, not by any power or work of man, but by the
gracious hand of almighty God, even as he only without the help of man
causes the shewers and dew to fall upon the earth. To which very purpose I
take it the words of our prophet here are likewise to be understood: The
multitude of the army of Christ, and by what hand they are raised up unto him.
for having before declared how Jesus Christ shall have his army to join with
him in fight against his enemies, he adds here in what multitude they shall
come, and by what hand they shall be raised up unto him. They shall be
innumerable as the dew, which by the only hand of God is brought forth from
the womb of the morning: where the prophet by a metaphor names it the womb
of the morning, where the morning dew is secretly formed, and from whence it
comes as children from the womb. Again, the name of youth by another figure
imports not merely yoongnesse of age, but the persons themselves that are
young; by the like phrase of speech as we are wont to say; The youth were
gathered together; the youth were sporting themselves, etc.

Youth they that are newly newly borne again to Christ
19 By youth then are meant the young fry of the church; the new increse and
supply thereof from time to time in them who are newly Iam. 1.18.
begotten by the word of truth, and Ioh. 3.3.5.
borne again Tit. 3.5.
by the washing of the new birth, and by the renewing of the holy ghost to
become of Adams children the children of God and people of Jesus Christ. Who
for that are called 1. Ioh. 2.12.
little children, and 1. Cor. 3.1.
babes in Christ, and 1. Pet. 2.2.
newborn babes that are to be suckled with the milk of the word of God that
they may grow thereby. Of whom this prophet elsewhere speaks when he says.
Psalm. 22.31.
They shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall be borne: and
again: Psalm. 102.18.
This shall be written for the generation to come, and the people which shall be
created, shall praise the Lord. Where he prophecieth of a generation and people
to be created and borne, not by the creation and birth whereby we are men but
whereby we are according to the phrase of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.24.
new men, and 2 Cor. 5.17. Galat. 6.15.
new creatures, having Ezec. 36.26.
a new heart given unto us and a new spirit put into the midst of us; our
stony heart being changed into an heart of flesh, and Heb. 9.14.
our consciences by the blood of Christ purged from dead works that we may
serve the living God. Such are the youth that the prophet speaks of in this
place. And hereby we are put in mind of our second nativity and birth whereby
we are made members of the church of Christ and called to become children
again: children as 1. Cor. 14.20.
concerning malitiousnesse; children in Mat. 18.3.4.
humility, simplicity, innocence; that whereas being in time past Luc. 16.8.
children of this world we Ephesians. 2.2.3.
have walked according to the course of this world, in fulfilling the will of
the flesh and of our own mind, we may, being now Gal. 3.26.
the children of God, Romans 6 4.
walk in newness of life, and live Ephesians. 4.18.
the life of God, and Phil. 2.15.
as the sons of God be blameless and pure and without rebuke, Math. 5.16.
shining by our good works as lights, in the midst of the froward and crooked
nation of the world. Yea further we are to be remembered that as youth, as young
children are still growing in stature and strength and discretion until they
come to ripe and perfect age, so we after that we are once newborn unto
Christ should likewise be still increasing and growing in those things that
belong unto a christian life, in virtue, in holiness, in faith, in 2. Pet.
3.18.
grace and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, that Psalm. 84.7.
going thus from strength to strength we may be even Phil. 1.11.
filled with the fruits of righteousness, and in the end attain Ephesians. 4.13.
unto the measure of the age of the fullness of Chist.

20 Now of this new birth and the fruits and effects thereof the solemnity of
this day may give me some occasion to speak, being as we call it new years
day wherein we celebrate the remembrance of the circumcision of Christ, and
that Col. 2.11.
in him we also are circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands; that
Ephesians. 4.22.
putting of the body of the sins of the flesh, and the old man which is
corrupted through deceivable lusts, we may be renewed in the spirit of our
minds and put on the new man which according to God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. But of this I spoke unto you more at large
the last year, by occasion of the words of the Apostle; 2. Cor. 5.17.
If any man be in Christ, he is, or let him be a new creature. The particulars
whereof happily you remember not, but remember that which is the general that
from year to year, from day to day you still go forward to become new
creatures in Jesus Christ. Say with the Apostle, and let us be careful that of
our selves we may truly say it ibid.
Old things are past; behold all things are become new. And surely in this
state of our new birth all things are set before us under the name of new
things; Mat. 26.28.
a new testament, (...). 13 34.
a new commandment, Reu. 3.9.
a new song, Revel. 2.17.
a new name, Heb. 10.20.
a new way, Revel. 21.2.
a new Jerusalem, ^. Pet. 3.13.
new heavens and new earth. Now what an vn^eete thing is it that when all
things are new for our sakes, we our selves should remain old? Nay let us
also become new, and by our conversation let us make it appear that we are
newborn, and what we have neglected heretofore, let us now begin to amend
with the beginning of a new year, and be careful hereafter to Ephesians. 5.16.
redeem the time, that the increase of our years may be the increase of our
comfort, and may further us in the assured hope of that life where there shall
be no change of years, but one new year to continue for ever and ever.

The multitude that should be borne unto Jesus Christ as the drops that cannot
be numbered.
21 But to come toward an end, concerning this offspring and youth which I have
spoken of, the prophet says, that they shall be as the dew from the womb of the
morning. First for their multitude; for that as the drops of heaven cannot be
numbered, so the people of Christ shall be assembled unto him in multitudes
without number: accordingly as Saint John in the spirit saw it come to pass,
when as beside the remnant of Israel, he beheld a Revel. 7.9.
great multitude which no man could number of all nations and kindreds and
people and tongues, standing before the throne, and before the Lamb; clothed
with long white robes and palms in their hands, and crying with a loud voice,
salvation comes of our God, etc. So that although in comparison of the
multitude of the world the church of Christ be but Luc. 12.32.
a little flock, and Mat. 7.^4.
few there be that enter into life, even as the grapes after the vintage, a few
here, and a few there, and as after Esa. 17.6.
the shaking of the olive tree there are two or three upon one bough, and four
or five upon another, seldom to be found; yet in themselves they are according
to the promise made to Abraham as Genesis 13.16. and 15.5.
the stars of heaven that cannot be numbered and Heb. 11.12.
as the sand by the seaside. And therefore let it not discourage us that the
chafe seems to hide the corn, and evil men so swarm every where in the
world that the promise made to Christ seems to be of small effect. Math.
11.19.
Wisdom shall surely be justified of her children, who though they appear
but few unto us, yet are exceeding many in the eyes of God, so that we need not
think we go alone or be the worse persuaded of the way wherein we go,
because we see but few to walk therein. Let us go on forward in faith and
patience, and we shall see that the Ioh. 14.2.
many mansions in our fathers house shall have men to furnish them, and that
the church of Christ is not so barren but that thereby he shall breed Heb 2.10.
many children unto glory.

22 Secondly the morning dew waits not for man, nor is wrought by man's hand,
Our second birth the work not of man but of God only.
but descends from the Lord, and falls many times in such sort as that we
see it is come but know not when or how it came. Even so is that generation and
new birth whereby we become the children of God. It is not wrought by the hand
or power of man, but this work also descends from the Lord. It is the hand
of God, the inspiration of the holy ghost that works in you, men and
brethren, that change whereby you are newly created and borne the people of
Jesus Christ. Indeed we speak the words unto you which tend to the converting
and regenerating of the heart, but what can our words do in your hearts, if
there be not the work of some other power that is mightier then our words. The
husbandman may manure and till the ground, but it is not he that can make the
fruit. 1. Cor. 3.6.7.
Paul planteth, Apollo waters, but God gives the increase; and neither is he
that planteth, any thing, nor he that waters, but God that gives the
increase. That that we do, goes no further then to the outward man, and our
words make but a sound in the ear of the body, but they that are inwardly
taught to the conversion of the soul, they are Ioh. 6.45.
all taught of God. It is a secret and hidden work: our eyes see it not, our
ears here it not, our understanding cannot sufficiently conceive it; nay they
cannot thoroughly conceive it, in whom it is. Cypr. de cardin. Christi operibus.
As the lightning breaks the clouds, says Saint Cyprian, and with the
sudden flashing does not so much enlighten as astonish the eye; so a man is
sometimes touched with I know not what motion, and perceives himself to be
touched, and yet beholds not him that touches him. There are spoken unto him
certain secret words inwardly which he is not able to utter, so that he
cannot doubt but that he is near him, yea within him that moves him, and yet
shows not himself that (...) may see him as he is. This is that which our
savior Christ says: Joh. 3.8.
The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
know not whence it comes nor whither it goes: so is every one that is
borne of the spirit. And hence it comes which we else where also read by
the words of Christ: Mar. 4.26
so is the kingdom of he^en as if a man should cast seed in the ground, and
should sleep and rise up night and day, and the seed should spring and grow
up, he not knowing how. We sow the seed, but we know not how it grows; and
though we know not how it grows, yet in the end we see and perceive that it
has grown. Thus we comfort our selves that though we cannot give success
unto our own labors, yet we loose not our labor, but the spirit of God as
it were in the heart of the earth fostereth and cherishes the seed that we
sow, and quickneth it to bring forth fruit, and out of the womb of Gods
eternal election, still raises up a new youth, and offspring to serve in the
Lords camp, and to receive the promises of grace and salvation by Jesus
Christ. It rests that for the growing of this seed in our hearts, we pray
unto him, etc.

The fourth Sermon, upon Twelfth day.
Verse 4. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent; Thou art the Priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedec.


THis verse sets forth unto us the calling of Jesus Christ to the office of
priesthood, Christ both in humility and majesty our priest and mediator unto
God.
where by he is be come our redeemer and advocate with the father, that in the
kingly height and majesty of Jesus Christ there may be nothing to dismay us,
seeing we know that both in his humility and in his majesty he is made our
priest and mediator to reconcile us and bring us unto God. The Scripture wont
to qualify the dread of Gods majesty with the consideration of his mercy.
And thus is the Scripture wont to qualify the glorious and dreadful
majesty of God with the consideration of his gracious and most merciful
inclination toward us, that we may learn so to reverence him for his
greatness, as that by his goodness we be allured to love him and by prayer to
seek unto him: assuring our selves that he Esa. 57.15.
Who is high and excellent, that inhabiteth eternity; whose name is the Holy
one, that dwells in the high and holy place, yet is with him also that is of
a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to give
life unto them that are of a contrite heart. Psalm. 138.6.
Though the Lord be high, says David, yet has he respect unto the lowly, and
Psalm. 102.1^.19.20.
out of the heaven he beholds the earth, to turn him to the prayer of the
desolate, and to hear the mourning of the prisoners, and to deliver the
children of death.

2 Thus Jesus Christ is described unto us sitting in glory at the right hand
of God, and yet stowping down to the compassion of our infirmities, that the
conceit of his greatness may be no terror unto us, but rather a ground of
exceeding great comfort, whilst we stand persuaded that he who by mercy is so
ready to succor us, is by power so able to do for us whatsoever pleases him.
There is nothing more fearful then the guilty conscience of a sinner, which
is still running away from God, and hiding it self as Adam did, unless it be
embouldened and established by the acknowledgement and assurance of his favor
and good will. And hence it came to pass, as has been before touched, that
they who no otherwise considered of Jesus Christ but in his majesty sitting at
the right hand of God, conceived of him a doubtefull and distrustful fear,
and shadowed themselves under the wings of other mediators, and hid
themselves under the patronage and intercession of saints and angels, that by
them they might have access and entrance unto God. They lived in the dark,
and saw not that light of faith, whereby we are taught to Heb. 4.16.
go with boldness unto the throne of grace, assuring our selves that ( the Ioh.
15.7.
words of Christ abiding in us) 14.13.
whatsoever we shall ask the father in his name he will do it, that the father
may be glorified in the son. To which comfort we are instructed by the
doctrine of the priesthood of Christ, whose consecration and enstalment to this
office, the prophet describes unto us in this verse. Five things to be
observed in this verse of the priesthood.
Wherein we may first observe the confirmation of this office by the
irreuocable oath of God. Secondly, the office it self, which is priesthood.
Thirdly the person to whom it is assigned, Thou, that is, Jesus the son of
God. Fourthly, the continuance of this priesthood, which is, for ever. Lastly
what order of priesthood it is, namely, after the order of Melchisedec.

3 As touching the first, this protestation by oath serves according to the
matter in hand, The oath of God a significacation of (...) unchangeable and
irreu^^able purpose.
to set forth the unchangeable counsel of God for the establishing of the
priesthood of Christ, to be the only means for ever of atonement and peace
betwixt God and us. It is always used in Scripture to note Gods immutable
purpose, and settled determination that shall never be reuersed. For the words
of God sometimes implie conditions and exceptions, and he says, thus and thus
it shall be, but with limitation, namely, things continuing as they be: but so,
that if the case be altered with us, he will also after the course of his
dealing toward us. Thus he says by the prophet Jeremy, Ier. 1^.7.
I will speak suddenly against a nation or against a kingdom to placke it
up, and to root it out and to destroy it. But if this nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their wickedness, I will repent of the plague that
I thought to bring upon them. And I will speak suddenly concerning a nation
and a kingdom to build it, and to plant it. But if it do evil in my sight,
and hear not my voice, I will repent of the good that I thought to do for
them. According to the tenure of these words God said of Niniue; Ion. 3.4.
Yet forty days, and Niniue shall be destroyed, when notwithstanding upon
their repentance God spared them, and turned back his hand, whereby he had
threatened to destroy them. On the other side God speaks unto Eli thus, 1.
Sam. 2.30.
I said that thine house, and the house of thy father should walk before me
for ever: but now the Lord says, It shall not be so; for them that honor me
I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be despised. Thus the words of
God sometimes though in terms they seem absolute, yet in meaning are
conditional, and whether they be for good or evil, they stand or fall
according to the good or evil that they find in us. But where God puts to
his oath, there is no reuocation, and what he has once sworn, he never
repents him thereof, nor goes back from it. And indeed God never repents
him of any thing, God indeed never repents him: the repentance that is
attributed unto him is some change in his actions, no change in himself.
whether spoken with oath or without oath, but because, where the actions and
doings of God are altered toward us, there seems to us to be some alteration
in God himself, the scripture in this case by the phrase of repentance
somewhat submits it self to our conceit, when as indeed God, foreseeing
all things before they come to pass, and Act. 15.18.
knowing all his works from the beginning of the world, does nothing but Esa.
25.1.
according to his counsels of old; nothing but what from everlasting he had
decreed and purposed with himself. But in those things, wherein the oath of
God is used, there is no show of variableness nor shadow of change, but his
words and deeds both in semblance and substance are perpetual and everlasting.

4 And to this usage of an oath God for our sakes vouchlaseth to submit
himself, Why God y^^ldeth ^^arre unto us to use an ^ath.
the more to stir us up to the embracing of his words, and the more strongly
to challenge and hind our credit and assent to those things which he
speaks. Now strange it is that God should need to swear, and that his word
whereby he made the world, should not in the world be sufficiently believed
without an oath. But because he seeks our salvation, he labors by all
means to prevail with us that we may hearken unto him. And as for Marcions
cavil that it is an indignity for God to swear, Tertullian answers: Tertu^
^^nt. Ma^^ion^^. 2.
There is nothing unworthy of God, that furthereth man to believe God. The
things that are necessary for man, are worthy of God, because there is
nothing so worthy of God, as the salvation of man is.

God swears sometimes in judgment, sometimes in mercy.
5 God therefore uses an oath, sometimes in threatening of judgment, sometimes
in prounsing of mercy: sometimes in extreme wrath and fury, sometimes in
compassion and loving kindness. The one way it is matter of extreme horror
and dread; the other of singular and unspeakable comfort. When God swears in
wrath, what is his oath but the sealing up of irreuocable damnation? the very
opinion whereof is sufficient to astonish our hearts, and to confound all the
senses and powers both of body and soul. For what is it but even hell it
self for a man to conceive that he has God for his vowed and sworn enemy,
who by his oath has bound himself to destroy him, so that now there is no
remedy but to undergo that judgment, at which the angels themselves do
tremble and quake, and are not able to stand under the burden of it? Thus when
the people of Israel provoked the Lord, and increased their rebellions from
day to day, the Lord was so far moved at length, that Psalm. 95.11.
he swear in his wrath, that they should not enter into his rest. When by his
prophet he called them to Esa. 22.12.
weeping and mourning and sackcloth, that by their repentance they might
pacify the Lord, and they contrariwise as it were to despite the Lord gave
themselves to joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh
and drinking wine, and in scorn of the prophets words cheered one another,
saying, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die, the Lord said unto
them in form of an oath: Verse. 14.
If this iniquity be purged from you till ye die. Which Hebrew manner of
swearing if we will express, it is as much as to say: As truly as I live, or
am a just and righteous God, this iniquity shall never be purged from you till
ye die. Thus the prophet Amos mentioning their extreme cruelty toward the
poor, infers thereupon, Amos 8.7.
The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, that he will never forget any
of their works. These are fearful speeches, and being pronounced of others,
they are written to instruct and admonish us that we do not by obstinate and
wilful rebellion provoke the Lord and urge him from day to day by our proud
and insolent contempt and despising of his words, least whilst we abuse his
patience to far, we cause him to swear our destruction, and to set his oath as
an everlasting bar betwixt him and us. He will have us to understand that it is
not in vain that he threatens the sinful man, and if his word be not enough,
he shows us that he voweth and swears the confusion of them that will not
be reclaimed. Let us therefore be wise in time, and learn hereby to fear the
Lord; that we bring not this remeadilesse and dreadful judgment upon our own
heads.

The ^ath of God for the salvation of the saithfull.
6 Now God as he has sworn the destruction of the wicked, so has he also
sworn the salvation of them that believe and obey him. The foundation of which
salvation he here lays with an oath, confirming thereby the priesthood of
Jesus Christ, not so much to assure the same unto Christ himself as to settle
in us an assurance of comfort to be received thereby. For God seeing our
weakness to be such that we have need of all manner of props and stays to
hold us up, would have his purpose of grace and life by Christ to be testified
unto us not only by his word and promise, but also by his oath, that
whatsoever impediments might seem to hinder that which we have believed
through Christ, yet nothing should shake us from faith and hope, because we
have to do with him, who being able to do whatsoever he will, will not be
found a liar in his word, much less forsworn and perjured in his oath. Heb.
6.17.
God, says the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, willing the more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the stablenesse of his counsel,
bound himself by an oath, that by two immutable things wherein it is
impossible that God should he, that is, his promise and his oath, we might have
strong consolation which have our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set
before us, etc. The reason then why God swears unto us is that we should
receive strength of comfort thereby, resting assured that our Romans 5.5.
hope shall never shame us, and that there is no more possibility that it
should deceive us, then it is possible for God to forswear himself. What
comfort and assarance we are to conceine of the oath of God as touching our
sa^uation.


7 This is his kindness toward those that are his: this is his fatherly
care, to comfort and uphold us in the assured hope and expectation of his
mercies. Which mercy of God in thus condescending to our weakness and
frailty, we are to apply to the stablishing of our faith, and to the arming of
our consciences against al temptation of distrustful and perplexed fear. He
has bound himself unto us by his covenant and promise, by writing and seal,
and as if all this were not enough, he has added his oath also. By all these
means he has confirmed unto us his blessing, the forgiveness of our sins,
the assistance of his grace, the protection of his hand, the continuance of
his love, and the blessed hope of everlasting life. What is it therefore that
should quail our faith, or discomfort the hope that God has given unto us?
Sin is offensive and displeasing unto God; the devil is mighty and strong;
hell pleads a right, whereby it chalengeth us to it self: our consciences by
any merit of our own cannot plead the contrary: but neither the offense of
sin, nor the power of Satan, nor the pleading of hels title, nor the
subscribing of our own consciences to the confession of our own guilt can so
much prevail as to bring God to the denying of himself, and to the violating
of his oath, whereby he has bound himself to forgive their sins, and to
save them from hell and from the devil that do believe in him. Hierony. epi^
ad Rusticum.
If we believe not God upon his promise, says Saint Hierome, yet let us at
least believe him when he swears for our salvation. The oath of God is a sure
foundation; build thy self upon it and thou shall never be removed. Thus God
comfort the repentant man, Ezech. 33.11.
As I live says the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked should iurne from his way and live. If God then have touched thy heart
with true repentance, why doubtest thou of thy self, seeing God has not only
said but sworn that thy life is the thing that he desires and delights
in? Thus he comfort the faithful afflicted soul: Isa. 54.9.10.
As I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth, so
have I sworn that I will not be angry with thee nor rebuke thee: For the
mountains shall remove, and the bills shall fall down, but my mercy shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the conenant of my peace fall away, says
the Lord that has compassion on thee. This is the comfort that God yields,
not only to his church in general, but in particular also to every member
thereof, that the covenant of his peace shall stand in^^^e with them, that his
mercy shall never fail them; that be will never cease to Icrein 31.3.
love them, as another prophet says, With an everlasting love.

8 The papists overthrow the comfort that God off^r^th unto us by his oath.
Another manner of comfort then we can receive by the doctrine of the papists,
who make the promise of God and his oath altogether idle and of none effect,
teaching us no other faith or hope to be conceived thereof, but such as leaves
us hanging betwixt heaven and hell, and more perplexed with fear the devil;
then rejoicing in the persuasion of the love of of God. A man with them may not
be fully persuaded in his heart that he has received the grace of God or found
favor in his sight. It is too much presumption for a man to think that he is
beloved of God, or has obtained the forgiveness of his sins. Which what is
it else but to set a man upon a rack, and to wave him and toss him to and
fro, anguished and vexed betwixt doubtful hope and tormenting fear? How far
is this from that resolution and joy of faith whereunto the holy Ghost
instructs us, which mounting up above the skies, and laying it self in the
lap of Jesus Christ, contemns the world, and defieth the power of Satan,
and walking in the garden of holy Scriptures, gathers here and there the
sweet flowers of inward peace, and solaceth it self with that which it
reads; Esa. 25.1.
O Lord, thou art my God, I will exalt thee. 2. Tim. 1.12. edit. vulg.
I know whom I have believed, and I am sure enough. Job. 19.25.
I know that my redeemer lives, Cor. 5.1.
and though the earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, yet I shall have
a building that is of God, an house not made with hands, but eternal in
heaven. In the mean time the Hebr. 13.5.6.
Lord is on my side, he will not fail me nor forsake me, I will not fear what
man can do unto me. Yea who or what Romans 8.35.
shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or anguish, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay, I stand
persuaded that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. 2. Tim 4.18.
He will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his
heavenly kingdom. He has sworn unto me, and how should I distrust his
mercy? Though the whole world were against me and all that is therein, and
though I know there be enough in me for which he may refuse me, yet I know
nothing can weaken or impeach the truth of God, to make him depart from his
oath, and to cast me away that put my trust in him.

9 The office of priesthood intends atonement and peace betwixt God and man.
It follows now in the second place to consider of the office it self that is
here confirmed, which is, the office of priesthood. The office of priesthood
serves for mediation and atonement betwixt God and man, which is performed
by offering gifts and sacrifices in the name of satisfaction for sin, and for
appeasing the wrath of God conceived against sin. To which purpose it serves
which we read to the Hebrews; Heb. 5.1.
Every high priest is ordained for men in things perteining to God that be may
offer both gifts and sacrifices for sin. The occasion then of priesthood is
the sin of man, who by his disobedience has divided and stranged himself
from God, and is become the enemy of God. To make peace betwixt God and man,
and to bring man again to God somewhat must be yielded that may stand for lue
and recompense of the offense and trespass by man committed against God. And
this the heathens themselves in some part conceived, either by light of
understanding, or as it is more likely by tradition received from the
patriarchs and fathers; from whose faith and fellowship they divided
themselves, but yet retained some shadows and corrupt imitations of their
devotions, which they applied to the service and worship of idols and false
gods of their own devising. Whence it is that Tertullian speaks as of a
policy of satan to give countenance unto sacrilege and idolatry: Tertul. de
praescript. adu. haer.
Ipsas quoqueres sacramentorum diuinorum in idolorum mysterys aemulatur. In the
mysteries of idols he counterfeiteth the matters of Gods sacraments. They had
therefore their priests and priesthoods, their rites and ceremonies of
sacrifices and offerings whereby to pacify their angry gods, and to win favor
at their hands. But those Gods were indeed devils, and those sacrifices and
ceremonies nothing else but a horrible deprauing and profaning of the worship
and service appointed by God, whereby the devil was honored and served under
the name of God. The only true piesthood is that that is established by God,
and has his word for the warrant of it: all other priests with all their
devises provoke the wrath of God, but to pacify it they can do nothing.

10 Three things to be regarded in him that shall be a pri^st for atonement
betwixt God and man.
Now in him that shall be truly called a priest to make peace and atonement
betwixt God and us, there are three things to be considered; the excellency
of his person; the worthiness of his sacrifice, and the virtue of his prayer;
in any of which if there be any defect, there can nothing be done available
on our behalf. As touching his person he must be in condition and quality far
superior unto other men, meet for his greatness, purity and holiness to appear
before the glorious majesty of the most high God. The rule of the Law stands
good in this case; Cuius persona non placet, nec catera placent: Where the
person is not approved, nothing else can be accepted. Genesis 4.4.5.
The Lord had respect to Abel first, and therefore to his offering; but he had
no regard to Cain; and therefore to Cains offering he had no regard. Whereupon
Saint Bernard says Bernard. in Cant. ser. 24.
Quid miraris, O Cain, si ad munera tua non respicit, quite despicit? Why
marueilest thou, Cain, that he has no respect to thy offerings, seeing he
despises thy self. So it is in this case; he cannot be a priest to make
atonement for others that admits any exception against himself. Secondly,
as the person of the sacrificer; so the worthiness of the sacrifice is to be
regarded; that it be fit to be offered unto God, and of sufficient price and
value to counteruaile the trespass for satisfaction whereof it is performed.
For whatsoever the person be, yet if he offer not unto God that that is worthy
of God, his sacrifice is not admitted, neither can he thereby purchase
remission and forgiveness of sins. Thirdly on the excellency of his person,
and worthiness of his sacrifice depends the virtue and acceptance of his
prayer. For he cannot by prayer present himself unto God as an intercessour
and mediator for us, who himself stands subject to challenge either for the
unworthiness of his person, or for the baseness of his offering. But he that
answers both these conditions, his prayer is of force to obtain grace and
mercy for them that commit themselves unto him. They that teach any priesthood
truly, and in it self effectual and available for the forgiveness of
sins, in which these three conditions are not satisfied, they teach not the
truth of God but their own devise, and thereby deceive both themselves and
other men.

11 The priesthood of the Jews not auail^able in it self to give for-g^^nes
of sins.
There was indeed a priesthood amongst the Jews established by God himself,
which yet notwithstanding could not work atonement and peace with God,
because these three conditions were not found therein. The persons that
ministered in that priesthood were by law tied to certain outward
observations, and by rites and ceremonies of apparel and diet, of washings,
and purifyings, and annointings, etc. were in some sort separated from other
men: but as touching inward quality, where the eye of God looks, they were
the same that other men; sinners, weak, unworthy to appear in the sight of
God, and therefore were bound to offer not only Heb. 7 27.
for the peoples sins, but for their own also. Again their sacrifices were
not such as might yield any due satisfaction for sin. For it Heb. 10.4.
was impossible, as we read, that the blood of bulls and goats should take
way sin. A man having committed trespass brought his offering to the priest.
He laid his hand upon the head of the sacrifice as it were there to lay his
sin. The brute and dumb creature was slain, as if it had done the
trespass. But what could the blood of a brute beast avail to acquit the
conscience of him that had offended indeed? It was a testimony that he had
sinned, because in that name it was slain, but purgation of sin it could
yield none, and the uttermost that it could do was but Heb. 9.13.
to sanctify as touching the purifying of the flesh, and to perform an outward
satisfaction to the church. Therefore the prayer that was grounded upon these
sacrifices could not be effectual or strong enough to entreat and move the
majesty of God. And hence it is that the author to the Hebrews says, that
Heb. 7.18.
that priesthood was disanulled for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof:
calling it weak and vnprositable as it is considered merely in it self
without respect unto Jesus Christ figured and shadowed therein. For all the use
and benefit thereof stood in the reference that it had unto the priesthood
here established, which by the oath of God is appropriated for ever unto Jesus
Christ. Thou art the priest. The priest in that priesthood was accepted with
God as in figure and bearing the person of this priest. The sacrifices there
were called attonements, as implying respectively his oblation and sacrifice of
himself. The prayer of the priest there was heard for the people as uttered in
the name of this mediator, and depending upon the intercession that he should
make. The truth of priesthood for forgiveness of sins belongs only unto
Jesus Christ.


12 Therefore the sovereignty of priesthood belongs properly unto the son
of God, unto Jesus Christ who is in that respect called Heb. 9.15.
the mediator of the new testament wherein God has promised forgiveness of
sins. The excellency of whose person to that purpose the holy ghost in sundry
places describes; as that Col. 1.15.
he is the image of the invisible God; the first borne of every creature; by
whom all things were created, both in heaven and in earth, both visible things
and invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or principalitics, or powers,
etc. And again, that he is Heb. 1.2.3.
the heir of all things; that by him the world was made; that he is the
brightness of the glory of God, and the ingraued form of his person; bearing up
all things by the power of his word; verse. 4.
more excellent then the angels, etc. Thus Saint John also begins his
gospel, as at the first to show the greatness of him of whom he writes, Ioh.
1.1.
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word was
God, etc. All things were made by it etc. In it was life, etc. verse. 14.
We saw the glory thereof as the glory of the only begotten of the father,
etc. In this glory the holy Scripture sets him forth unto us that we may
understand that seeing he is the son of God there is in his person no defect,
but all sufficient perfection for the performance of this work. There was no
exception for the father to take against the person of his only begotten
son, his own image, being the same that he himself is, because this were al
one as to take exception against himself. If in God there be worth enough to
make atonement for man, then is there enough in Jesus Christ, because Christ
is the son of God.

13 Christ our priest not only according to has manhood but also according to
his godhead.
Which foundation they greatly shake who rest the priesthood and mediation of
Christ in his humane nature only, and yield not unto the godhead any part in
this execution, whereas the whole power and virtue of that that Christ in his
manhood has done for us, arises from the godhead; the respect whereof being
set aside, nothing that he has done can be of sufficient force to work our
peace and to bring us unto God. And therefore hence does the scripture teach us
to esteem the force and power of the sufferings of Christ, for that it is Act.
20 2^.
God that has purchased us with his own blood, and 1. Cor. 2.8.
the Lord of glory that was crucified for us, not only by unity of person, but
by act of priesthood and mediation, whilst as he is the son of God, he has
given himself in his manhood to be thus cruelly entreated for our sakes. Which
the holy ghost very expressly teaches us when he says that Christ, not only
by the will and work of his humane nature, but Heb. 9.14.
by his eternal spirit offered himself unto God. For if by his eternal
spirit, that is, the power of his godhead he offered himself, how can it be
denied but that by the same eternal spirit and godhead he has performed the
work and office of a priest. So when the Apostle says that 2. Cor. 5.19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself he plainly shows that
the godhead of Christ was an agent in this reconciliation, and adjoined it
self not only as a part of the person, but as a partaker of the work, to
effect this atonement betwixt God and man. Therefore Saint Ambrose says that
he is Ambros. in 1. Tim. cap. 2.
ex vtroque mediator; a mediator in both respects as he is both God and man.
And more plainly he speaks in another place that in Heb. cap. 7.
Christ both in his godhead and in his manhood being a mediator for ever
betwixt God and man, is always living to make intercession for us. So Saint
Austen likewise says that August. orat. cont. Iudae. paga. and Arianos. c. 8.
Christ whole man and God, the word, the soul and the flesh one Christ is made
a mediator for us. To be short when the ancient August. cons. lib. 10. cap.
42. Chrysostom. Theodoret. Theophy. Oecumen. in 1. Tim. cap. 2.
fathers teach that Christ in that he is the priest and mediator betwixt God
and man, is and needs must be partaker with them both, and so both God and man,
what is it but a mere contradiction to affirm that Christ according to his
godhead is not a mediator?

14 Christ himself not our priest only, but also our sacrifice.
Now that the son of God our mediator and priest might have a meet sacrifice
to offer in our behalf, he took unto him our body and flesh and demeaned
himself to the condition of our nature, which although in it self it be but
of small price to offer unto God, yet being joined into one person with the
son of God, becomes thereby of infinite worth, because it is the body of
the son of God. For we cannot doubt but that the body of the son of God,
the sufferings and death of the son of God are a sufficient expiation and
redemption of the sins of men. As therefore against the priest, so against the
sacrifice there is no exception, because the priest himself is also the
sacrifice. For it is otherwise here the^ in the former priesthood of Aaron,
because there the priest was one thing and the sacrifice another; but here the
priest and sacrifice are both one, whilst Christ himself the son of God Tit.
2.14.
gives himself for us, and Heb. 7.27.
offers up himself, and Heb. 9 26.
puts away our sins by the sacrifice of himself. Seeing therefore both the
priest and the sacrifice are of so infinite worth and value, The intercession of
Christ avail able by has own worth.
the prayer of mediation which this priest utters by virtue of the sacrifice
which he has offered, cannot but be in the highest degree acceptable to the
Lord, and make them accepted also whom thereby he commends to the Lord. Such
was the prayer that Jesus Christ powered forth unto his father immediately
before his passion, beholding now in spirit the acceptance of the sacrifice
which he was about to offer, and by virtue thereof entreating and making
intercession for them for whom he offered; not only his Apostles, but all that
Ioh. 17.24.
the father had given unto him, and verse. 20.
by their word should beleene in him. Who afterward having finished all things
which he had to do and to suffer for us here on earth, ascended into heaven,
there thence forth to do the office of a priest Heb. 9.24.
by appeering in the sight of God for us.

Christ ascended into heaven still continurth a priest for us and for ever.
15 For he has not by his ascending into heaven put of the care of his
redeemed, or left them to themselves, but even yet he sits at the right hand
of God to plead our cause, and to be our me diatour, that by his intercession
our sins may be forgiven us; the love and favor of God may be yielded unto
us, and our prayers may be gracious and acceptable in his sight. And what is
his very sitting at the right hand of God in that flesh wherein he has
performed the satisfaction and atonement for our sins, but a continual
remembering the Lord of that that in the same flesh he has done for us, thereby
as it were with strong and mighty voice craving for us mercy and grace, and
the defense of Gods blessed hand to preserve and keep us until he bring us
unto that inheritance whereunto he has redeemed us. And this continual
intercession for us the prophet here notes, in that he says, that he is
appointed to be a priest for ever. For where as in the former testament the
priests could not continue Heb. 7.23.24
by the reason of death, this man, because he endures ever, has an
everlasting priesthood. There is one died, another came in place, and by
succession of priests was the continuance of that priesthood: but this priest
needs no successor, because although he once died, yet being raised again
from the dead, he lives for ever, and is ever present with God by himself to
do the office that he has taken upon him to make intercession for us.

Christ a priest after the order of Melchisedec.
16 And this eternity of priesthood is again implied in that that he adds
that Christ is a priest after the order of Melchisedec. Of which fully to
speak would require a long discourse, but I will briefly knit up that which is
most needful to be spoken. In the holy scripture therefore we read of two
orders of priesthood, and only two, Two orders of priesthood.
the one Heb. 7.11.
the order of Aaron, the other as here we read, the order of Melchisedec. The
order of Aaron, together with the earthly tabernacle was but Hebr. 9.9.10.
a figure for that time, whereby were offered gifts and sacrifices that could
not make holy concerning the conscience him that did the service, which only
stood in meats and drinks, and diverse washings and carnal rites, Heb. 7.19.
which made nothing perfect, but served only for an introduction to abetter
hope, and to Gal. 3.24.
school men unto Christ. Which having but the Heb. 10.1.
shadow of good things to come, when for the time it had served the use
whereunto it was appointed, and now the truth and substance was revealed in
Jesus Christ, ceased utterly and became of none effect, and profited them
nothing at all that were exercised therein. There remains therefore thence
forth no other priesthood faue only the order of Melchisedech, the title
where of rests only and entirely in Jesus Christ.

The figure of Melchisedec how it is to be applied.
17 For the application of which figure of Melchisedec if we will go safely we
must tread no other steps but those which the holy ghost has marked out unto
us: as for men's presumtions we cannot safely build upon them, neither is their
word any warrant to justify unto us their own conceits. What there is in the
story of Melchisedec to be applied unto Jesus Christ the holy ghost in the
seventh to the Hebrews prosecuteth at large. And first in his name and titles
we may see the whole mystery of Christ briefly comprised. For Jesus Christ is
indeed the true Melchisedec, that is by interpretation Heb. 7.2.
king of righteousness, not only for that he is righteous himself, but
because he is as the prophet calls him Ier. 23.6.
the Lord our righteousness, who 2. Cor. 5.21.
when he knew no sin was made sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: whose people are called Esa. 61.3.
trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord, bringing forth the Phil.
1.11.
fruits of righteousness to the glory and praise of God. He is also Heb. 7.2.
king of Salem, that is, king of peace, accordingly as the prophet also
terms him Esa. 9.6.
the prince of peace, because he is the procurer and mainteiner of our peace;
at whose birth the angels sound out Luc. 2.14.
peace upon earth; who going to his death bequeathed unto his a legacy of
peace; Joh. 14.27.
peace I leave with you: my peace I give unto you: whose Ephesians. 2 17.
preaching was peace both to far and near: Col, 1.20.
by whom the father has reconciled all things to himself, and set at peace
both the things in heaven and the things in earth by the blood of his cross.
So that under the regiment of this king we may boldly say; Eth. 2.14.
He is our peace; R^m. 5.1.
being justified by faith we have peace toward God through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Furthermore as Melchisedec, so Jesus Christ is the priest of the most
highest God. And this on the one part the holy ghost mentions indefinitely
that Melchisedec was the priest of the most high God, but what was the
ceremony of his priesthood, or what sacrifice he offered, he expresses not,
and therefore for us to determine any thing thereof is but rashness, neither
may we strain the comparison further then the word of God gives us way and
warrant so to do.

The papists falsely resolve of the sacrifice of Melchisedec.
18 The papists take upon them to resolve out of the story of Moses what the
sacrifice of Melchisedec was, and by a corrupt and false translation avouch
that Genesis 14.18.
he offered bread and wine, which they say was a figure of their mass, and
would thereby prove that in their mass is a very real and actual
sacrifice done of the very body and blood of Jesus Christ, serving to purchase
forgiveness of sins both for quick and dead. But the premises are to short
to infer a conclusion so large, and it is no argument to say, Melchisedec
offered bread and wine, therefore Christ has appointed us to offer a sacrifice
of his very body and blood in the likeness and form of bread and wine. For to
yield them their own translation, what gain they thereby if we say that
Melchisedec offered these things to Abraham by way of courtesy, not to God by
way of mystery. And heereunto in part S. Ambrose leads us, saying that
Ambrose de sacram. li. 4. c. 3.
Abraham came from the sight a conqueror, and Melchisedec the priest met
him, and offered unto him bread and wine. To offer bread and wine to Abraham,
was no matter of sacrifice unto God. But indeed the translation is false, and
their collection worse, neither is the Hebrew word any where in the
Scriptures found to signify the offering of a sacrifice. The true reading is,
Melchisedec brought forth bread and wine. And so Mieron. in quest. Hebraicis
in Genesim. and epist. ad Fuagrium.
Saint Jerome translateth; and gives the reason of bringing forth bread and
wine, namely, for the refreshing both of Abraham himself and also of his men
of war. So says Ambros, in epist^ad Heb. cap. 7.
Saint Ambrose also in the very same words, So other of the fathers read the
words, and the very evident truth thereof made Pagnine and Arias Montanus to
translate the place as we do, though they were papists and earnestly devoted
unto the Church of Rome: yea, they vary herein from the vulgar Latin
translation, which by the Council of Trent they have decreed to be only
authentical and of authority in the Church. It appears therefore that this
place yields little help or life to their sacrifice of the mass, and weak
is that building that has no better a foundation to rest upon. And surely
wonder it were that the Apostle to the Hebrews professing to draw them
forward from the Heb. 6.1.
first principles of Christian doctrine to the perfection thereof, and to that
purpose treating precisely of the priesthood of Melchisedec, and applying the
same unto Christ, should omit this matter of sacrifice, if there were any
matter in it, and not so much as intimate any thing thereof, which the papists
would make us believe is the chiefest and most important matter of all other.
But the silence of the holy Ghost condemns their sentence of wilfulness and
presumption.

The fathers make Melchisedecs bread and wine an allusion to the Lords supper,
but no proof of the popish mass.
19 Neither are they any whit benefited by that which the ancient fathers have
spoken of this matter, who from this story of Melchisedec gathered indeed an
allusion unto the sacrament of the Lords supper, but to no other purpose save
only to show that Melchisedec bringing forth bread and wine did betoken that
Christ should institute a sacrament in bread and wine for a sign and
remembrance of his body and blood. This Saint Hierom declares when handling
Christ's institution of the sacrament he says Hieron. in Mat. cap. 6.
Christ takes bread and goes to the true sacrament of the passover that as
Melchisedec the priest of the high God in presiguring of him offering bread and
wine had done, so he himself also might represent the truth of his body and
blood. No more did they conceive done either before by Melchisedec or afterward
by Christ, but only by bread and wine to represent the verity and truth of
his body and blood. But of the turning of the bread and wine into the very
body and blood of Christ, and offering the same really and substantially in
sacrifice unto GOD, neither did Melchisedec prefigure any thing, neither have
they affirmed any thing, neither does the Scripture teach us any thing that
we should believe the same. To be short let us not be wise beyond that that
God has taught us: let it suffice us for this point to believe that
Melchisedec king of Salem was also the priest of the most high God and so both
king and priest, and therein above all other a most Iiuely figure of Jesus
Christ. If we go further we go in the dark, and it is not likely that we should
keep the way.

20 It is further to be added that as Melchisedec to Abraham, so Christ to his
has pronounced Mat. 5.3. and Iu^. 6.20. etc.
bleshing, and Ephesians. 1.3.
in him God the father has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly things. As Abraham paid tithes of all to Melchisedec the priest, so
we must pay and yield all to the high priest of our profession Jesus the son
of God. Melchisedec and Christ how understood to be without father, without
mother, etc.
Melchisedec is described without father, without mother, without beginning of
days or end of life: which is not simply to be understood, but according to
that manner as the scripture sets him forth unto us, which so dainly
brings him in as the priest of the high God meeting Abraham and blessing him,
and neither before nor after mentions him any more, as if he were a man
suddenly come from heaven, and suddenly returned thither again, and not to be
counted in the genealogy of the fathers. For if we understand it simply and
barely as it sounds, we cannot fit it unto Jesus Christ, who is not
altogether without father or mother, etc. but, as says Saint Jerome, Hierony.
in Psalm. 110.
all Ecclesiastical writers have said, that he is said to be without father
according to his manhood, without mother and kindred according to his godhead,
and therein also without beginning of days or end of life. Therefore as
Melchisedec for any thing we read, so Christ verily and indeed continues a
priest for ever, seeing he ever lives as was before said, to make
intercession for us.

The honor of priesthood proper unto Jesus Christ.
21 Now of all that has been spoken this is the sum, that the honor of
priesthood for propitiation and atonement for sin belongs only unto Jesus
Christ; that he alone it is who for the greatness of his person, and for the
worthiness of his sacrifice, and for the power of his intercession is
sufficient to be our mediator unto God: that he only answers that that was
figured in Melchisedec, being for us both a king and a priest, The sufficiency
of the priesthood of Christ is the condemnation of the popish priesthood.
in whom we have righteousness and peace and bliss; who never cease to stand
and plead for us before the throne of God. Seeing then he is thus
alsufficient in himself, and abides ever with God to perform in our behalf
the office of a priest, we learn hereby to look to another priest, or
mediator, but only to him, and therefore to condemn the popish priesthood
togiher with all their strange intercessio^s of sacrilege and blasphemy, as
tending to the derogation of the priesthood of Christ, and to the impeachment
of that sacrifice and atonement that he has performed for us. The popish
priesthood of no order appointed by God, and therefore not of God.
Of whom it may be demanded by what order it is that they take upon them to
be priests, and to offer sacrifice for forgiveness of sins. The Scriptures
as before is said, name unto us only two orders of priesthood, of which
theirs is neither. The order of Aaron they will not challenge unto themselves:
the order of Melchisedec they dare not, because it is noted to be the peculiar
and sovereign royalty of the son of God. Or if they dare (as indeed what
dare they not to serve their turn?) how or with what color can they fit
themselves to that order? for to be a priest after the order of Melchisedec is
to be both king and priest; and to be a priest Heb. 7.3.
continuing for ever: without father, without mother, etc. But these things
cannot be applied to popish priests. Therefore priests according to the order
of Melchisedec they cannot be. If neither according to Aaron, nor according to
Melchisedec, then their priesthood is not of God, but they are priests of their
own making, and therefore hateful unto God.

The popish priesthood impeacheth and disgraceth the priesthood of Christ.
22 And so much the rather, for that by this their usurped priesthood they
vilify and disgrace the priesthood which God by his oath has established for
ever in Jesus Christ. For what do they but mainely detract from the
excellency of his person when in offering sacrifice for sin they match and
mate with him every varlet and pesaunt to whom it pleases any Romish bishop to
give imposition of hands, and make them priests to appear before God, and to
make atonement for sin, whom men would scant think worthy enough for the
wiping of their shoes, or the keeping of their swine? The sacrifice of his
cross and that Heb. 7.27. and 9.12.26. and 10.10.12.14.
once offering of himself, which only and without any second offering the
scripture commends unto us, teaching us that thereby we Heb. 10.10.14
are sanctified and perfited unto God, so that we have no need of any further
offering, what do they but disgrace as vnsushcient when they make a necessity
of offering him up in sacrifiec every day to purchase thereby forgiveness of
sins both for quick and dead: and when the holy Ghost most expressly says
that Heb. 9.24.25.
he is entered into heaven to appear in the sight of God for us, not that he
should offer himself often, do yet notwithstanding teach that being in
heaven he often and every day Rhem. Tesia. Annot. Heb. 7.23.
concurreth with their priests as the Rhemists speak, to offer up himself?
His intercession they have made in a manner frustrate and void by putting in
his place other intercessours and mediators by whom they have persuaded
themselves to have more ready access unto God, even as many as there are
saints to be found in heaven: as if Christ were either unwilling or unable to
procure them favor with God; or were asleep and had forgotten either the
office committed unto him, or this promise whereby as before was noted he has
assured us in this sort: Ioh. 14 13.
Whatsoever ye ask the father in my name, I will do it, that the father may
be glorified in the son: teaching us to use no other but only his own name
because God in this behalf has chosen to be glorified neither in Peter nor
Paul nor in the virgin Mary but only in his son. To discourse these points
at large would be too long and tedious, but thus in a word they rob Christ so
much as in them lies of that honor which God the father by an irreuocable
oath has confirmed unto him, and make the word of God of none effect by
communicating that to other which the father has vowed shall be proper unto him
alone. And horrible is the iniquity and villainy that from time to time they
have committed under the pretense of this priesthood, even 2. Pet. 2.1.3.
denying the Lord that has bought them and through covetousness with famed
words buying and selling and making merchandise of the Renel. 18.13.
souls of men; and whilst they fed them with an opinion of forgiveness of
sins by their priesthood and sacrifice, bereauing them of forgiveness of
sins which they should have found indeed in the blood of Jesus Christ. Let
us not be partakers of their error, but refusing all other priesthood and
mediation let us cleave unto that only which God has ordained in the person
of Jesus Christ. He has Heb. 1.3.
by himself purged our sins and perfectly fulfilled the work of
reconciliation which was committed unto him of the father he needs no
aslistants or helpers in this behalf. The comfort that we receive by the
priesthood of Christ.


23 But of all this a singular comfort is ministered unto us. For seeing we have
such an high priest, so glorious and great in person; so sufficient in worth
of sacrifice; so gracious in intercession, sitting also at the right hand of
the majesty in heaven, so near unto God, the very son of God, what good
thing is there that we may not hope for at the hands of God by his means? How
should we doubt but that God is always ready to yield us favor and grace
coming to him in his name? How may we comfort our selves in affliction and
distress lifting up our eyes to heaven and saying, He sits in my behalf at
the right hand of God who is able to do all things for me. His eyes are
always over me, his care is always for me: his mouth is never shut from
soliciting and pleading my cause with God the father. There is nothing so
grievous in my sins but his blood is able to acquit it: nothing so high in
the gifts of God but his intercession is able to obtain it. He has taken me
to be his; he will not suffer me to perish but will preserve and keep me for
ever. God the father grant unto us, etc.

The fifth Sermon.
Verse. 5.6.7. 5 O Lord, he that is at thy right hand shall wound even kings in
the day of his wrath.

6 He shall judge amongst the heathen: he shall fill all with dead carkeises;
he shall wound the head over great countries.

7 He shall drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up his
head.


THese verses serve for declaration of that that we read in the first verse.
For here is showed how Jesus Christ set up in the majesty of his kingdom
exercises his power for the confusion of them that refuse him for their king,
and deny to stoop unto his scepter, until that be performed which is there
promised that all his enemies shall be made his footestoole. This is the
general drift of these words; but more particularly we may observe here set
forth concerning Jesus Christ the severity of his wrath; What points we are
to observe in these three last verses.
the extent of his government: his authority of judgment: the prosecution of
his victory: and after all accomplished his triumph and glory. Of all which I
will speak as the course of the words themselves does give occasion.

2 As touching the first, the prophet in the fifth verse turning his speech to
God the father speaks to this effest: O Lord, he to whom thou saiedst, sit
thou on my right hand, etc. after that thou shall have exalted him to that
fullness of majesty and power, shall in the day that he shall appoint for the
execution of his wrath, strike through and wound with a mortal wound not only
the viler and baser sort and as it were the common soldiers, but even the
captains themselves, yea the very kings and potentates of the world whosoever
they be that shall oppose themselves against him, and refuse to yield their
necks to the bearing of this yoke. A double end of Christ's sitting at the
right hand of God.
Where at the first sight there is given us occasion to consider a double end
of Christ's sitting at the right hand of God. The one concerns the salvation
of his faithful people: the other the destruction of rebels and enemies. The
one yields great comfort and assurance of hope, and the doctrine thereof is
proper to them that believe in Jesus Christ, and incline their ears to his
words, and apply their feet to walk in his ways, to whom it cannot but
yield great matter of confidence toward God to bethink themselves that they
have such an high priest and mediator as sits at the right hand of God in
so great acceptance with God; in the height of the glory of God; in all
souerainty of power and dominion over all creatures both in heaven and earth.
Why should I doubt but that my prayers are heard of God, when he that sits
at the right hand of God is there always ready to entreat for me? Why should
I fear least my sins condemn me, when he that sits at the right hand of
God is ready to plead his satisfaction for my sins? What can the devil do
against me when he fights for me that sits at the right hand of God? He is
my redemption and life that sits at the right hand of God and therefore how
shall death or hell be able to do me harm? Who will accuse me, when as he
has acquitted me? who will condemn me seeing he has sealed a pardon for me?
To be short, it is riches in poverty, health in sickness, joy in sorrow,
safety in danger, life in death faithfully to remember and heartily to embrace
Jesus Christ sitting at the right hand of God the father. Blessed is the man
whose heart Jesus Christ possesses by this faith: but he that accepts not of
this great grace by faith and obedience of the gospel, unhappy is he and thrice
unhappy howsoever according to the course and condition of this world he seem
to be most happy.

3 For Christ as to his that receive and love him he is gracious and lovely,
Christ's sitting at the right hand of God full of terror to rebellious and
unthankful men.
and sits at the right hand of God for their defense and safety, so to them
that unthankfully refuse him or rebelliously fight against him, is full of
terror and fear, full of wrath and rigor, and sits at the right hand of
God to be revenged of them, wounding and killing and not sparing even the very
kings and monarchs of the world that are not reconciled unto him. He is not
only a lamb to save, but also a lion to destroy. He has not only a scepter
to govern, but also a sword to kill. Psalm. 2.10.
Be wise now therefore, says David, O ye kings, understand ye that are judges
of the earth: Kesse the son least he be angry: when his wrath shall suddenly
burn, blessed are they that trust in him, but woe to them that have despised
him.

Mat. 3.12.
He has his fan in his hand, says John Baptist, and he will purge or make
clean his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner, but the chafe he
will burn with unquenchable fire. And who are this chafe but the wicked and
ungodly? but sinners and unbelievers and hypocrites who in the field of this
world, and in the floor of the church live and grow together with the good
corn, with the faithful and just; securely flattering themselves for that
they have place to grow in the Lords vineyard, whereas in the mean time to
Godward they are unprofitable and good for nothing; bringing forth no good
fruit; being void of faith and a good conscience; yielding no true devotion,
no sound obedience unto Jesus Christ, when notwithstanding they honest and
grace themselves with the profession of his name. Unto them Christ shall
adiudge a portion in the fire that never shall be quenched. He shall say at the
last day not only, Mat. 25.34.41.
Come ye blessed, inherit the kingdom, but also, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire. 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
The Lord Jesus, says saint Paul shall show himself from heaven with his
mighty Angels in flaming fire to render vengeance unto them that know not
God, and that obey not unto the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: which shall be
punished with everlasting perdition from the presence of the Lord and from the
glory of his power.

4 Let us remember these things that we deceive not our selves in that which
we pretend of our glorying and rejoicing in Jesus Christ: with great
solemnity we celebrate his nativity and birth; we keep holy days: we
feast it with dainty fare; we brave it with our best attire; we forbear our
ordinary labors; and all as in the honor of Jesus Christ. But if we despise
his Gospel, and tread his word under our feet; if we cast his
commandments behind our backs and refuse to be guided by his direction; if
under pretense of keeping holiday to the Lord we seek our own will, and follow
our own carnal and corrupt desires, and regard no more in our hearts but with
the Israelites to Exodus 32.6.
sit down to eat and to drink and to rise up to play, what is there in that
that we do, but that which God elsewhere reproved in them: Esa. 29.13.1^
This people draw near unto me with their lips, and honor me with their
mouths, but their heart is far from me? Men deceive themselves and make a way
to their own destruction, when they fancy Jesus Christ to be so merciful a
Savior, as that under him they may do what they will, and live as they list,
ignorant, careless consciencelesse, sauouring of nothing but of the flesh and
of the world, and yet in the end be nothing hindered from coming unto him.
And this is the common error of many that live under the name of Christians.
They call him their Lord Jesus, but live as if they acknowledged him only
Jesus to save them; Christ not only Jesus to save us, but also the Lord Jesus
to rule and govern us.
and not the Lord Jesus to rule and govern them. Thus they divide Jesus
Christ, and where they list they accept of him; and otherwhere reject him. But
Christ is not divided, neither will he be Jesus to save where he is not Lord to
rule. If we will receive him, we must receive him entier and whole 2. Pet.
2.20.
the Lord and savior Jesus Christ. If we deny unto him that subjection and
dutiful obedience whereby we should approve that we take him for our Lord, he
shall be unto us a Lord indeed, and not a savior; we shall feel his power,
and not find his mercy; his sword shall ouerrule us that would not be content
to be ruled by his word. We remember the sentence of Christ, Luc. 19.27.
Those mine enemies that would not have me to reign over them, bring them
hither and slare them before me. Let us assure our selves if we yield not unto
Christ his kingdom to reign over us, he takes us for his enemies, and
howsoever we now call him Ioh. 1.29.
the lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, yet at that great
day of his appeering, the conscience of our unfaithfulness and rebellion shall
make us to Renel. 6.16.
say unto the mountains and rocks, fall upon us and cover us from the sight
of him that sits upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb. To this
purpose Christ has forewarned us, Mat. 7.22.
Many shall say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
name, and in thy name cast out devils, and in thy name done many miracles: and
then I well profess unto them: surely I never knew you: away from me ye
workers of iniquity. And again, Luc. 13.25.
When the goodman of the house is risen up and has put to the doors, and ye
shall begin to stand without and to knock saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us,
and he shall answer and say, I know ye not whence ye are, then shall ye
begin to say, Lord we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have
taught in our streets; and be shall say unto you I know you not whence ye
are: depart from me ye workers of iniquity. If we be workers of iniquity,
the Lord of righteousness has no place for us to dwell with him.

Earthly dignities are no exemptions from the service of Christ, nor defense
against bis wrath.
5 Furthermore it is expressed that this wrath of Christ is extended unto kings
and princes that we may understand that with God there is no respect of
persons, and that our earthly prerogatives, whereby we seem so far to
excel others, are no dispensations or charters of liberty, that less duty
should be required of us, then of those that are inferiors unto us. Earthly
state swells and puffs up the minds of men; and in their pride they think
scorn to be tied to any rules for the ordering of their life. They hold it a
wrong unto them to have duty urged upon them as upon other men, and it must
not be expected of them to serve Jesus Christ, further then their leisure and
liking will give them leave. But therefore as I have said, the prophet here
names kings as subject to the wrath of Christ, that no height of men may
persuade them that they have any privilege whereby they are exempted from
serving the Lord, but rather that the highest are most in sight, and specially
marked of God, and in the contempt of Christ, are subject to so much the
greater wrath; by how much the more it concerns them, not only themselves to
be religious and dutiful unto him; but also both by their authority, and by
their example to forward those that live under them to do honor unto his name.

Kings persecuting the church are subject to the wrath of Christ, and shall do
no more then he sees good.
6 But yet the prophet here specially intends those potentates and kings that
professedly oppose themselves against Christ and his Gospel, according to that
that he speaks in another Psalm: Psalm. 2.2.
The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together against
the Lord and against his anointed. Which is applied by Saint Peter in the
fourth of the Acts: Act. 4.27.
Against thine only son Jesus whom thou have anointed both Herod and
Pontius Pilate with the Gentiles and people of Israel have gathered them
selves together, and is further also to be applied to all other tyrants and
persecutours of the church. Now hereby the holy ghost would strengthen our
minds against the terror and fear of the princes and great men of this world
that we may not be overmuch troubled or dismayed when we see them banding and
bending themselves against the church of Christ, inasmuch as we know, that be
they never so great, they are subject to the hand of him that sits at the
right hand of God; so that howsoever they fume and rage, and by their power
seem to threaten ruin to heaven it self, yet they can do nothing but as it
pleases Christ to use them to serve his turn, as who has it in his hand to
destroy them at his own will. The majesty of Christ should more affect us
then the power of earthly princes.
And therefore the majesty and power of Jesus Christ should much more affect
and move us, then all the power and greatness of earthly princes; and the
fear of him should be stronger to contain and hold us within the bounds of
duty and faithfulness toward him, then the fear of any secular power
should be to remove us from the same. August in Psalm. 75.
Terribiles sunt reges, says saint Austen, sed super omnes terribilis qui
terret reges: Kings are greatly to be feared, but he is fearful above all
that makes kings themselves afraid. If we fear kings because they can
destroy us, how much more shall we fear him that is able to destroy kings?
Earthly kings can but destroy our bodies; neither can they do that but when and
as the Lord will give them leave; but this king has power over body and
soul, and is able when he will to destroy both: Mat. 10.28.
fear not them, says Christ, that kill the body and are not able to kill the
soul, but fear him that is able to destroy both soul and body in hell fire.

7 Again it is to be observed how the prophet sets down a certain time
determined by Jesus Christ for the execution of his wrath. A day appointed for
the execution of the wrath of Christ.
For this is imported in that that he says: In the day of his wrath. Whereby he
calls us to patience and to a quiet and contented expectation of the
revealing of the Lords hand, that we take it not amiss, if the Lord do not so
soon manifest his wrath against his enemies as we desire and look for. We see
it oftentimes fall out that the enemies of Christ and his church infinitely
storm and rage against his name and Gospel, and yet in the mean time all
things go with them according to their own desire. They murder the
righteous and innocent, and wash their feet in the blood of them that give
any testimony unto the faith of Christ, and the Lord in the mean time
makes as if he saw it not, and holds his hand as if he cared not what were
done by them. This sometimes we wonder at, and are amazed in our minds to
see that God suffers those things to be done to poor innocent souls for
his sake, and does not straightwaies draw his sword, and bring forth his
weapons for the revenging of their cause. But the prophet wills us always to
consider that the Lord has appointed a day for the manifesting of his wrath
against his enemies, which as in wisdom and judgment he has determined, so
in wisdom also he will observe and keep the same. In the mean time their
courses are not unknown unto him, but he appoints both which way and how far
they shall go, and disposes their goings to good ends and uses; howsoever the
same be not always apparent to our eyes. But that which the Lord has
appointed they cannot pass; they cannot go beyond it: where he has set
thenet, they shall be taken: where he has dug the pit, they shall certainly
fall; and shall not escape the plague that he has prepared for them. Howsoever
therefore they rejoice in their present success, against the just, and comfort
themselves in the assurance of their own estate as if heaven and earth were
sworn to serve their will, yet, as David says; Psalm. 37.13.
the Lord laugheth them to scorn, because he sees that their day is coming:
the day that shall strip them of all their glory, and turn their light into
darkness, and give them the full reward of Zepha. 2.10.
their pride, whereby they have reproached the just and magnified themselves
against the people of the Lord. Let us therefore in this be half submit our
selves unto the wise dome of the Lord and not prescribe unto him when or how he
shall glorify himself in the deliverance of his people or in the destruction
of his enemies. And seeing the impieties and blasphemies of the wicked contain
far more wrong and offense unto the majesty of God, then they can do unto us,
and yet he is content in respect of himself to for bear and to defer his
wrath, let us not marvel that he is so slow in the mainteining and instifying
of our cause, that uses so great sufferance and patience in his own.

The day of wrath s^^ially to be under siood of the day of judgment, or the
ast day.
8 But this day of wrath as it has relation unto all those days of particular
judgments wherein God in this world from time to time takes open revenge upon
wicked men and persecutours of his church; so it must be extended also to that
Revel. 6.17.
great day of wrath wherein shall be the consumation and full accomplishment of
all judgment. Which saint Paul calls also Romans 2.5.
the day of wrath and of the declaration of the just judgment of God; and
saint Peter: 2. Pet. 3.7.
the day of judgment and of the destruction of ungodly men. Which is therefore
specially so called because God shall then in special manner make his
judgment to appear universally upon all the wicked, so that there shall be no
denial of his hand. For now although the wrath of God do oftentimes light
upon the wicked in such sort, as that plainly men that have eyes may discern
upon them the hand of the son of God whom they have despised, yet the world
wilfully blinds it self and will not behold or acknowledge therein the work
of God, but rather impute all to mishap, and fortune, and oversight, and
therefore through hardness of heart fear not to go forward in the same ways
wherein they have seen others to fall before them. Thus children tread in their
fathers steps, and successors follow the cruelties and ungodly courses of
their predecessors, without any doubt or fear at all of their unexpected and
fearful end. Although therefore that God do thus set forth his judgment by
many dreadful examples even in this life, yet it is to the most as if he
judged not, because men will not take it to be his judgment. Again albeit
many there be that are thus made spectacles of the wrath of God in this world;
yet many there are also that seem to go to their graves in peace, as if God
had taken no notice of them or understood not what they had done against him.
Prosperity and honor accompany them to their end, and the world cannot
discern but that they are blessed and happy men. But that day of judgment
shall reform all this error, when as they that now refuse to see or to
acknowledge the power and work of God in those executions which he performs
in this world, shall have their eyes opened to see it whether they will or not,
and it shall come to pass which the prophet says: Esa. 26.11.
They will not behold thy high hand, O Lord, but they shall see it, and shall be
confounded with the zeal of thy people, and the fire of thine enemies shall
denoure them; and again when on the other side they that seem in this life
altogether to have escaped the hand of God, shall at once receive a doom fully
answerable to all their sinful and wicked deeds. And surely when God punishes
some in this life, as he does; and does not punish other who notwithstanding
have deserved it as well as they, what does he but teach us to expect a further
day when his wrath shall be further made manifest upon them both? Let it not
therefore be grievous or troublesome unto us to see them for the time flourish
and prosper in their evil ways; neither let us yield our hearts to be
bewitched with the sight of their present glory, so as to be content for the
enjoying of their deceitful pleasures to follow them: but as our eyes do now
behold their outward bliss, so let our faith in the word of God behold their
end, and we shall see a portion assigned for them whereof we would not choose to
be partakers with them for the gaining or obteining of the whole world.

The extent of Christ's kingdom unto the Gentiles.
9 In the sixth verse the prophet first of all sets forth the large extent of
the dominion and kingdom of Jesus Christ; as who has his throne erected and
established not only amongst the Jews to reign over the seed of Abraham,
but amongst the Gentiles also and heathen people, who being before Ephs. 2.12.
aliens from the common wealth of Israel, strangers from the covenants of
promise, without hope and without God in this world, are by the preaching of
the Gospel Psalm. 47.9.
joined unto the people of the God of Abraham, and graffed upon their stock,
to be partakers with them of like adoption and grace unto cuerlasting life.
Thus had God promised before: Psalm. 2.8.
I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for thy possession. Psalm. 72.8.
His dominion shall be from the one sea to the other, and from the flood unto
the worlds end: Verse. 11.
All kings shall worship him: all nations shall do him service. Many notable
prophecies are there found to this purpose; which it shall not be needful to
rehearse. Which have been so notably verified since the time of Christ's
ascension by the passage and preaching of the Gospel through the world (the
Gentiles thereby acknowledging the God of Abraham, and accepting the blessing
that was promised unto them in his seed) as that we may greatly marualle at
the blindness and obstinacy of the Jews, who by no means will belecue that
these are the times of which the Prophets foretold, or be persuaded that the
Messiah promised unto their fathers is come, when as notwithstanding they see
that come to pass, which according to their own books could not be but in
the days, and by the coming and kingdom of the true Messiah. But now that
God has had this compassion upon our for lorne and wretched estate, and has
called us to the fellowship of this grace, let us, as the Apostle wills, Romans
15.9.
praise God for this mercy, and endeavor with all our hearts to 1 Thessalonians 2.12.
walk worthy of him that thus has called us to his kingdom and glory. Yea
and let the love that we bear to the root and stock whereon we grow, move
us to pray unto the Lord for them, who were the Romans 11.21.
natural branches of that olive tree, whom God for the time has out off,
that by that occasion he might show mercy unto us; that now yet at length he
will return unto them, and as he took away the Ephesians. 2.14.
partition wall that kept us from them, when they as yet enjoyed the ptinilege
of his grace; so he will now take from their hearts 2. Cor. 3.15.
the veil of unbelief that keeps them from us, that seeing the light of his
Gospel, and being gathered with us by faith into the bosom of his church, and
all being made one sheepefold under one shepherd, both they and we may
thenceforth look for the coming of this shepherd Jesus Christ, to give unto
us the end of our faith and hope, and to perform unto us the good things which
he has promised, 1. Cor. 2.9.
which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor have entered into the
heart of man, which God has prepafor them that love him.

10 Now when the father appoints him the judge amongst the Heathens, Christ
appointed the judge, and what is thereby attributed unto him.
he thereby gives him authority and power to prescribe laws, to determine
controversies, and to punish them that will not be obedient unto him. For God
has put all his words into the mouth of this judge, and has made him the
Luc. 7.16.
great Prophet by whom he would fully and finally reueile unto us his will,
that all men's eyes may look only unto him, Christ the only lawgiuer to his
Church.
and all men's ears may receive laws from his mouth, and in all things
belonging to the state and government of his spiritual kingdom, may depend
upon his voice, without devising new laws themselves, or accepting them of the
devise of other men. They therefore that set up other lawgiuers in the church,
what do they but pull down Jesus Christ, and nullify the word whereby God
the father has set him up to be the sovereign and only judge? as the
papists do, The papists setting up other lawgiuers against Christ.
who not contenting themselves with the word of Jesus Christ, have imposed
upon the church the burden of their own traditions; and have set up the bishop
of Rome to be a perpetual Dictatour unto the church, to establish laws of
his own, and by his Non obstante to take away the laws of Christ. A notable
example whereof appeered in the Council of Constance, where mentioning the
institution of Christ administering the sacrament under both kinds, and saying,
Drink ye all of this, they yet decree that Hoc non obstante, Council.
Constant. sess. 13.
this notwithstanding, the lay people shall not be partakers of the cup,
calling it a perverse or preposterous usage to minister unto them in both
kinds, and a rash assertion to affirm that so it ought to be, and condemning
them for heretics that will minister in that sort. What was this but the very
presumption of Antichrist, setting up himself above the son of God, and
taking upon him to censure and control the laws of Jesus Christ? But let us
leave them to their own pride and wilful devises, and acknowledge no other
but only Iam. 4.12.
one lawgiuer who is able to save and to destroy; and therefore follow the
faithfulness of the Apostle, who as Tertullian says, Tertul. de praescript.
cont. haeret.
Nihil de suo indulserunt; gave themselves no liberty to prescribe anything of
their own, but kept themselves within the limits of that commission, wherewith
they were sent unto all nations, Mat. 28.20.
teaching them says Christ, to observe whatsoever things I have commanded you.

Christ the only judge by his word to determine all causes and controversies
in his church.
11 Again, because Christ is appointed to be the only judge, therefore are we
to yield all our causes and controversies to be decided and determined by his
word. What sentence he pronounces, we are to stand unto it: where he
pronounces no sentence, we are to determine nothing. In those infinite
controversies and questions of faith and religion wherewith the world at this
time is so much distracted and divided, it is wished that there were some
judge, by whose indifferent sentence there might be resolution of the truth;
and so all strife and controversy might be appeased. But who should this
judge be, but he that of God is appointed to be the judge amongst the Heathen,
even Jesus Christ, who although he be in heaven, yet from heaven speaks unto
us in the word of the Gospel, and teaches us both what to believe, and what to
do that we may come unto him. If any man reply, that albeit Christin deed to
speak in the Gospel, yet we have need of some judge to tell us the meaning of
Christ's words, because their is question also of the meaning thereof, I
answer that this is but a wilful shift of froward men, who by question of the
meaning seek to slip away from the words of Christ, when his words do
plainly declare what his meaning is. Surely if the words of Christ be not
plain enough to make his meaning known unto us, we cannot see but that when
some man has set down the meaning thereof, there may again be required a
meaning of his meaning. For God oftentimes speaks unto us so plainly in the
Scriptures, as that no man can better tell us what his meaning is, then he
himself does. When therefore he speaks plainly unto us, and by manifest
words sets forth his meaning, surely then to require a judge to instruct
us of the meaning of his words, is nothing else but to dally with God, and
under a vain pretense to reject the truth whereof he has assured us.
Chrysostom could say: Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. ho. 3.
All things are clear and plain by the holy Scriptures: whatsoever things
are necessary, they are manifest. And Austen in like sort: August. de doct.
Christ. lib. 2. cap. 9.
In those things which are plainly set down in scriptures are found all those
things that belong to faith and conversation of life. What can be more
definitely spoken to commend unto us the sufficiency and plainness of the
Scriptures for the deciding and clearing of all necessary points. Therefore to
be short seeing the holy Scripture contains those laws and statutes by
which Christ shall judge us, and he himself has there set down the sentence
whereby we shall either stand or fall by believing or not believing, living or
not living as he has taught us, let us set aside all other judges and
judgments, and in simplicity and faithfulness follow the rule that is there
delivered unto us; always assuring our selves that whatsoever is necessary
for the obteining of everlasting life, Christ speaks it in the scriptures
somewhere so plainly, as that we need not fear to take instruction thereof
immediately from his own mouth. And although in those heavenly oracles of
sacred judgments there be many things hard to be understood, which may
exercise the wits and studies of the best learned, and give us occasion to
admire the deep and unsearchable wisdom of almighty God; yet many things
also there are wherein God August. ep. 3.
speaks to the hearts not only of the learned, but also of the unlearned, and
yields not only a deep for the elephant to swim, but also a shallow for
the lamb to wade, in the use whereof we shall easily perceive that he has
abundantly provided for our comfort and salvation. Only let us be careful
daily to exercise our selves in the meditation of the scriptures, least that by
our neglect those things become obscure and hard, which by use and practice of
the word should be otherwise familiar and plain unto us.

The papists chalenging unto themselves to be judges of the words of Christ,
and their practice in that behalf.
12 And as for them who not contented with these resolutions and judgments of
Jesus Christ, do challenge unto themselves to be judges for the determining of
the controversies of the church, let them follow their own course. We see well
enough what their purpose and practice is. They see the judgments of Christ to
be manifestly against them. But they would persuade us, yea they bid a man
Rhemish Test. in the argument of the Epistles in general.
assure himself that if any thing therein sound unto him as contrary to their
church, he fails of the right sense. To themselves therefore and to the
bishop of Rome they say it belongs to give the sense; and whilst they give
the sense, we may be sure they will make every thing to serve their turn, and
nothing to be against them. But by their giving the sense they bring to pass
that when Christ speaks one thing, he must mean another; and the sense must
be a plain and express contradiction to the words. Thus when Christ says: c
Ye shall not have me always with you, they tell us that his meaning was not
but to be always really present with us, and every day in the mass to be
offered in sacrifice unto God. And this offering of Christ by the words of
scripture is plainly gainsaied, which tells us that Christ offered himself
but Heb. 7.27.
once, and needed not often to offer himself; that he is 9.25.
gone into heaven not to offer himself often, because 10.18.
where there is forgiveness of sins, as there is by Christ's once offering
of himself, 9.28.
there is no more offering for sin. But all this notwithstanding we must not
think that it is so meant, but that Christ is to be offered often, and being
gone into heaven does every day concur with the priest to offer up himself,
and that forgiveness of sins it not so purchased by the death and sacrifice
of Christ upon his cross, but that we must continually have in the church an
offering for sin. Christ says in words Math. 26.27.
Drink ye all of this, as was before allenged; but we must think he meant
that all should not drink but the priest only. The word of Christ is that we
may not Romans 10.14.
call upon him in whom we do not believe: but his meaning for all that is that
we shall call upon saints though we may not believe in them. The word of Christ
is that as there is but one God, so there is but 1. Tim. 2.5.
one mediator betwixt God and man: but his meaning for all that must be that
all the saints of heaven must be our mediators unto God. The word of Christ
is that we shall not Exodus 20.4.
make a graven image to fall down to it or to worship it; but we must think
that he meant that we should make us graven images to fall down before them,
to worship them, to offer and pray unto them. What impudent men are these, and
how hard is their forehead that will go about to persuade us that Christ has
a sense and meaning so directly contrary to that that he speaks. And yet they
forsooth must be taken for the judges of the scriptures, and whatsoever Christ
says we must believe nothing but according to that meaning that they will make
of it, because as one of them says, if a man have the interpretation of the
church of Rome, he has the true sense of scripture, although he cannot see how
it agrees with the words. Let us detest these hypocrites more and more, and
let these things so palpably lewd and absurd teach us to stop our ears
against those Romans 16.18.
fair words and flattering speeches wherewith they send their sirens and
mermaides abroad to beguile and seduce the hearts of simple men. Yea and let us
cleave so much the more steadfastly unto the judgment of the word of Christ,
because we see that for the mainteining of their bad cause, they are forced so
grossly to abuse the same. When we see the text of scripture so plain for our
selves that in words it affirms the same that we teach, and so pregnant
against them that they are feign so absurdly to wrest it to serve their turn,
how can we doubt but that the judge of truth speaks on our part, and that
their setting up of another judgment seat is nothing else but an appeal from
the sentence of this judge. Let them prosecute their appeal, but we will rest
in the word and sentence of him whom God has set up to be the judge amongst
the heathen. Christ a judge to be revenged of them that are disobedient unto
him.
Who last of all because he is the judge shall award just damnation to them
that are disobedient, and will not submit themselves to be guided by his
judgment. And though happily they be such as profess his name, yet being
enemies to his word, they are enemies unto him, and shall receive their
judgment accordingly: as who indeed pretend the name of Christ, not to honor
Christ, but by pretense thereof to serve and set up themselves.

The fury of Christ's wrath against his enemies.
13 The prophet now having set forth Christ as the judge of all nations,
returns again to declare his wrathful indignation and fury against his
enemies. And to that purpose he adds: He shall sill all with dead carkeises,
etc. Where he compares him to a bloody conqueror, who having gotten the
victory, and having now the law in his own hands, kills and slaieth
without mercy, so that the earth is in a manner covered with the multitude of
dead men. But what the earthly conqueror does by cruelty, the same Christ
here is brought in as doing by just judgment. Only by these terms of bodily
slaughter we must understand those both corporal and spiritual; both
temporal and eternal destructions wherewith Christ shall reward the pride and
rebellion of them, who either in himself or in his members oppose themselves
against him. And if it be a fearful thing unto us to fall into the hands of
tyrants who practice these cruel and horrible executions upon men's bodies, how
dreadful a thing should it be unto us to provoke the wrath of him that shall
bring this fearful damnation both upon body and soul? Are we moved to
conceive the bodies of slain men lying in heaps upon the ground, and does it
not move us to consider the multiude of the world casting themselves
heape-wise and headlong under the sword of Jesus Christ, and dying by his
hand? And if we naturally abhor to imagine our own bodies lying among the
carkeises of dead men to be devoured of wild beasts, and to be as carrion for
kites and ravens, how unnatural are we to our selves when by contempt of Christ
and his commandments we suffer our selves to lie amongst the heaps of wicked
men in the damnation of sin, to become the pray and spoil of the devil and
his angels, and with them to be partakers of everlasting fire? Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; who is not
so gracious and lovely unto them that seek him, but he is as sharp and severe
unto them that will not be guided by his word.

How Christ has given experience of his wrath in the destruction of the great
monarchs and potentates of the world.
14 Which severity the prophet again denounces not only to the baser sort,
but also to the greatest and mightiest amongst men, when he says that he shall
strike the head, or him that is the head over great countries. For by these
words he describes the great monarchs and princes of the world, who having
many and great countries under their dominion, should in the pride of their
greatness, resist the kingdom of Jesus Christ, but yet for all their might
should not escape the deadly stroke of his revenging hand. And hereof we find
many notable examples in the stories of the church, wherein we may behold how
vengeance has followed princes and great men to strip them of their crowns
and dignities; to bring them to contempt and shame; to destroy them by horrible
and fearful death, who have abused their state and greatness against Christ,
and sought thereby the overthrow of his church. It would be too long to
discourse of Herod, who thinking by the death of Christ to gain the assurance
of the kingdom of Judea to himself, was by Caius the emperor deprived of his
kingdom, and ended his life an exile and banished man? of Pontius Pilate who
condemning the righteous son of God to undeserved death, became afterward
the butcher and murderer of himself? of the other Herod who killed James,
and would have killed Peter also, who for his pride was stricken by the angel
of God, and denoured being yet alive of vermin and lice? Look unto the
Heathen emperors of Rome, who were indeed the heads over great countries, and
who practiced the greatest opposition against the kingdom of Christ, and see
whether there were in a manner any of them that so did, upon whom the hand of
Jesus Christ was not manifestly to be seen. Nero the emperor Tertul. in
Apologet. ca. 5.
dedicator damnationis nostrae, as Tertullian calls him, that is, the first
that made a law to condemn Christians to death, after all his villainies and
cruelties being condemned himself by the Senate of Rome to be whipped to
death, to avoid this judgment fled away by night, and complaining that he
could find neither friend nor enemy to dispatch him, but yet professing that
as he had lived a shameful life, so he would die a shameful death, fell upon
his own sword and killed himself. Domitian who as Tertullian also speaks,
was Tertul. ibid.
portio Neronis de crudelitate, for his cruelty a piece of Nero, was slain in
his chamber by the consent of his own wife. Hadrian was taught to rue his
shedding of blood by a horrible flux and issue of his own blood, wherewith he
grew in the end to that exceeding torment, as that he called for poison and
sword to dispatch himself. Commodus a man for his lewdness and cruelty
likened to those monsters Nero and Domitian, was first poisoned by Martia his
concubine, and afterward strangled by Narcissus. Seuerus the emperor was so
cruelly tormented in his whole body, as that he also desired poison to end his
life. Maximinus was torn in pieces of his own soldiers. Decius was drowned
in a quagmire. Valerius as was before said, was taken by Sapores king of
Persia, and after much indignity his skin was flated off, and salt cast upon
his raw flesh, and so in miserable sort he ended his wretched life. Dioclesian
killed himself Galienus and Aurelianus were slain by others. Julian the
apostata after all his both violent and wily practices against Christ and his
church, in battle against the Persians was wounded to death and taking of his
own blood in his hand, sprinkleth it upward, and perforce acknowledges the
judgment of Christ, saying, Vicisti tandem Galilaee; Thou Galilean yet at
length have gotten the victory. These were tyrants and persecutors of the
church, and in them as in many more which it were to long to rehearse, we see
the words of the prophet verified that Christ should smite and wound even the
very heads over great couniries. Yea these our times have not wanted very
notable and pregnant examples of this judgment of the Lord. For if we look
back unto them who have been the special authors of those massacres and
murders that have been committed upon the professors of the Gospel, we
shall easily perceive that God has returned the blood which they have shed,
upon their own heads. They have come to fearful ends by lice, by flux of
blood, by poisoning, by stabbing, and having first combined themselves to the
destruction of the faithful, have afterward fallen to conspiring and
practicing one against another. This is the work of Christ; this is his
fearful wrath; that men may learn to stand in awe of him, and not to abuse
their greatness and power to the oppugning of his kingdom.

The vengeance of Christ cease not to pursue and follow his enemies until it
have destroyed them.
15 There follows now a word or two to be spoken of the last verse. He shall
drink of the brook in the way: therefore shall he lift up his head. The
former part of which words is hard to be understood, neither will I take upon
me certainly to determine the meaning thereof. I like best to follow them who
construe the same to the like purpose in general as the words before; as if
the prophet having imported Christ's victory gotten against his enemies would
further signify that as a noble conqueror having won the battle and put
the enemy to flight, pursues and follows the chase with might and maine,
and the more instantly to press them, will not turn out of the way to refresh
himself but is content to drink of the brook that he finds in the way and
so cutteth them of one and one until they be utterly wasted and overthrown,
even so the son of God Jesus Christ with all wrath and fury shall prosecute
his enemies, and hold them still in chase, and pursue them by his divine power
and sword of judgment, so that none of them shall escape, but all shall fall
under his hand. Certain it is that just vengeance is still waiting at the
heels of the enemies of Christ, and cease not to follow them until it have
utterly destroyed them. They may seem for a time to fly and to escape; their
pomp and power may seem to hide them and to shield them from the Lords hand;
but in the end he will overtake them, and find them out, and pull them out of
their holes, and set his feet upon their necks; and pour upon them
everlasting confusion. Let no man flatter himself; let no man be secure in
enmity against the Lord. Present standing is no warrant against future
falling. The sword that has not yet stricken, yet is gone forth to strike,
and shall not return until it Psalm. 68.21.
wound the head of Gods enemies, and the curled pates of them that walk
forward in their sins; 2. Pet. 2.3.
whose judgment long agone, as Saint Peter says, is not far of, and their
damnation sleeps not.

Christ's victory and glorious triumph over all his enemies.
16 The last words import the glorious triumph of Jesus Christ, having now
subdued all his enemies and cast them under his feet for ever. Therefore shall
he lift up his head. It may be taken either that Christ shall lift up or hold
up his head, or that God the father shall lift up the head of his son Jesus
Christ. As holding down the head betokens sorrow and shame, so the holding or
lifting up of the head betokens rejoicing, and triumph, and glory, and full
confidence of safety and assured estate. Thus shall Christ lift up the head by
way of triumphing and rejoicing, when he shall have taken full vengeance of his
adversaries, and freed, not himself only, but the whole body of his church
from the assaults and dangers of all enemies. We see now that oftentimes,
though not in himself, yet in his members, he is feign to hang down the head,
and to wear the badges of reproach and shame, whilst the ungodly vaunt
themselves, and go Job. 32, 26.
looking upon the sun, and in their hearts despise the righteous, accounting
more vilely of them then of the dust of their feet. But the case shall be
altered: the rising of Christ, shall be their fall: the lifting up of Christ's
head, shall be the casting down of theirs; and it shall be fulfilled which is
written: Esa. 65.13.14.
Behold my servants shall reivice, and ye shall be ashamed: behold my servants
shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall
howl for vexation of mind. We may otherwise understand that God the father
shall lift up the head of Jesus Christ in the same meaning as Pharao is said
Genes. 40.13.
to lift up the head of his chief butler, that is, to advance him to his place
of dignity and honor. Which God the father has done already upon his first
conquest, having set him at his right hand as has been before declared, and
more fully shall do when he shall have 1. Cor. 15.27.
put all things under his feet, and shall make his glory manifest unto all
the world, and shall so establish the kingdom that he has given him, that
thencefoorth there shall never be enemy to resist the same. To this king Jesus
Christ together with the father and the holy Ghost, one God, immortal,
invisible, and only wise be all praise and honor and glory both now and for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

