KIND-HARTS DREAM.

Containing five Apparitions, with their Inuectiues against abuses reigning.
Delivered by several Ghosts unto him to be published, after Piers Penilesse
Post had refused the carriage.

Inuita Inuidiae. by H. C.



Imprinted at London for William Wright.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
IT has been a custom Gentle men (in my mind commendable) among former
Authors (whose works are no less beautified with eloquente phrase, than
garnished with excellent example) to begin an exordium to the Readers of their
time, much more convenient I take it, should the writers in these da^es
(wherein that gravity of enditing by the elder excercised, is not observed,
nor that modest decorum kept, which they continued) submit their labors to the
favorable censures of their learned overseers. For seeing nothing can be said,
that has not been before said, the singularity of some men's conceits,
(otherwise exellent well deserving) are no more to be soothed, than the
peremptory posies of two very sufficient Translators commended. To come in
print is not to seek praise, but to crave pardon: I am vrgd to the one; and
bold to beg the other, he that offende^ being forced, is more excusable than
the wilful faulty, though both be guilty, there is difference in the guilt.
To observe custom, and avoid as I may cavil, opposing your favors against my
fear, I Will show reason for my present writing, and after proceed to sue for
pardon. About three months since died M. Robert Green, leaving many papers in
sundry Book sellers hands, among other his Groatsworth of wit, in which a
letter written to diverse play-makers, is offensiuely by one or two of them
taken, and because on the dead they cannot be avenged, they wilfully forge in
their conceits a living Author: and after tossing it two and fro, no remedy,
but it must light on me. How I have all the time of my conuersing in printing
hindered the bitter inueying against scholars, it has been very well known,
and how in that I dealt I can sufficiently prove. With neither of them that
take offense was I acquainted, and with one of them I care not if I never be:
The other, whom at that time I did not so much spare, as since I wish I had,
for that as I have moderated the heat of living writers, and might have used
my own discretion (especially in such a case) the Author being dead, that I
did not, I am as sorry, as if the original fault had been my fault, because my
self have seen his demeanor no less civil than he exelent in the quality
he professes: Besides, diverse of worship have reported, his vprightnes of
dealing, which argues his honesty, and his facetious grace in writting, that
aprooues his Art. For the first, whose learning I reuerenee, and at the
perusing of Greenes Book, stroke out what then in conscience I thought he in
some displeasure writ: or had it been true, yet to publish it, was
intolerable: him I would wish to use me no worse than I deserve. I had only
in the copy this share, it was il written, as sometime Greenes hand was none of
the best, licensd it must be, ere it could be printed which could never be if
it might not be read. To be breife I writ it over, and as near as I could,
followed the copy, only in that letter I put something out, but in the whole
book not a word in, for I protest it was all Greenes, not mine nor Master
Nashes, as some unjustly have affirmed. Neither was he the writer of an Epistle
to the second part of Gerileon, though by the workemans error T. N. were set to
the end: that I confess to be mine, and repent it not.

Thus Gentlemen, having noted the private causes, that made me nominate my
self in print; being as well to purge Master Nashe of that he did not, as to
justify what I did, and withal to confirm what M. Green did: I beseech ye
accept the public cause, which is both the desire of your delight, and common
benefit: for though the toye be shadowed under the Title of Kind-hearts
Dream, it discouers the false hearts of diverse that wake to commit mischief.
Had not the former reasons been, it had come forth without a father: and then
should I have had no cause to fear offending, or reason to sue for favor. Now
am I in doubt of the one, though I hope of the other; which if I obtain, you
shall-bind me hereafter to be silent, till I can present ye (...) some thing
more acceptable.

Henry Chettle.
Kind-hartes Dedication of his dream, to all the pleasant conceited
wheresoever.
GEntlemen and good-fellowes, (whose kindness having christened me with the
name of Kindheart, binds me in all kind course I can to deserve the
continuance of your love) let it not seem strange (I beseech ye) that he that
all days of his life has been famous for drawing teeth, should now in
drooping age hazard contemptible infamy by drawing himself into print. For
such is the folly of this age, so witless, so audacious, that there are scarce
to many pedlers brag themselves to be printers because they have a bundel of
ballads in their pack, as there be idiots that think themselves Artists,
because they can English an obligation, or write a true staff to the tune of
fortune. This folly raging universally, has infired me, to write the
remembrance of sundry of my deceased friends, personages not altogether
obscure, for then were my subject base, nor yet of any honorable carriage, for
my style is rude and bad: and to such as Iit belongs not to jest with Gods.
Kind-hart would have his companions esteem of Estates as stars, on whom
mean men may look, but not ouer-looke. I have heard of an eloquent Orator,
that trimly furnished with wars abiliments, had on his shield this Motto Bona
fortuna: yet at the first meeting of the enemy fled with out fight. For which
being reproved, he replied. If I have saved my self in this battle by
flight, I shall live to chase the enemy in the next. So Gentlemen fares it with
me, If envious misconsterers arm themselves against my simple meaning, and
wrest every jest to a wrong sense. I think it policy to fly at the first
fight, till I gather fresh forces to repress their folly. Neither can they
what ^uer they be, deal hardly with Kind-hart, for ^e only delivers his
dream; with every Apparition simply as it was uttered. Its fond for them to
fight against ghosts: its fearful for me to hide an Apparition: by concealing
it I might do my self harm and them no good; by revealing it, ease my heart,
and do no honest men hurt: for the rest (although I would not willingy move
the meanest) they must bear as I do, or mend it as they may. Well least ye
deem all my dream but an Epistle. I will proceed to that without any further
circumstance.

The Dream.
SItting alone not long since, not far from Finsburie, in a Taphouse of
Antiquity, attending the coming of such companions as might wash care away
with carowsing: Sleep the attendant upon a distempred bodies, bereft the
suns light by covering mine eyes with her sable mantle, and left me in nights
shade, though the days eye shinde; so powerful was my received potion, so
heavy my passion: whence (by my hostisse care) being removed to a pleasant
parlor, the windows opening to the East, I was laid softly on a down bed, and
covered with equal furniture, where how long I slept quietly, I am not well
assured, but in the time I intended to rest, I was thus by visible apparitions
disturbd.

First after a harsh and confused sound, it seemed there enrered at once ^iue
personages, severally attired, and diversely qualified, three bearing
instruments, their favors pleasant; two appearing to be Artists, their
countenances reverend.

The first of the first three was an od old fellow, low of stature, his head
was covered with around cap, his body with a fide skirted tawney coat, his
legs and feet trust up in leather buskins, his gray hairs and furrowed face
witnessed his age, his treble violl in his hand, assured me of his profession.
On which (by his continual sawing having left but one string) after his best
manner, he gave me a huntsvp: whom after a little musing, I assuredly
remembered to be no other but old Anthony Now now.

The next, by his suit of russet, his buttond cap, his taber, his standing on
the toe, and other tricks, I knew to be either the body or resemblaunce of
Tarlton, who living for his pleasant conceits was of all men liked, and dying,
for mirth left not his like.

The third (as the first) was an old fellow, his beard milkewhite, his head
covered with a round low crowned rent silk hat, on which was a band knit in
many knotes, wherein stuck two round sticks after the Iuglers manner. His
ierkin was of leather cut, his cloak of three colors, his hole paind with
y^llow drawn out with blew, his instrument was a bagpipe, and him I knew to be
William Cuckoe, better known than loved, and yet some think as well loved as
he was worthy.

The other two had in their countenances a reverent grace, the one which was
the elder, seeming more severe, was in habit like a Doctor, in his right hand
he held a Compendium of all the famous Physicians and Surgions works
beelonging to Theorike, in his left hand a table of all instruments for man's
health, appertaining to practice.

At the sight of this Doctor, you may think Gentlemen, Kind-hart was in a
pitious case: for I verily believed he had been some rare Artist, that taking
me for a dead man had come to anatomize me, but taking comfort that my thrumde
hat, had hanging at it the ensigns of my occupation, like a tall fellow (as to
me it seemed) I lookte him in the face and beheld him to be master Doctor
Burcot (though a stranger, yet in England for physic famous.

With him was the fifth, a man of indifferent years, of face amible, of body
well proportioned, his attire after the habit of a schollerlike Gentleman,
only his hair was somewhat long, whom I supposed to be Robert Green,
master of Arts: of whom (how ever some suppose themselves injured) I have
learned to speak, considering he is dead, nill nisi necessarium.

He was of singular pleasaunce the very supporter, and to no man's disgrace be
this intended, the only Comedian of a vulgar writer in this country.

Well thus these five appeared, and by them in post past a knight of the post,
whom in times past I have seen as highly promoted as the pillory: but I have
heard since he was a devil, that plaide the Cariar of Pierce penilesse packet
to Lucifer, and was now returning to contaminate the air, with his pestilent
periuries, and abominable false witness bearing.

How Pierce his supplication pleased his Patron I know not, but sure I take it
this Friend had a foul check for meddling in the matter: for when all these
five before named had made profer of several bills inuectiue against abuses
reigning, this devilish Messenger repulsed them wrathfully, and bad them get
some other to be their packet bearer if they list, for he had almost hazarded
his credit in hell, by being a Broker between Pierce Penilesse and his Lord:
and so without hearing their reply, flew from them like a whirle wind. With
that, (after a small pause) in a round ring they compassed my bed, and
thrusting into my hand all their papers, they at once charged me to awake, and
publish them to the world.

This charge seemed to me most dreadful of all the dream, because in that
the distinguishing of their several voices was heard, far from the frequent
manner of men's speech. In fine, Cuckoe with his pipes, and Antony with his
Crowd, keeping equal epuipage first left my sight; Tarlton with his Taber
fetchig two or three leaden friskes, shortly followed, and the Doctor and
master Green immediately vanished.

With this (not a little amazed as one from a trance reviued) I rouzd up my
self: when suddenly out of my hand fell the five papers, which confirmed my
dream to be no fantisie. Yet (for that I knew the times are dangerous) I
thought good advisedly to read them, before I presumed to make them public. So
by chance lighting first on Antony nownowe I found on the outside, as follows
on the other side.

The friendly Admonition of Anthony Now now, to Mopo and Pickering,
Arch-ouerseers of the Ballad singers, in London, or elsewhere.
ANthony now now a Gods blessing to his loving and living Brethren Mopo and
Pickering greeting, whereas by the daily recourse of infinite numbers to the
infernal regions, whose plaintes to be heard ar^ no less lamentable, then
their pains to be felt infollerable, I am given to understand, that there be a
company of idle youths, loathing honest labor and dispising lawful trades,
betake them to a vagrant and vicious life, in every corner of Cities and market
Towns of the Realm singing and selling of ballads and pamphletes full of
ribaudrie, and all scurrilous vanity, to the profanation of Gods name, and
withdrawing people from christian exercises, especially at faires markets and
such publik^ meetings, I humbly desire ye that ye join with another of your
brethren free of one City and profession, that always delighting in godly
songs, is now in his age betaken to his beads, and lives by the dolef^ll
tolling of Deaths bell warning. Dear friends, I beseech you jointly to agree
to the suppressing of the a forenamed (...) vagabonds. And that I right incite
(as I hope) your forward effects, I will particularize the difference between
the abused times among you reputed, and the simplicity of the days, wherein I
lived. Withal I wish ye to expect no greater matter then Anthonyes capacity
can comprehend. When I was liked, there was no thought of that idle vpstart
generation of ballad-singers, neither was there a printer so lewd that would
set singer to a lascivious line. But I perceive the times are changed, and men
are changed in the times. For not long since a number of children were
b^lstered by some unworthy Citizens and other free men in Towns Corporate to
exercise a base libertine life in singing any thing that came to hand from
some of the Devils instruments, intruders into printings mystery, by whom
that excelent Art is not smally slandered, the government of the estate not a
little blemished, nor Religion in the least measure hindered. And to shut up al
in the last, is it not lamentable that after so many callings, so many
blessings, so many warnings, through the covetous desire of game of some two or
three, such a flock of Run-agates should ouerspred the face of this land, as
at this time it does. They that intend to infect a river poison the fountain,
the Basiliske wounds a man by the eye, whose light first failing the body of
force descends to darkness.

These Basilisks, these bad minded monsters, brought forth like vipers by their
mothers bane, with such lascivious le wdnes have first infected London the eye
of England, the head of other Cities, as what is so lewd that has not there
contrary to order been printed, and in every street abusiuely chanted. This
error (over spreding the realm) has in no small measure increased in Essex
and the shires thereto adjoining, by the blushlesse faces of certain Babies
sons to one Barnes most frequenting Bishops Stafford. The old fellow their
father soothing his sons folly, resting his crabbed limes on a crab-tree
staff, was wont and I think yet he uses to sever himself from the Booth, or
rather Brothell of his two sons Ballad shambels: where the one in a sweaking
treble, the other in an ale-blowen base carrowle out such adultrous ribaudry,
as chaste ears abhor to hear, and modesty has no tongue to utter.

While they are in the ruff of ribaudrie, (as I was about to say) the old
ale-knight their dad breaks out into admiration, and sends straggling customers
to admire the roaring of his sons: where that I may show some abuses, and
yet for shame let slip the most odious, they hear no better matter, but the
lascivious under songs of Watkins ale, the Carmans whistle, Chopingkniues, and
friar foxtaile, and that with such odious and detested boldness, as if there be
any one line in those lewd songs than other more abominable, that with a
double repetition is lowdly belowed, as for example of the friar and the nun.

He whipped her with a foxes tail, Barnes minor,
And he whipped her with a foxes tail, Barnes mayor.
O brave boys says Barnes maximus. The father leapes, the lubers roar, the
people run, the Devil laughs, God lowers, and good men weep. Nay, no sooner
have the godly preachers delivered wholesome doctrine, but these impes of
iniquity, and such as imitate their order, draw whole heaps to hearken to
their inquinated cries, as if they were heardes of the Gergishites swine ready
to receive whole legions of soule-drowning spirits.

Stephen, Mopo and Pickering I muse you make no complaint to those worshipful
that have authority to restrain such straglers for this is to be proved, of
whom soeue^ they buy them, that these two Barnes utter more licentious songs,
then all that part of England beside.

(...) it is (had they any shame) that men brought up to an honest
handicraft, of which the realm more need then iygging vanities, should betake
the^ to so impudent a course of lif^. The Rogue that lives idly is restrained,
the fi^ler and plaier that is maisterlss^ is i^ the same predicament, both
these by the law are burned in the ear, and shall men more odious escape
unpunished.

It were to be wished, if they will not be warnd, that as well the singers, as
their supporters, were burned in the tongue that they might rather be ever
utterly mute, then the triumphers of so many mischiefs. Neither are these two
alone in fault, though they stand worthily foremost as Malorum Duces, but
besides them, others more then a good many, some as I have heard say taken to
be apprentices by a worthless companion (if it prove true that is of him
reported) being of a worshipful trade, and yet no Stationer, who after a
little bringing them up to singing brokerie, takes into his shop some fresh
men, and trusts his old searuantes of a two months standi^g with a dossen
groates worth of ballads. In which if they prove thrifty, he makes them pretty
chapmen, able to spread more pamphlets by the state forbidden then all the
Bookesellers in London, for only in this City is straight search, abroad small
suspicion,, especially of such petty pedlers. Neither is he for these flies
only in fault, but the Gouerners of eutpur se hall, finding that their company
wounderfully increast, howeuer many of their best workeme^ monthly ^scande at
the three foot cross, they took counsel how they might find some new
exercise to employ their number.

One of the ancientest that had been a traveler, and at Brainetree fair,
seen the resort to the standinges of the forenamed brethren, the sons of
ol^e Barnes the Plu^er, chose out roaringe Dicke, W^t Wimbars, cum multis aliis
of tune-able trebles, that gathered sundry assemblies in diverse places, where
y^r a leaud song was fully ended, some mist their knives, some their purses,
soome one thing, so^me an other. And alas, who would suspecte my inn^cente
youths, that all the while were plea^inge rude peoples eyes and ears, with no
les delectable noise, then their ditties were delightsome: the one being too
od^ous to be read, the other too infectious to be heard. Well how ever they
sung, it is like they shared: for it has been said, they themselves brag,
they gay^ed their twenty shillinges in a day. Ah brother Mopo, many a hard
meal have you made, and as many a time, has Curtoll your foure-footed
traueiler, been pincht for want of prouander, and yet at the weeks end have
you hardly taken ten shillinges. But I persuade my self you gain by your
honest labor, and they by ledger demaine. To tell you your own injuries, by
them every where offered, need not: to wish you to speak to them it boots
(...). Therefore this is my counsel, and let it be your course: Make humble
suite to her Majesty's Officers, that they may be hence^oorth prohibited:
entreat the Preachers that they inuaye against this vice, which though it
seem small to other abuses, yet as a grain of mustard seed it increases, and
brings forth more mischiefs, then few words can express, or much
diligence make void. First, if there be any songs suffered in such public
sort to be soong, beseech that they may ^ither be such as your selves, that
after seven years or more service, have no other living left you out of
Pattent, but that poor base life, of it self too badde, yet made more
beggarly, by increase of number: or at least if a^y if besides you be thereto
admitted, tha^ it may be none other but aged and impotent persons: who living
upon charity, may the rather draw those that delight in good songs, to have
mercy on their need. For to sing publicly, is by a kind of tolleration,
permitted only to beggars, of which number, it is not necessary to make them,
that have seen no number of years, nor are in the members of their bodies
imperfect. Is it not absurd to see a long legd lubber pinne^ in a chair,
fed with a dugge, dreste with a bibbe, and rockte in a cradle? As vile it is,
that boys of able strength, and agreeable capacity, should be suffered to
wrest from the miserable Aged, the last refuge in their life (beggary excepted)
the poor help of Ballad-singing. Many a crust has old Anthony, got by it
Mopo, beside other comfortes: but now I hear my blind brother that exercisde
the base, is forced to lay his fiddle to pawn and trust only to the two and
thirtieth Psalm, and Job patience for his poor belly-pinchinge pittaunce.
Once again I turn me in your names to the Maiestrates, and Preachers of
London, and as to them so to others elsewhere in the Realm. Right honorable,
reverend, or worshipful, Anthony humbly desires you, to look into the leaud
cause, that these wicked effects may fall. The people delighte to hear some
new thing: if these profane ribauldries were not: somewhat sauering of
godliness, of policy, or at the utmost of morrall wit, should be received.
It is common, that they which have capacitye, when they hear either Diuinitye,
Law, or other Arts, apply their memories to receive them, and as they have
conceived, they bring forth fruits: so fares it by the contrary, when they
hear lascivious surquedry, lewdness, impiety, they yield no other harvest,
than they received seed: for who can gather grapes of thorns, or figs of
thistles. It would be thought the Carman that was woonte to whistle to his
beasts a comfortable note, might as well continue his old course, whereby his
sound served for a musical harmony in Gods ear: as now pro^anely to follow a
Iigging vanity, which can be no better than odious before God: s^th it is
abh^minable in the ears of good men. But all is one, they are suffered, which
makes them secure, and there is no impietye, but the baser flatter themselves
in, because they are not more stricktly reprehended by their betters. If every
idle word shall be aunsweared for, how shall they escape that suffer whole
days to be consumde in abominable brothelry. Well, at the hands of the
sheapheard shall the flock be challenged, there is a mercy that kisseth
Justice, every other tolleration is sinful and shameful. Here Anthony now
now ceases: knowing the superiors have discretion upon true information, to
deal as beseemes them. I only urge my brother Mopo, S. P. and Pickeringe, to
beseech that lascivious singers may be utterly suppressed, as they will show
themselves to be the men they should be, wherein if they fail, let them live
ever in perpetual pouertye, and fare at all times as hard as poor Mopos Cut
did with his masters countreyman in Shorditc^, till by the force of his hinder
heels, he utterly undid two milch maidens, that had set up a shop of
Ale-drapery. Subscribed

Anthony now now a Gods blessing,


When I had read this rabble, wherein I found little reason, I laid it by,
intendinge at more time to seek out Mopo, and his mentioned companions. The
next paper I chanced on, was that of Master Doctor Burcot:

The superscription thus.

To the impudent discreditors of Phisickes Art, either speedy amendment or
punishment.
Injurious enemies to Arts, that have sought to make Physic, among common
people, estee^ ed common: and Surgery contemptible, to you is this my Brief
addressed, for since I left the earth, comm^nded by him, that disposes of
every creature, I understand soome greene-headed scoffers at my green
receipt: have intermedled in matters more then they conceive, and by that folly
effected much less then they promised. It was held of old, for a principle,
and not long since observed as a custom, that as the nights Battes,
forerunners of darkness, never slickered in the streets, till the Sun was
declinde: and then every where blindly flapped in men's faces: so the Owls of
Arts, blinde-flinder-mise (as I may term them) confirmning the old Oracle:
never show themselves but in corners, giving their rules for that they
understand not, to the loss of life, or man^ dismembringe. Every simple has
his virtue, every disease his beginning: but the remedy rises from the
knowledge of the cause: If any can (in natural sense) give ease, they must be
Artistes, that are able to search the cause, resist the disease, by providing
remedies. How fares it then, blind abusers of the blind, your blushles faces
are so seasoned, that you can in print or public writings, open the skirtes
of your shame, by promising sight to the blind, sound joints to the gowty,
steady members to the Paraletike, strong limbs to the lame, quick hearing to
the deaf, sense to the frantic. To begin with I. O. one of your sight
healers, was it not well handled by him, when a gentleman of good account having
only a heat in one of his eyes, he like a kind christian persuaded the
patient to receive a water preservative to the sound eye that it might draw the
humor from the first, when in very truth by his cunning he so dealt, that not
an eye was left in his head whereby he might well see, saving that by the ey
that was first sore he can with much adoo look through a crystal. Thus this
cogging sight giver drank a hundred mark and utterly impaired the paiers
sight.

O obscure knave, worthy to be so well known, that thine eyes being thrust
out of thy head in a public assembly, thou mighsttest no more attempt to make
blind thy betters. There was a Gentleman in the world, troubled not long since
with a pain in the foot, Physicians found it to be the gout, against which
malady promising no precise remedy, but only to give ease for the time, did
their dailye endeavor, by defensiues preventing pain that would have proved
offensive. He impatient of delay, forsook all hopes of art, and delivered over
his life into the hands of some of these trauelers that by incision are able to
ease all atches. If a sensible man (concei^ing their tyranny on him used) should
note their cuttings, drawings, corrosiuings, boxings, butcherings, they would
conclude, Non erat inter Siculos tormentu^ maius. Yet forsooth, who but these
are welcome to diseased or endaungered people. The reason, they will undertake
to warrant what no wise man can, and if it happen by strong conceit some have
comfort, then to the worlds wonder in old wives monuments are they remembered.
Short tale to make, after many tortures, God gave the gentleman ease by death.

For the dead Pals^e there is a woman has a desperate drink, that either
helps in a year, or killes in an hour. Beside she has a charm that mumbled
thrice over the ear, together with oil of Suamone (as she terms it) will
make them that can hear but a little, hear in short time never a wh^t. But
above all her Medcine for the quartine Ague, is admirable. viz. A pint of
exceeding strong march beer, wherein is infused one drope of Aqua mirabilis,
this taken at a draught before the fit is ^ntollerable good, and for a
president, let this serve.

A Gentlewoman about London whose husband is heir of a right woorshipfull
house, was induc^d to take this drench, from this wise woman, for every drop of
that strong water she must have twelve pence. A (...) at the least was prizde
at forty shillings. Thus daily for almost a month she ministered, the
Gentlewoman having still good hope, at last was put by her husband quite out of
comfort for any good at this woman's hands, for he by chance getting the
deceivers glass, would needs pour out a spunefull what ever he paid, she
cried out she could not spare it, all helped not, he took it and tasted, and
sound it to be no other then fountain water.

There was one Bondman or freeman (it skiles not much whether) that by
wondrous ready means would heal madmen, what expectation was of him, by his
great promises all London knows, how lewdly he dealt, it can as well
witness, of him I will say little, because there is more knowue, then I am
able to set down.

Besides these (...)-agates, there are some of good experience, that giving
themselves to inordinate excess, when they are writ unto by learned physicians
to minister for the patients health according to their advised prescription,
negligently mistake. As for example, a Doctor directs to his Poticary a bill to
minister to a man having an vlcerous sore, certain pills for the preparing of
his body, withal a receipt for the making a corrosiue, to apply to the sore,
he (either witles, which is too bad, or wilful, which is worse) prepares the
corrosiue in pills, and for^es the Receipt for the pills in manner of a
plaster.

The party receives the corrosiue inward, his mawe is f^etted, death follows.
If there be such an Apothecary that has so done, let him repent his dealings,
least the blood of that man light on his head.

It is said there was another skillful, no less ouerseene that having a poor
manne of a leg to dismember, who had long time been his patient, and at the
instant, more extremely painde, then before, which was cause of requiring^ his
Chirurgians immediate help. This woorkeman, the poor patientes
deathes-maister, in that point not to be termed his own (...) master,
dismembered him, the sign beeinge in the foot. Whereof being told,
immediately after the deed, he only merrited this praise, by giving council
to the murdered man to have patience at his sudden end.

But these accidents among Artistes happen as sel^ome as the ^roofe of a good
cure among you that are vtte^y ignora^nt in Ar^e: for their faults, are
committed by them rarely or never, your trespasses, like a quotidian disease.
So of the one it may be said, Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is
raginge, and those that ^ee thereby deceived are not wise. Yet of the other may
directly be concluded to their single commendation, that as no serpent is
without his hidden stinge, or any thing in earth without some blemi^h: ^o no
purity of their impur^ proression, can be equalled in imperfection, so impure
is all, so vile, so dangerous.

Therefore now return I where I began, to you the excrementes of nature, and
monsters of men, whose murders are no less common then your crafts, which
are not so well known to the world, as felt by them that leave it, with two of
you will I (...). The one a braggart of great antiquity, whose lively image is
yet to be seen in King Luds Palace, and his living Ghost at this time
ministringe to the poor Pensioners of that place. Sir, nay it shall be sir
in reverence of your old occupation, I muse not a little what wonderful (...)
preparatiue it is ye boast on: by which were men so mad to believe you, you are
able to make any manne not only boldly to walk in ill airs, and converse
day and night with infected company, but also to receive the strongest
poison (like king Mithridates) into his body? Ten to one, it is so strange,
as no man but your self is able to name it. Yet give me leave to guess at it
without offense to your falsehoode. I remember I have heard great talk, you
have been both a caster of metal, and a forger, and it seems you have gotten
the receipte which the Tinne-melters wife ministered, to break her husbands
cold, when he sat sleeping in his chair, videlicet two ounces of pure Tin
put in an iron ladle, melted in the fi^e, and poured at an instant down the
throat. If it be thus, I dare take your word for any poison hurting that
party that so receives it, for as a simple fellow (seeing four or five hanged
for their offenses, and hearing (...) speak bitterly of them being dead)
said, Well, God make them good men, they have a fair warning: so I may say
they that deal with your mettaline medicine have a fair warrante against
pois^n: Likewise may it be said of your admirable eye water through the virtue
of which, you have attained the woorshipfull name of Doctor put out: having
put out soome of their eyes that deal with it. But if I have varied from your
met^aline rec^ipt before, I conclude it but a forgerie, and so blame you not
greatly for followinge a parcel of your old and to some a hurtful trade.

Another of your brethren, as well over seen in mineralls as your self, lying
in a good fellows house not long since, being monilesse, as ye are all but
thread bare make shifts, persuaded his host to take physic for fear of
infection, his labor he was content to give, and nothing for their kindness
would he require but even five mark, which he must pay for the very simples.
His simple host believing him to be honest, gave him the money. If he had
left here, though this had been to lewd, it had been far better than to
go forwar^ as he did, for some what he bestowed on purging simples which
unprepared he ministered, and with the same ministered the poor man's death.

The lewd wretch cried out that he had taken a great quantity of the
purgation, more than he appointed, which was in a window in his chamber, much
ado was made, and he would justify before any learned man his deed, but
trusting better to his heels, than to hazard a han^, he gave them that night
the slip, and is not yet (...).

To be short, how ever ye differ in several shifts, yet agree you all in one
manner of shifting, cunning is the cloak to hide your cogging: money the mark
for which ye play the makeshiftes, nay the murderers, not of the common
enemy, but your own countrymen, than which what can be more barbarous?
Common reason should persuade, that much reading and long practice in every Art
makes men expert. Per Contrarium I conclude, you that have neither read nor
practiced, must needs ^e egregiously ignorant.

Assure your selves, if you refrain not, justice will stand up, and so
restrain ye, as there shall be nothing more noted than your ignorant
practices and impudent courses. In my life I was your adversary: in death I am
your enemy. Beseeching the reverend College of learned Doctors and
worshipful company of experienst Chirurgions to look more straightly to your
false deceites, and close haunts, that there may be sooner heard talk of such
a rare obscure assurance^ to work what not wonders in Physic, or
Chirurgirie, but he be rather looked into or ever he begin, than suffered to
begin, whereby any poor patient should suffer loss in trial of their blind
skill: so shall your cousenages be as open as your Acts be odious.

Subscribed Burcot.


This is somewhat like (thought I) if he had said any thing against cousoning
toothe drawers, that from place to place wander with banners full of horse
teeth to the imparing of Kindharts occupation, but I perceive master Doctor
was never a tooth drawer, if he had, I know he would have toutcht their (...).
Since he has let them pass, I greatly pass not: and yet in regard of the
credit of my trade, I care no^ to have a blow or two with them my self, before
I look any further.

Sundry of them that so wander, have not to do with the means Kindhart uses,
but forsooth by charms they can at their pleasure fray away the pain, which
Kindhart counts little better than witch craft, if it could do good, and so to
some of them have I affirmed it: But a proper slip-string, some time a potty
sc^le-marster, now a pelting tooth charmer, having ^o reason to desend his
obscure rules, quite put me to silence before a well learned audience, the one
a cobbler, the other a carman, (...) last a collyer. These being poor men, had
I for pity often eased of their pain, yet was the remedy I used somewhat
painful, but not long since they are come acquainted with the charmer I told
ye of, he in charitable consideration of their grief, promised to ease them
only with writing and after burning a word or two. Tra^elling to a Gentleman's
not far from London, I by the way chaunst to be called to confer with him at
the same very instant, where reproouing his opinion, he put me down with
such a galliemafrey of larine ends, that I was glad to make an end: Yet got I a
copy of his charm, which I will set down that I may make it common.

A Charm.
Frst, he must know your name, then your age, which in a little paper he sets
down, on the top are these words In verbis, et in herbis, et in lapididus sunt
virtutes, underneath he writes in capital letters A AB ILLA, HVRS GIBELLA,
which he sweres is pure Chalde, and the names of three spirits that enter into
the blood and cause rewmes, and so consequently the tootheach. This paper must
be likewise three times blessed, and at last with a little frankincense burned,
which being thrice used, is of power to expel the spirits, purify the blood,
and ease the pain, or else he lies, for he has practiced it long, but shall
approve it never.

Another sort, get hot wiers, and with them they burn out the worm that so
torments the grieved: these fellows are fit to visit cursed wives, and might by
their practice do a number of honest men ease, if they would miss the tooth
and worm the tongue.

Others there are, that persuade the pained, to hold their mouths open over a
basen of water by the fire side, and to cast into the fire a handful of
henbane seed, the which naturally has in every seed a little worm, the
seeds breaking in the sire, use a kind of cracking, and out of them, it is
hard among so many, if no worm fly into the water: which worms the deceivers
affirm to have fallen from the teeth of the diseased. This rare secret is much
used, and not smally lyked. Sundry other could I set down practiced by our
banner-bearers, but all is foppery, for this I find to be the only remedy for
the tooth pain, either to have patience, or to pull them out.

Well, no more for me, least I be thought to speak too largly for my self.
I had thought to have had a fling at the rat-catchers, who with their banners
displayed, bear no small sway, what I have to say to them they shall not yet
hear, because I hope they will take warning by other men's harms. Only this I
affirm that as some banner-bearers have in their occupations much craft, the
rat-catchers is nothing else but craft.

But stay Kind-hart, if thou make so long a (...) between every act, thy jests
will be as stale as thy wit is weak. Therefore leaving those vagabonds to
repent their villanyes, I Will bid adie^ to master Doctor, and see who is our
next speaker.

Robert Green to Pierce Pennilesse.
PIerce, if thy Carrier had been as kind to me as I expected, I could have
dispatched long since my letters to thee: but it is here as in the world, Donum
a dando deriuatur: where there is nothing to give, there is nothing to be got.
But having now found means to send to thee, I will certi^e thee a little of my
disquiet after death, of which I think thou either have not heard or wilt not
conceive.

Having with humble penitence be sought pardon for my infinite sins, and paid
the due to death, even in my grave was I scarce laid, when Envy (no fit
companion for Art) spit out her poison, to disturb my rest. Aduersus mortuos
bellum suscipere, inhumanum est. There is no glory gained by breaking a dead
man's skull. Pascitur in viuis liuor, post fata quiescit. Yet it appears
contrary in some, that inueighing against my works, my poverty, my life, my
death, my burial, have omitted nothing that may seem malicious. For my Books,
of what kind soever, I refer their commendation or dispraise to those that have
read them. Only for my last labors affirming, my intent was to reprove vice,
and lay open such villainies, as had been very necessary to be made known,
whereof my Black Book, if ever it see light, can sufficiently witness.

But for my poverty, me thinks wisdom would have bridele^ that inuectiue;
for Cuiuis potest accidere, quod cuiquam potest. The beginaing of my
dispraisers is known, of their end they are not sure. For my life, it was to
none of them at any time hurtful: for my death, it was repentant: my burial
like a Christians.

Alas that men so hastily should run,
To write their own dispraise as they have done.
For my revenge, it suffices, that every halfe-eyd humanitian may account it,
Instar belluarum immanissimarum seuire in cadauer. For the injury offered thee,
I know I need not bring oil to thy fire. And albeit I would dissuade thee from
more inuectiues against (...) thy adversaries (for peace is now all my plea)
yet I know thou will return answer, that since thou receiuedst the first
wrong, thou will not endure the last.

My quiet Ghost (unquietly disturbed) had once intended thus to have exclaimd.

Pierce, more witless, than pennilesse; more idle, than thine adversaries ill
imployde; what foolish innocence has made thee (infant like) resistlesse to
bear, what ever injury Envy can impose?

O^ce thou commendedst immediate conceit, and gave no great praise to
excellent works of twelve years labor: now, in the blooming of thy hopes, thou
suffer slander to nippe them ere they can bud: thereby approving thy self
to be of all other most slack, being in thine own cause so remiss.

Color can there be none found to shadow thy fainting, but the longer thou
deferst, the more grief thou bringst to thy friends, and give the greater
head to thy enemies.

What can thou tell, if (as my self) thou shall be with death prevented:
and then how can it be but thou die disgraced, seeing thou have made no reply
to their twofold Edition of Inuectiues:

It may be thou think they will deal well with thee in death, and so thy
shame in tollerating them will be short: forge not to thy self one such
conceit, but make me thy president, and remember this old adage: Leonem
mortuum mordent Catuli.

Awake (secure boy) revenge thy wrongs, remember mine: thy adversaries began
the abuse, they continue it: if thou suffer it, let thy life be short in
silence and obscurity, and thy death hasty, hated, and miserable.

All this had I intended to write, but now I will not give way to wrath, but
return it unto the earth from whence I took it: for with happy souls it
has no harbor.

Robert Green.

Had not my name been Kind-hart, I would have sworn this had been sent to my
self; for in my life I was not more pennilesse than at that instant. But
remembering the Author of the Supplication, I laid it aside till I had leisure
to seek him: and taking up the next, I found written.

To all maligners of honest mirth, Tarleton wishes continual melancholy.
NOw Masters, what say you to a merry knave, that for this two years day has
not been talked of: Will you give him leave if he can to make ye laugh: What all
a mort: No merry countenance: Nay, then I see hypocrisy has the upper hand,
and her spirit reigns in this profitable generation. Since it is thus, I Will be a
time-pleaser. Fie upon following plays, the expense is wondrous; upon players
speeches, their words are full of wyles; upon their gestures, that are
altogether wanton. Is it not lamentable, that a man should spend his two pence
on them in an afternoon, hear covetousness amongst them daily quipt at, being
one of the commonest occupations in the country; and in lively gesture see
treachery set out, with which every man now adays uses to entrap his brother.
Byr lady, this would be looked into: if these be the fruits of playing, it is
time the practisers were expeld.

Expeld (quoth you) that has been pretily performd, to the no small profit of
the Bouling-allyes in Bedlam and other places, that were wont in the
after-noones to be left empty, by the recourse of good fellows unto that
unprofitable recreation of Stage-playing.

And it were (...) much amiss, would they join with the Dicing houses to make
suit again for their longer restraint, though the sickness cease. Is not this
well said (my masters) of an old buttond cappe, that has most part of his
life lived upon that against which he inueighs: Yes, and worthily.

But I have more to say than this; Is it not great shame, that the houses of
retaylers near the Towns end, should be by their continuance impouerished:
Alas good hearts, they pay great rentes, and pity it is but they be provided
for. While Plays are used, half the day is by most youths that have liberty
spent upon them, or at least the greatest company drawn to the places where
they frequent. If they were suppressed, the flock of young people would be
equally parted. But now the greatest trade is brought into one street. Is it
not as fair a way to Myle-end by White-chappell, as by Shorditch to Hackney?
the Sun shines as clearly in the one place, as in the other; the shades are
of a like pleasure: only this is the fault, that by overmuch heat sometime
they are in both places infectious.

As well in this as other things there is great abuse: for in every house where
the venerian virgins are resident, hospitality is quite exiled, such fines,
such taxes, such tribute, such customs, as (poor souls) after seven years
service in that unhallowed order, they are feign to leave their suits for
offerings to the old Lenos that are shrine-keepers, and themselves (when they
begin to break) are feign to seek harbor in an Hospital: which chances not
(as sometime is thought) to one amongst twenty, but hardly one amongst a
hundred have better ending. And therefore seeing they live so hardly, its pity
Players should hinder their takings a penny.

I marry (says Baudeamus my quondam Host) well fair old Dicke, that word
was well placed: for thou know our rentes are so unreasonable, that except
we cut and shave, and poule, and prig, we must return Non est inuentus at the
quarter day.

For is not this pitiful* I am a man now as other men be, and have li^'d in
some shire of England, till all the Country was weary of me. I come up to
London, and fall to be some Capster, Hostler, or Chamberlain in an Inn: Well,
I get me a wife, with her a little money: when we are married, seek a house
we must, no other occupation have I but to be an Ale-^raper, the Landlord will
have forty pound fine, and twenty mark a year, I and mine must not lie in
the street: he knows by honest courses I can never pay the Rent. What should I
say: somewhat must be done, rent must be paid, duties dischargd, or we undone.
To be short, what must be shall be: indeed sometimes I have my Landlordes
countenance before a Justice, to cast a cloa^e ^uer illrule, or else he might
seek such another tenant to pay his rent so truly.

Quaintly concluded (Peter Pandar) somewhat ye must be, and a bawd ye will
be. I by my troth sir, why not I as well as my neighbors, since there is no
remedy. And you sir, find fault with plays. Out upon them, they spoil our
t^ade, as you your self have proved. Beside, they open our crosse-biting, our
co^y-catching, our trains, our traps, our gins, our snares, our subtilties:
for no sooner have we a trick of deceit, but they make it common, singing
Iigs, and making ^easts of us, that every boy can point out our houses as they
pass by.

Whither now Tarlton? this is extempore out of time tune, and temper. It may be
well said to me:

Stulte, quid haec faris, etc. Rusticus ipse, ^uis malus es, tibi pe^simus
ipsi. Thy self once a Player, and against Players: nay, turn out the right
si^e of thy russ^t coat, and let the world know thy meaning. Why thus I
mean, for (...) I speak in sobernes.

Every thing has in it self his virtue and his vice: from one self flower
the Be and Spider suck honny and poison. In plays it fares as in books,
vice cannot (...) reproved, except it be discovered: neither is it in any play
discovered, but there follows in the same an example of the punishment: now he
that at a play will be delighted in the one, and not warned by the other, is
like him that reads in a book the description of sin, and will not look
over the leaf for the reward.

Mirth in seasonable time taken, is not forbidden by the auste rest Sapients.

But indeed there is a time of mirth, and a time of mourning. Which time
having been by the Magistrates wis^ly observed, as well for the suppressing of
Plays, as other pleasures: so likewise a time may come, when honest re^reation
shall have his former liberty.

And let Tarleton entreat the young people of the ^ittie, either to abstain
altogether from plays, or at their coming thither to use themselves after a
more quiet order.

In a place so ci^ill as this City is esteemed, it is more than ^arbarously
rude, to see the shameful disorder and routes that sometime, in such public
meetings ar^ used.

The beginners are neither gentlemen, nor citizens, nor any of both their
servants, but some lewd mates that long for innovation, and when they see
advantage, that either Seruingmen or Apprentises are most in number, they will
be of either side, though indeed they are of no side, but men beside all
honesty, willing to make boot of cloakes, hats, purses, or what ever they can
lay hold on in a hurley burley. These are the common causers of discord in
public places. If otherwise it happen (as it seldom does) that any quarrel
be between man and man, it is far from manhood to make so public a place
their field to fight in: no men will do it, but cowardes that would feign be
parted, or have hope to have many partakers.

Now to you that malign our moderate merriments, and think there is no
felicity but in excessive possession of wealth: with you I would end in a
song, yea an Extempore song on this Theme, Nequid nimis necessarium: but I am
now hoarse, and troubled with my Taber and Pipe: beside, what pleasure brings
music to the miserable. Therefore letting songs pass, I tell them in
sadness, how ever Plays are not altogether to be commended: yet some of them do
more hurt in a day, than all the Players (by exe^cizing their profession) in an
age. Faults there are in the professors as other men, this the greatest, that
diverse of them being public in every ones eye, and talked of in every vulgar
man's mouth, see not how they are seen into, especially for their contempt,
which makes them among most men most contemptible.

Of them I will say no more, of the profession, so much has Pierce Pennilesse
(as I hear say) spoken, that for me there is not any thing to speak, So
wishing the cheerful, pleasaunce endless; and the wilful sullen, sorrow
till they surfeit, with a turn on the toe I take my leave.

Richard Tarleton.

When I had done with this, one thing I mislik^e, that Tarleton stood no
longer on that point of Landlords: For lamentable it is (in Kind-harts opinion)
to note their unreasonable exaction. I my self knew a Landlord, that
beginning to enlarge a little Tenement, was according to statute prohibited:
he made humble suite that the work might go forward; for good man, he meant
not to make thereby any benefit, but even in charity he would turn it into
an Almes-house. This godly motion was liked, and he allowed to go forward with
his building. The work ended, in all the Country there could not poor be
found worthy, or at least able to enter into the same.

To be short, it was turned into a Tavern, and with rent and fine in few
months turned the Tenant out of doors. Yet it has been said, the poor man
did what he might, Cum vino and venere, to continue his state: but the
Landlord had made such a Dent in his stock, that with all the wit in his head
it would not be stopped. I beshrew the Card-makers, that clapped not a gown about
the Knave of Hearts, and put him on a hat for a bonnet over his night-cappe,
then had not after Age taken care for the Image of this excellent Almes-house
builder, but in every Alehouse should have been reser^ed his monument, till
Macke, Maw, Ruff, Noddy, and Trumpe, had been no more vs^e, than his charity
is (...).

Pity it is such Wolves are not shakte out of sheeps clothing. Elder times
detested such extremity: the Gospels liberty (howsoever some Libertines abuse
it) gives no such license: by their avarice Religion is (...), lewdnes is
bo^stered, the suburbs of the City are in many places no other but dark
dens for adulterers, thieves, murderers, and every mischief worker: daily
experience before the Magistrates confirms this for truth.

I would the ^art of the City were whole, for both within and without,
extreme cruelty causes much beggerie, Victa i^cet pietas, and with piety
pity. Self love has exiled charity: and as among beasts the Lyou hunteth
the Wolf, the Wolf deuoureth the Goat, and the Goat feeds on mountain
herbs: so a^ong men, the great oppress the meaner, they again the meanest:
for whom hard fare, cold lodging, thin clothes, and ^ore labor is only
allotted.

To see how soon the world is changd: In my time I remember two men, the one a
Divine, the other a Citizen: it was their use, at the time they should
quarterly receive their duties (for the first was well beneficed, the later a
great Landlord) when they came to any poor creature, whom sickness had
hindered, or mischaunce impaired, or many children kept low: they would not
only forgive what they should receive, but give bountifully for the relief of
their present necessity.

The old Proverb is verefied, Seldom comes the better: and they are posseft;
the poor of that comfort dis^ossest.

Some Landlords having turned an old Brue-house, Bake-house, or Dye-house, into
an Alley of tenements, will either themselves, or some at their appointment,
keep tippling in the fore-house (as they call it) and their poor tenantes must
be inioinde to fetch bread, drink, wood, cole, and such other necessaries, in
no other place: and there till the weeks end they may have anything of trust,
provided they lay to pawn their holiday apparel: nay, my Land-lady will not
only do them that go^d turn, but if they want money, she will on monday le^d
them likewise upon a pawn eleven pence, and in mere pity asks at the
weeks end not a penny more than twelve pence.

O charitable love, happy tenants of so kind a Landlady: I warrant ye this
Usurie is within the Statute, it is not above five hundred for the loan of a
hundred by the year.

Neither will they do this good to their tena^tes alone, but they will deal
with their husbands, that for a little room with a smoakie chimney (or
perchance none, because smoke is noisome) they shall pay at the least but
forty shillings yearly.

Fie upon fines, that's the undoing of poor people: we will take none (say these
good creatures) marry for the key we must have consideration, that is, some
Angel in hand: for verily the last tenant made us change the lock: neither
think we deal hardly, for it stands in a good place, quite out of company,
where handicraft men may have leisure to get their living, if they knew on what
to set themselves a work.

Now for all this kindness, the Landlord scarce asks of the tenant thanks
(though he deserve it well) for (as I said) his Wife is all the dealer: so
plays the Pars^n (the person I should say, I would be loath to be mistaken)
that I told ye before builded the Alnteshouse. The care of rentes is
committed to his Wife, he is no man of this world, but as one metamorphizd from
a Saint to a Devil.

How now Kindhart? shall we never have done with these Landlordes? It seems
well thou have as little land as wit: for while thou live they will not
mend, and therefore its as good to make an end, as waste wind. Well, all this
was of good will to help Tarleton out with his tale. Now let me see what note
Cuckoe sings, for it is his luck to be last.

William Cuckoe to all close Iuglers wishes the discovery of their crafts, and
punishment for their knaueries.
Room for a crafty knave, cries William Cuckoe. Knave, nay, it will near
hand bear an action: Bones a me, my tricks are stale, and all my old
companions turned into Civil suits. I perceive the world is all honesty, if
it be no other than it looks. Let me see, if I can see, believe me there is
nothing but iugling in every corner; for every man has learnd the mystery of
casting mysts, and though they use not our old ^earms of hey-passe, re-passe,
and come aloft: yet they can bypasse, compass, and bring under one another as
cunningly and commonly, as ever poor Cuckoe could command his Jack in a Box.

Yet my masters, though you robde me of my trade, to give recompense, after
death I have borrowed a tongue a little to touch their tricks.

And now sir, to you that was wont like a Subsister in a gown of rugge rent on
the left shoulder, to sit singing the Counter-tenor by the Cage in Southwarke:
me thinks ye should not look so coyly on old Cuckoe. What man, it is not your
sign of the Ape and the Uri^all can^arry away our old acquaintance?

I trust ye remember your iugling at Newington with a Crystal stone, your
knaueries in the wood by Wansteed, the wondrous treasure you would discover in
the I Will of Wight, al your villainies about that piece of service, as perfecty
known to some o^ my friends yet living as their Pater noster, who curse the
time you ever came in their Creed.

But I perceive you fare as the Fox, the more ^and, the better hap.

I wonder what became of your familiar, I mean no Devil, man; but a man
Devil: and yet I need not wonder, for since my descending to under earth, I
heard say he was hanged for his knauerie, as you in good time may be, Amen.
Amend I should say, but I think ye me ane it not: the matter is not great,
for (thanks be to God) how ever you mend in manners, the world is well amended
with your man and you.

I pray ye was that he which was your instrument in Notingam-shire, to make
your name so famous for finding things lost: It may be, you forgot that one
fetch among many: and least it should be out of your head, I Will help to beat
it into your brains.

YOur Maship upon a horse whose hire is not paid for, with your Page at your
stirrup, like a Castilian Caualier, lighted pennilesse at a pretty Inn, where
that day sat certain Justices in Commission. Your high heart, careless of your
present need, would needs for you^ self share out one of the fairest
chambers. Your Page must be purueyer for your diet, who in the kitchen found
nothing for your liking. Beef was gross, veale flashy, mutton fulsome,
rabbets, hens, and capons common. Wild foul for Will fool, or he will fast.

Well, at your will ye shall be furnished. But now a Iugling trick to pay the
shot.

My Impe your man, while mistrisse, men, and maids were busied about provision
for the Justices that sat, slips into a private parlour, wherein stood good
store of plate, and conueying a ma^sy sault under his Capouch, little less
worth than twenty mark, got secretly to the backside, and cast it into a
filthy pond: which done, he acquaints your knaueship with the deed.

By then your diet was dressed, the sault was mist, the good Wife cryde out, the
maids were ready to run mad.

Your man, (making the matter strange) inquird the cause: which when they
told. O (quoth he) that my master would d^ale in the matter, I am sure he
can do as much as any in the world.

Well, to you they come pitifully complaining, when very wrathfully (your
choler rising) you demand reason why they should think ye be able to deal
in such cases. Your kind nature (bent always to lenity) yielded at the last
to their importuning: only wished them to stay till the next day, for that you
would not deal while the Justices were in the house.

They must do as your discretion appoints: next day calling the good man and
wife to your bedside, ye tell them the sal^e was stolen by one of their
familiars, whom he had forced by Art to bring it back again to the house, and
in such a pond to cast it, because he would not have the party known for
fear of trouble.

^s you direct them, they search and find: then comes your ^ame in rare
admiration, the Host gives you four Angels for a reward, the Hostess two
French crowns: the maids are double diligent to do you service, that they may
learn their fortunes, the whole town talks of the cunning man, that indeed
had only connycat^ht ^is (...).

If that slip-string be still in your feruice, I advise you make much of him,
for by that trick he proved himself a toward youth, necessary for such a
master. This iugling passes Cuckoes play. Well, I advise you play least in
sight in London, for I have set some to watch for your coming, that will
iustiste all this and more of your shifting life.

Return to your old craft and play the Pinner, although it be a poor life,
it is an honest life: your fallacies will one day fail ye.

There is another Iugler, that being well skild in the Jews Trumpe, takes
upon him to be a dealer in Music: especial good at mending Iustruments: he
iugled away more instruments of late, than his body (being taken) will ever
be able to make good.

Tut, that's but a plain trick: How say ye by some I^glers that can serve
writs without any original, and make poor men dwelling far off, compound
wit^ them for they know not what? I tell you there be such, that by that
trick can make a vacation time quicker to them than a Term: who troubling
threescore or four score men without cause, get of some a crown, of others a
noble, of diverse a pound, beside the ordinary costs of the writ, to put off
their appearance, when n^ such thing was toward.

Fie upon these Iuglers, they make the laws of the Realm be ill spoken of,
and are cause that plain people think all Lawyers like them: ^s appears by a
poor old man by chance coming into one of the worshipful Innes of the Court,
where sundry Ancients and Students both honorable and worshipful sat at
supper: the poor man admiring their con^ely order and reverent demeanor,
demanded of a stander by, what they were. Gentlemen (said he) of the Innes of
Court. Lord bless hem (quoth plain Coridon) been they of Queens Court? No,
said the other, but of the Innes of Court. What done they, quoth the Country
man, wotten ye? The other answered, that they were all Lawyers, and Students
of the Law. Now, well a ^eere cries plain Simplicity, we han but one Lawyer
with us, and he spoils all the Parish: but here been now to mar the whole
shire. His simplenes was by the hearers well taken, and the Lawiers name
inquird, who proved no other but one of these pettifogging Iuglers, that having
scraped up a few common places, and by long Sollicitership got in to be an odd
Attorney, was not long since disgraded of his place by pitching over the Bar,
yet promoted to look out of a wodden window, cut after the Dove hole fashion,
(...) (...) on his subtle pate, containing the iugling (...) showed. So fortune
it to his fellows, and let the^r misery come cito pede. Law is in it self
good, the true Professors to be highly esteemd. But as in Divinity it sometime
fares that Schismatikes, Heretics, and such like, make Scripture a cloak for
their detested errors, and by their practices seek to make the reverend
Divines contemptible; so a sort of Connycatchers (as I may call them) that have
gathered up the gleanings of the Law, only expert to begin controversies, and
utterly ignorant of their end; persuade the simple that if they will follow
their rules, thus and thus it shall chance to their speedy quieting, and that
Atturneys, Counselors and Serieants, are too costly to be dealt with simply,
bur by their mediation, who are able to speak when Counsel fails, and give
more ease in an hour, than the best Benchers in a year, when God wot, they
do no more good than a Drone in a Hiue. These Iuglers are too cunning for
Cuck^e, and in the end will prove too crafty for themselves: Other Iuglers
there be, that (...) favor from Authority to seek some thing to themselves
beneficial, and to the Commonwealth not prejudicial, under color of orderly
dealing have hookt into their hands the whole living to a number poor men
belonging. These when they were complaind on, immediately took an honest
course, and promised large relief yearly to them they wrong: But every promise
is either broken, or kept and so it fares with them: I protest if their Iugling
were set down, it would make a pretty volume: but I will let them pass, because
there is hope they will remember themselves. To set down the Iugling in
Trades, the crafty tricks of buyers and sellers, the swearing of the one, the
lying of the other, were but to tell the world that which they well know, and
therefore I will likewise ouerslip that. There is an occupation of no long
standing about London called Broking or brogging, whether ye will; in which
there is pretty Iugling, especially to blind Law, and bolster Usury: if any man
be forced to bring them a pawn, they will take no interest, not past twelve
pence a pound for the month; marry they must have a groat for a monthly bill:
which is a bill of sale from month to month; so that no advantage can be taken
for the Usurie. I hear say its well multiplied since I died; but I beshrewe
them, for in my life many a time have I borrowed a shilling on my Pipes, and
paid a groat for the bill, when I have fetched out my pawn in a day.

This Iugling exceeds Cuckoes gettings, and sundry times turned poor William to
his shifts. Indeed I deny not, but in their kind some of them deal well, and
will preserve a man's goods safe, if he keep any reasonable time: these are not
so blameable, as they that make immediate sale. If ever I have opportunity to
write into the world again, I will learn who abuse it most and who use it
best, and set ye down their dwelling places.

Now I will draw to an end, concluding with a Master Iugler that he may be well
kn^wne if he be got into any obscure corner of the Country. This Shifter
forsooth carried no less countenance than a Gentleman's ability, with his two
men in blue coats, that served for shares not wages. He being properly seated
in a Shire of this Realm, and by the report of his men bruted for a cunning
man, grew into credit by this practice.

His house being in a Uillage through which was no thorough Fare, his men, and
sometime his Mastershippe in their company at midnight would go into their
neighbors several grounds being far distant from their dwelling houses, and
oftentimes drive from thence Horses, Mares, Oxen, Kine, Calves, or Sheep, what
ever came next to hand, a mile perthaunce or more out of the place wherein
they were left.

Home would they return and leave the cattle straying: In the morning, sometime
the milke-maids miss their Kine, another day the Plough-hinds their Oxen,
their Horses another time, somewhat of some worth once a week lightly.
Whither can these poor people go but to the wisemans worship? Perchance in a
morning two or three come to complain and seek remedy, who welcomed by one
of his men, are severally demanded of their losses. If one come for sheep,
another for other cattle, they are all at first told, that his Maistership is
a sleep, and till he himself call they dare not trouble him. But very kindly
he takes them into the hall, and when his worship stirs promises them they
shall speak with him at liberty. Now sir behind a curtain in the hall stands
a shelfe garnisht with books, to which my mate goes under to take o^e down.
And as he takes it down pulls certain strings which are fastened to several
small be^s in his Masters chamber, and as the bells strike, he knows what
cattle his neighbors come to seek, one bell being for Oxen, another for kine,
another for swine, etc. A while after he stamps and makes a noise above, the
seruingman entreats the Suitors to go up, and he hearing them coming himself
kindly opens them the door, and ere ever they speak, salutes them, protesting
for their loss great sorrow, as if he knew their griefs by revelation,
comforts them with hope of recovery, and such like words. They cry out, Jesus
bless your Mastership, what a gift have you to tell our minds and never hears
us speak. I neighbors says he, ye may thank God I trust I am come among ye
to do ye all good. Then knowing which way they were driven, he bids them go
either Eastward, or South-warde to seek near such an Oak or row of Elmes,
or water, or such like mark near the place where the Cattle were left; and
he assures them that by his skill the thieves had no power to carry them
farther than that place. They run and seek their cattle, which when they
find, O admirable wise man, the price of a Cow we will not stick with him
for, happy is the shire where such a one dwells. Thus do the pore cousoned
people proclaim, and so our shifter is sought too far and near. I think this
be iugling in the highest degree: if it be not, Cucko^ is out of his compass.
Well the world is full of holes, and more shifts were never practis^e* But
this is Cuckoes counsel that ye leave in time, lest being convicted like my
Host of the Anchor, ye pine your selves in prison to save your ears from the
Pillory: an end too good for Iugling shifters, and cosening periurers.

William Cuckoe.

Ha sir, I am glad we are at an end, Kindhart was never in his life so weary
of reading. Beshrew them for me, they have wakened me from a good sleep, and
weried me almost out of my wits. Here has been a coile indeed with lewd song
singers, drench giuers, detracters, players, oppressors, rentraisers, bawdes,
brothelhouses, shifters, and Iuglers. But since they have all done, turn over
the leaf and hear how merrily Kind heart will conclude.

Kindharts Conclusion of his Dream, and his Censure on the Apparitions
severally.
FOR memories sake, let me see what conclusion we shall form: Antthony told a
long tale of Runnagate song-singers, inueighing especially against those
lascivious ballads, that are by Authority forbidden, privily printed, and
publicly sold. In which I find no reason (as before I said) (...) I believe
none are so desperate to hazard their goods in printing or selling anything yt
is disallowed. Or if there be some such, I pers^ade my self the Maiestrates
d^ligence is so great, they would soon be weeded out. But now let me sound a
little into Anthonies meaning: he complains not that these lascivious songs
how ever in London they begin, are there continued, but thence they spread
as from a spring; and albe^t they dare not there be iustisied, yet are they in
every Pe^lers pack sent to public meetings in other plares where they are
suffered, beeause the Sellers swear these are published by Authority: an^
people far off think nothing is printed but what is lawfully tolerated.
Such knaves (...) would be looked into, that are not content with corrupting the
multitude, but they must slander the Maiestrates. If Mopo and his mates be
such men that I may meet with, I will not ouely deliver them Anthonies mind,
but urge them to exasperate the matter.

For Master Doctors motion, I doubt not but those which have charge theretoo to
look will be very careful to discharge their duties. My self will not be
slack against wandering Tooth-drawers. Besides, I have a Coppie of the
Confederacy between Don Mugel Prince of Rats, and the Graund Caualier of the
Rat-catchers: which I will publish, if he dissolve not the League, to the utter
overthrow of his Standerd, being three Rats and a pair of shackells, drawn
in a white field, cheuernd with Newgate chain, (in memory of his long
community therewith) and loftily borne on a broom staff. Neither will I
alone against them inueigh, but generally against all such banner-bearers,
whether they be of Teeth, of Stone cutting, or of Rat-catching. Nay, Kind
heart will not spare the Ensigne-bearer of Robert the Rifler. What though he
be one of the head Burgesses of Knaues-borough: and sometime has two
Bearwards serving under his colors, and they marshalled with Turks, Bows,
Arrows, Skoyles, and Nyneholes. And though Kind heart will not meddle with
those sports that are lawful; yet it may be shortly he will speak of their
lawless abusers.

With Robin Green it passes Kindharts capacity to deal; for as I know not
the reason of his unrest: so will I not intermeddle in the cause: but as soon
as I can convey his letter, where it should be delivered.

For old Dicke Tarlton that mad companion, I have helped him out with his
inuectiue against wringing Landlords, and commend his commendation of honest
mirth. But I understand, how ever he speaks well of players, there is a graze
widow in the world complains against one or two of them, for denying a Legatie
offortie shillings sum. Pity it is (poor soul) being turn^ to their
shifts, they should hinder her of her portion, for had she that, she intendes
to set vpan Appleshop in one of the Innes. If they pay her, so it is; if not,
she has sworn never to be good, because they have beguilde her.

For Cuckoo I have somewhat to add to his Iugling.

It happened within these few years, about Hampth^re there wandered a walking
Mort, that wen^ about ^he Country selling of tape, she had a good voite, and
would sing sometime to serve the turn: she would often be a leach, another
time a fortune teller.

In this last occupation we will now take her, for therefore was she taken,
having first ouer-taken an honest simple Farmer and his Wife in this manner.

ON a Summers evening by the edge of the Forest, she chaunst to meet the
forenamed Farmers wife: (...) whom when she had offered some of her tape, she
be^an quickly with her to fall in talk. And at the first sta^ing her in the
face, assures her she shall have such for^ as never had any of her kin: and
if her husband were no more unlucky than she, they should be possessed of s^
in^inite a sum of hidden treasure, as no man in England had ever seen the like.

The plain woman tickled with her soathing, entreated her to go home, which she
at first making somewhat strange, was at last content. There had she such
cheer as Farmers houses afford, who fare not with the meanest.

Shortly the good man comes in, to whom his Wife ^elates her rare fortu^e, and
what a wise woman she had (...) with. Though the man were very simple, yet
made he some question what learning she had, and how she came by knowledge of
such things. O sir (said she) my Father was the ^unningst Iugler in all the
country, my mother a Gypsy, and I have more cunning than any of them both.
Where lies the treasure thou talks^ on said the Farme^? Within this three miles
(quoth she.) I wonder thou thy self getst it not (said the man) but live
(as it ^eemes) in so poor es^ate. My poverty (answered this coosner) is my
chiefest pride: for such as we ^anuet ourselves ve rich, though we make others
rich. Befine, (...) treasure is by spirits possessed, and they keep it only for
them, to whom it is destinied. And more (said she) if I have a several room
to my self, hanged round about with whit^ linen, with other instruments, I
will by morning tellye, whether it be destined to you.

The goodman and wife giving credit to her words, fetched forth their finest
sheets, and ga^nished a chamber as she appointed: seven ^andles she must have
lighted, and an Angel she would have laid in every candlestick. Thus
furnished, she locks her self into the room, and appointes them two only to
watch, without making any of their servants privy. Where using sundry
mumbling fallacies, at last she called the man unto her, whom she sadled and
bri^eled, and having seven times ^id him about the room, caus^ him to arise
and call his wife, for to her belongd the treasure.

Both man and wife being come, in very sober manner she told them, that they
alone must attend in that place, while she forced the spirits to release the
treasure and lay it in some convenient place for them to fetch: but in any wise
they must not reveal about what she went, neither touch bread nor drink till
her return. So taking up the senen Angels away she went, laughing to her
self how she had left them waiting.

All night sat the man and his wife attending her coming, but she was wise
enough. Morning came, the servants mused what their Master and Dame meant,
that were wont with the Lark to be the earliest risers: yet since they heard
them talk, they attempted not to disturb them. Noone drawing on the Farmer
feeling by the chimes in his belly it was time to dine; was by his wife
counseled to stay till the wise woman's return. Which he patiently intending,
on a sudden the sent of the Ploughs waines meat so pierced his senses, that
had all India been the meede of his abstinence, eat he will, or die he must.
His wife more money wise, intended rather to starve than loose the treasure:
till about evening one of their neighbors brought them news of a woman coosener
that by a Justice was sent to Winchester for many lewd pranks. The man would
needs see if it were the same, and coming thither found it to be no ^ther,
where thinking at least to have good words she impudently derided him,
specially before the bench: who asking her what reason she had to bridle and
saddle him: faith (said she) only to see how like an Ass he looked.

A number of such there be, whom I will more narrowly search for in my next
Circuit, and if my Dream be accepted, set them out orderly.

FINIS.

